Menes fl. c.32003000 BC1 menez Ancient Egyptian mnj probably pronounced manij6 Ancient Greek 5 and 7 was a pharaoh of the Early Dynastic Period of ancient Egypt credited by classical tradition with having united Upper and Lower Egypt and as the founder of the First Dynasty.
8 The identity of Menes is the subject of ongoing debate although mainstream Egyptological consensus inconclusively identifies Menes with the Naqada III ruler Narmer2349 or his successor the First Dynasty pharaoh HorAha.
10 The commonlyused name Menes derives from Manetho an Egyptian historian and priest who lived during the Ptolemaic Kingdom. Manetho noted the name in Greek as  transliterated Mns.511 An alternative Greek form  transliterated Min was cited by the fifthcenturyBC historian Herodotus12 but this variant is no longer accepted it appears to have been the result of contamination from the name of the god Min.13 The Egyptian form mnj is taken from the Turin and Abydos King Lists which are dated to the Nineteenth Dynasty whose pronunciation has been reconstructed as manij. By the early New Kingdom changes in the Egyptian language meant his name was already pronounced mane.14 The name mnj means He who endures which I.E.S. Edwards 1971 suggests may have been coined as a mere descriptive epithet denoting a semilegendary hero ... whose name had been lost.5 Rather than a particular person the name may conceal the collective identity of the Naqada III rulers Ka Scorpion II and Narmer or may simply refer to a functional leadership role.
5 The almost complete absence of any mention of Menes in the archaeological record5 and the comparative wealth of evidence of Narmer a protodynastic figure credited by posterity and in the archaeological record with a firm claim3 to the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt has given rise to a theory identifying Menes with Narmer.The chief archaeological reference to Menes is an ivory label from the town Naqada which depicts the royal title Aha the pharaoh HorAha next to a building and within this is the royal title mn15 generally taken to be Menes.
5 a From this various theories on the nature of the building a funerary booth or a shrine the meaning of the word mn a name or the verb endures and the relationship between HorAha and Menes as one person or as successive pharaohs have arisen.
2 The Turin and Abydos king lists generally accepted to be correct2 list the nesubitnames of the pharaohs not their Horusnames3 and are vital to the potential reconciliation of the various records the nesubitnames of the king lists the Horusnames of the archaeological record and the number of pharaohs in Dynasty I according to Manetho and other historical sources.
3 Flinders Petrie first attempted this task3 associating Iti with Djer as the third pharaoh of Dynasty I Teti Turin or another Iti Abydos with HorAha as second pharaoh and Menes a nebtyname with Narmer a Horusname as first pharaoh of Dynasty I.23 Lloyd 1994 finds this succession extremely probable3 and CervellAutuori 2003 categorically states that Menes is Narmer and the First Dynasty begins with him.4 However Seidlmayer 2004 states that it is a fairly safe inference that Menes was HorAha.
10 Two documents have been put forward as proof either that Narmer was Menes or alternatively HorAha was Menes. The first is the Naqada Label found at the site of Naqada in the tomb of Queen Neithhotep often assumed to have been the mother of Horus Aha.16 The label shows a serekh of HorAha next to an enclosure inside of which are symbols that have been interpreted by some scholars as the name Menes. The second is the seal impression from Abydos that alternates between a serekh of Narmer and the chessboard symbol mn which is interpreted as an abbreviation of Menes. Arguments have been made with regard to each of these documents in favour of Narmer or HorAha being Menes but in neither case is the argument conclusive.bThe second document the seal impression from Abydos shows the serekh of Narmer alternating with the gameboard sign mn together with its phonetic complement the n sign which is always shown when the full name of Menes is written again representing the name Menes. At first glance this would seem to be strong evidence that Narmer was Menes.20 However based on an analysis of other early First Dynasty seal impressions which contain the name of one or more princes the seal impression has been interpreted by other scholars as showing the name of a prince of Narmer named Menes hence Menes was Narmers successor HorAha and thus HorAha was Menes.21 This was refuted by CervellAutuori 2005 pp. 4245 harvnb error no target CITEREFCervellAutuori2005 help but opinions still vary and the seal impression cannot be said to definitively support either theory.
22 Herodotus after having mentioned the first king of Egypt Min he wrote that Linus called by the Egyptians Maneros was the only son of the first king of Egypt and that he died untimely.
23 Egyptologists archaeologists and scholars from the 
19 th century have proposed different dates for the era of Menes or the date of the first dynasty
24 cModern consensus dates the era of Menes or the start of the first dynasty between c. 32003030 BC some academic literature uses c. 3000 BC.
1 Ancient tradition ascribes to Menes to uniting Upper and Lower Egypt into a single kingdom25 and becoming the first pharaoh of the First Dynasty.26 Although name does not appear on extant pieces of the Royal Annals Cairo Stone and Palermo Stone his name appears in later sources as the first ruler of Egypt. Some sources credit him as directly inheriting the throne from the god Horus.27 He also appears in later dated kings lists always as the first human pharaoh of Egypt. Menes appears in demotic novels of the Hellenistic period demonstrating that even that late he was regarded as an important figure.
28 Menes was seen as a founding figure for much of the history of ancient Egypt similar to Romulus in ancient Rome.29 Manetho records that Menes led the army across the frontier and won great glory.11
26 Manetho associates the city of Thinis with the Early Dynastic Period and in particular Menes a Thinite or native of Thinis.1126 Herodotus contradicts Manetho in stating that Menes founded the city of Memphis as his capital30 after diverting the course of the Nile through the construction of a levee.31 Manetho ascribes the building of Memphis to Menes son Athothis26 and calls no pharaohs earlier than Third Dynasty Memphite.
32 Herodotus and Manethos stories of the foundation of Memphis are probably later inventions in 2012 a relief mentioning the visit to Memphis by IryHora predynastic ruler of Upper Egypt reigning before Narmerwas discovered in the Sinai Peninsula indicating that the city was already in existence in the early 
32 nd century BC.
33 Diodorus Siculus stated that Menes had introduced the worship of the gods and the practice of sacrifice34 as well as a more elegant and luxurious style of living.34 For this latter invention Menes memory was dishonoured by the Twentyfourth Dynasty pharaoh Tefnakht and Plutarch mentions a pillar at Thebes on which was inscribed an imprecation against Menes as the introducer of luxury.
34 In Plinysclarification needed account Menes was credited with being the inventor of writing in Egypt.Diodorus Siculus recorded a story of Menes related by the priests of the crocodile god Sobek at Crocodilopolis in which the pharaoh Menes attacked by his own dogs while out hunting35 fled across Lake Moeris on the back of a crocodile and in thanks founded the city of Crocodilopolis.3536
37 Gaston Maspero 1910 while acknowledging the possibility that traditions relating to other kings may have become mixed up with this story dismisses the suggestions of some commentators38 that the story should be transferred to the Twelfth Dynasty pharaoh Amenemhat III and sees no reason to doubt that Diodorus did not correctly record a tradition of Menes.35 Later Edwards 1974 states that the legend which is obviously filled with anachronisms is patently devoid of historical value.
36 According to Manetho Menes reigned for either 30 60 or 62 years and was killed by a hippopotamus.11
39 Alexander Dow 1735679 a Scottish orientalist and playwright wrote the tragedy Sethona set in ancient Egypt. The lead part of Menes is described in the dramatis person as next maleheir to the crown now worn by Seraphis and was played by Samuel Reddish in a 1774 production by David Garrick at the Theatre Royal Drury Lane.40