Narmer Ancient Egyptian nrmr may mean painful catfish stinging catfish harsh catfish or fierce catfish123 was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the Early Dynastic Period whose reign began at a date estimated to fall in the range 32732987 BC.4 He was the successor to the Protodynastic king Ka. Many scholars consider him the unifier of Egypt and founder of the First Dynasty and in turn the first king of a unified Egypt. He also had a prominently noticeable presence in Canaan compared to his predecessors and successors. Neithhotep is thought to be his queen consort or his daughter.A majority of Egyptologists believe that Narmer was the same person as Menes.a6
78 Although highly interrelated the questions of who was Menes and who unified Egypt are actually two separate issues. Narmer is often credited with the unification of Egypt by means of the conquest of Lower Egypt by Upper Egypt. Menes is traditionally considered the first kingpharaoh of Ancient Egypt and is identified by the majority of Egyptologists as the same person as Narmer  although a vigorous debate also proposes identification with HorAha Narmers successor as a primary alternative.bThe issue is confusing because Narmer is a Horus name while Menes is a Sedge and Bee name personal or birth name. All of the King Lists which began to appear in the New Kingdom era list the personal names of the kings and almost all begin with Menes or begin with divine andor semidivine rulers with Menes as the first human king. The difficulty is aligning the contemporary archaeological evidence which lists Horus Names with the King Lists that list personal names.Two documents have been put forward as proof either that Narmer was Menes or alternatively HorAha was Menes. The first is the Naqada Label found at the site of Naqada in the tomb of Queen Neithhotep often assumed to have been the mother of Horus Aha.10 The label shows a serekh of HorAha next to an enclosure inside of which are symbols that have been interpreted by some scholars as the name Menes. The second is the seal impression from Abydos that alternates between a serekh of Narmer and the chessboard symbol mn which is interpreted as an abbreviation of Menes. Arguments have been made with regard to each of these documents in favour of Narmer or HorAha being Menes but in neither case is the argument conclusive.cThe second document the seal impression from Abydos shows the serekh of Narmer alternating with the gameboard sign mn together with its phonetic complement the n sign which is always shown when the full name of Menes is written again representing the name Menes. At first glance this would seem to be strong evidence that Narmer was Menes.14 However based on an analysis of other early First Dynasty seal impressions which contain the name of one or more princes the seal impression has been interpreted by other scholars as showing the name of a prince of Narmer named Menes hence Menes was Narmers successor HorAha and thus HorAha was Menes.15 This was refuted by CervellAutuori 2005 pp. 4245 but opinions still vary and the seal impression cannot be said to definitively support either theory.
16 Two necropolis sealings found in 1985 and 1991 in Abydos Umm elQaab in or near the tombs of Den18 and Qaa19 show Narmer as the first king on each list followed by HorAha. The Qaa sealing lists all eight of the kings of what scholars now call the First Dynasty in the correct order starting with Narmer. These necropolis sealings are strong evidence that Narmer was the first king of the First Dynasty hence the same person as Menes.
20 The complete spelling of Narmers name consists of the hieroglyphs for a catfish nrd and a chisel mr hence the reading Narmer using the rebus principle. This word is sometimes translated as raging catfish.23 However there is no consensus on this reading. Other translations of the adjective before catfish include angry fighting fierce painful furious bad evil biting menacing and stinging.123 Some scholars have taken entirely different approaches to reading the name that do not include catfish in the name at all242526 but these approaches have not been generally accepted.Rather than incorporating both hieroglyphs Narmers name is often shown in an abbreviated form with just the catfish symbol sometimes stylized even in some cases represented by just a horizontal line.27 This simplified spelling appears to be related to the formality of the context. In every case that a serekh is shown on a work of stone or an official seal impression it has both symbols. But in most cases where the name is shown on a piece of pottery or a rock inscription just the catfish or a simplified version of it appears.Two alternative spellings of Narmers name have also been found. On a mud sealing from Tarkhan the symbol for the jbird Gardiner sign G47 duckling has been added to the two symbols for Narmer within the serekh. This has been interpreted as meaning Narmer the masculine28 however according to Ilona Regulski29 The third sign the jbird is not an integral part of the royal name since it occurs so infrequently. Godron30 suggested that the extra sign is not part of the name but was put inside the serekh for compositional convenience.In addition two necropolis seals from Abydos show the name in a unique way While the chisel is shown conventionally where the catfish would be expected there is a symbol that has been interpreted by several scholars as an animal skin.31 According to Dreyer it is probably a catfish with a bulls tail similar to the image of Narmer on the Narmer Palette in which he is shown wearing a bulls tail as a symbol of power.
32 The date commonly given for the beginning of Narmers reign is c. 3100 BC.3334 Other mainstream estimates using both the historical method and radiocarbon dating are in the range c. 32732987 BC.eThe famous Narmer Palette discovered by James E. Quibell in the 18971898 season at Hierakonpolis35 shows Narmer wearing the crown of Upper Egypt on one side of the palette and the crown of Lower Egypt on the other side giving rise to the theory that Narmer unified the two lands.36 Since its discovery however it has been debated whether the Narmer Palette represents an actual historic event or is purely symbolic.f Of course the Narmer Palette could represent an actual historical event while at the same time having a symbolic significance.In 1993 Gnter Dreyer discovered a year label of Narmer at Abydos depicting the same event that is depicted on the Narmer Palette. In the First Dynasty years were identified by the name of the king and an important event that occurred in that year. A year label was typically attached to a container of goods and included the name of the king a description or representation of the event that identified the year and a description of the attached goods. This year label shows that the Narmer Palette depicts an actual historical event.37 Support for this conclusion in addition to Dreyer includes Wilkinson38 and Davies  Friedman.39 Although this interpretation of the year label is the dominant opinion among Egyptologists there are exceptions including Baines40 and Wengrow.
41 Archaeological evidence suggests that Egypt was at least partially unified during the reigns of Ka and IryHor Narmers immediate predecessors and perhaps as early as Scorpion I. Tax collection is probably documented for Ka44 and IryHor.45 The evidence for a role for Scorpion I in Lower Egypt comes from his tomb Uj in Abydos Upper Egypt where labels were found identifying goods from Lower Egypt.46 These are not tax documents however so they are probably indications of trade rather than subjugation. There is a substantial difference in the quantity and distribution of inscriptions with the names of those earlier kings in Lower Egypt and Canaan which was reached through Lower Egypt compared to the inscriptions of Narmer. Kas inscriptions have been found in three sites in Lower Egypt and one in Canaan.47 IryHor inscriptions have also been found in two sites in Lower Egypt and one in Canaan.4748 This must be compared to Narmer whose serekhs have been found in ten sites in Lower Egypt and nine sites in Canaan see discussion in Tomb and Artefacts section. This demonstrates a qualitative difference between Narmers role in Lower Egypt compared to his two immediate predecessors. There is no evidence in Lower Egypt of any Upper Egyptian kings presence before IryHor. The archaeological evidence suggest that the unification began before Narmer but was completed by him through the conquest of a polity in the northwest Delta as depicted on the Narmer Palette.
49 The importance that Narmer attached to his unification of Egypt is shown by the fact that it is commemorated not only on the Narmer Palette but on a cylinder seal50 the Narmer Year Label37 and the Narmer Boxes51 and the consequences of the event are commemorated on the Narmer Macehead.52 The importance of the unification to ancient Egyptians is shown by the fact that Narmer is shown as the first king on the two necropolis seals and under the name Menes the first king in the later King Lists. Although there is archaeological evidence of a few kings before Narmer none of them are mentioned in any of those sources. It can be accurately said that from the point of view of Ancient Egyptians history began with Narmer and the unification of Egypt and that everything before him was relegated to the realm of myth.According to Manetho quoted in Eusebius Fr. 
7 a Menes made a foreign expedition and won renown. If this is correct and assuming it refers to Narmer it was undoubtedly to the land of Canaan where Narmers serekh has been identified at nine different sites. An Egyptian presence in Canaan predates Narmer but after about 200 years of active presence in Canaan53 Egyptian presence peaked during Narmers reign and quickly declined afterwards. The relationship between Egypt and Canaan began around the end of the fifth millennium and apparently came to an end sometime during the Second Dynasty when it ceased altogether.54 It peaked during Dynasty 0 through the reign of Narmer.55 Dating to this period are 33 Egyptian serekhs found in Canaan56 among which 20 have been attributed to Narmer. Prior to Narmer only one serekh of Ka and one inscription with IryHors name have been found in Canaan.57 The serekhs earlier than IryHor are either generic serekhs that do not refer to a specific king or are for kings not attested in Abydos.55 Indicative of the decline of Egyptian presence in the region after Narmer only one serekh attributed to his successor HorAha has been found in Canaan.55 Even this one example is questionable Wilkinson does not believe there are any serekhs of HorAha outside Egypt58 and very few serekhs of kings for the rest of the first two dynasties have been found in Canaan.
59 The Egyptian presence in Canaan is best demonstrated by the presence of pottery made from Egyptian Nile clay and found in Canaang as well as pottery made from local clay but in the Egyptian style. The latter suggests the existence of Egyptian colonies rather than just trade.
61 The nature of Egypts role in Canaan has been vigorously debated between scholars who suggest a military invasion62 and others proposing that only trade and colonization were involved. Although the latter has gained predominance6163 the presence of fortifications at Tell esSakan dating to Dynasty 0 through early Dynasty 1 period and built almost entirely using an Egyptian style of construction demonstrate that there must have also been some kind of Egyptian military presence.
64 Regardless of the nature of Egypts presence in Canaan control of trade to and through Canaan was important to Ancient Egypt. Narmer probably did not establish Egypts initial influence in Canaan by a military invasion but a military campaign by Narmer to reassert Egyptian authority or to increase its sphere of influence in the region is certainly plausible. In addition to the quote by Manetho and the large number of Narmer serekhs found in Canaan a recent reconstruction of a box of Narmers by Dreyer may have commemorated a military campaign in Canaan.65 It may also represent just the presentation of tribute to Narmer by Canaanites.
65 Narmer and HorAhas names were both found in what is believed to be Neithhoteps tomb which led Egyptologists to conclude that she was Narmers queen and mother of HorAha.66 Neithhoteps name means Neith is satisfied. This suggests that she was a princess of Lower Egypt based on the fact that Neith is the patron goddess of Sais in the Western Delta exactly the area Narmer conquered to complete the unification of Egypt and that this was a marriage to consolidate the two regions of Egypt.66 The fact that her tomb is in Naqada in Upper Egypt has led some to the conclusion that she was a descendant of the predynastic rulers of Naqada who ruled prior to its incorporation into a united Upper Egypt.67 It has also been suggested that the Narmer Macehead commemorates this wedding.68 However the discovery in 2012 of rock inscriptions in Sinai by Pierre Tallet69 raise questions about whether she was really Narmers wife.h Neithhotep is probably the earliest nonmythical woman in history whose name is known to us today.
71 Narmers tomb in Umm elQaab near Abydos in Upper Egypt consists of two joined chambers B17 and B18 lined in mud brick. Although both mile Amlineau and Petrie excavated tombs B17 and B18 it was only in 1964 that Kaiser identified them as being Narmers.
72 i Narmers tomb is located next to the tombs of Ka who likely ruled Upper Egypt just before Narmer and HorAha who was his immediate successor.jAs the tomb dates back more than 5000 years and has been pillaged repeatedly from antiquity to modern times it is amazing that anything useful could be discovered in it. Because of the repeated disturbances in Umm elQaab many articles of Narmers were found in other graves and objects of other kings were recovered in Narmers grave. However Flinders Petrie during the period 189919037576 and starting in the 19
70 s the German Archaeological Institute DAIk have made discoveries of the greatest importance to the history of Early Egypt by their reexcavation of the tombs of Umm elQaab.Despite the chaotic condition of the cemetery inscriptions on both wood and bone seal impressions as well as dozens of flint arrowheads were found. Petrie says with dismay that hundreds of arrowheads were discovered by the French presumably Amlineau. What happened to them is not clear but none ended up in the Cairo Museum.77 Flint knives and a fragment of an ebony chair leg were also discovered in Narmers tomb all of which might be part of the original funerary assemblage. The flint knives and fragment of a chair leg were not included in any of Petries publications but are now at the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology University College London registration numbers UC35679 UC52786 and UC35682. According to Dreyer32 these arrowheads are probably from the tomb of Djer where similar arrowheads were found.
78 It is likely that all of the kings of Ancient Egypt buried in Umm elQaab had funerary enclosures in Abydos northern cemetery near the cultivation line. These were characterized by large mud brick walls that enclosed space in which funerary ceremonies are believed to have taken place. Eight enclosures have been excavated two of which have not been definitely identified.7980 While it has yet to be confirmed one of these unidentified funerary enclosures may have belonged to Narmer.lNarmer is well attested throughout Egypt southern Canaan and Sinai altogether 98 inscriptions at 26 sites.m At Abydos and Hierakonpolis Narmers name appears both within a serekh and without reference to a serekh. At every other site except Coptos Narmers name appears in a serekh. In Egypt his name has been found at 17 sitesDuring Narmers reign Egypt had an active economic presence in southern Canaan. Pottery sherds have been discovered at several sites both from pots made in Egypt and imported to Canaan and others made in the Egyptian style out of local materials. Twenty serekhs have been found in Canaan that may belong to Narmer but seven of those are uncertain or controversial. These serekhs came from eight different sites Tel Arad111112 En Besor Ein HaBesor113114 Tel esSakan115116 Nahal Tillah Halif Terrace117 Tel Erani Tel Gat118119 Small Tel Malhata120121 Tel Maahaz122 and Tel Lod1
23 Narmers serekh along with those of other Predynastic and Early Dynastic kings has been found at the Wadi Ameyra in the southern Sinai where inscriptions commemorate Egyptian mining expeditions to the area.1241
25 First recorded at the end of the 
19 th century an important series of rock carvings at Nag elHamdulab near Aswan was rediscovered in 2009 and its importance only realized then.126127128 Among the many inscriptions tableau 
7 a shows a man wearing a headdress similar to the White Crown of Upper Egypt and carrying a scepter. He is followed by a man with a fan. He is then preceded by two men with standards and accompanied by a dog. Apart from the dog motif this scene is similar to scenes on the Scorpion Macehead and the recto of the Narmer Palette. The man equipped with pharaonic regalia the crown and scepter can clearly be identified as a king. Although no name appears in the tableau Darnell127 attributes it to Narmer based on the iconography and suggests that it might represent an actual visit to the region by Narmer for a Following of Horus ritual. In an interview in 2012 Gatto129 also describes the king in the inscription as Narmer. However Hendricks 2016 places the scene slightly before Narmer based in part on the uncharacteristic absence of Narmers royal name in the inscription.ShamshiAdad dynasty 18081736 BCE Amorites ShamshiAdad I IshmeDagan I MutAshkur Rimush Asinum Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Nondynastic usurpers 17351701 BCE PuzurSin Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Adaside dynasty 1700722 BCE Belbani Libaya SharmaAdad I IptarSin Bazaya Lullaya ShuNinua SharmaAdad II Erishum III ShamshiAdad II IshmeDagan II ShamshiAdad III Ashurnirari I PuzurAshur III Enlilnasir I Nurili Ashurshaduni Ashurrabi I Ashurnadinahhe I EnlilNasir II Ashurnirari II Ashurbelnisheshu Ashurrimnisheshu Ashurnadinahhe IISecond Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty15001100 BCE Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty UntashNapirishaTwentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes IITwentythird Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht BakenranefSargonid dynasty TiglathPileser Shalmaneser Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Ashurnadinshumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal Ashuretililani Sinsharishkun Sinshumulishir Ashuruballit II