Pschent - Wikipedia

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 Archaeology 
3 Mythology 
4 Gallery 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pschent 24 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Deutsch   Franais  Bahasa Melayu  Norsk bokml Polski  Simple English Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Svenska   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian double crown Pschent Pschent the double crown of Egypt Details Country Ancient Egypt Predecessors Deshret Hedjet The pschent sknt Greek  was the double crown worn by rulers in ancient Egypt. The ancient Egyptians generally referred to it as sekhemty sm.ty the Two Powerful Ones.1 It combined the White Hedjet Crown of Upper Egypt and the Red Deshret Crown of Lower Egypt. The Pschent represented the pharaohs power over all of unified Egypt.2 It bore two animal emblems an Egyptian cobra known as the uraeus ready to strike which symbolized the Lower Egyptian goddess Wadjet and a vulture representing the Upper Egyptian tutelary goddess Nekhbet. These were fastened to the front of the Pschent and referred to as the Two Ladies. Historyedit Pschent Double Crown in hieroglyphs The invention of the Pschent is generally attributed to the First Dynasty pharaoh Menes but the first one known to wear a Double Crown was the First Dynasty pharaoh Djet a rock inscription shows his Horus wearing it.3 The king list on the Palermo Stone which begins with the names of Lower Egyptian pharaohs nowadays thought to have been mythological demigods shown wearing the Red Crown marks the unification of the country by giving the Pschent to all First Dynasty and later pharaohs.4 The Cairo fragment on the other hand shows these prehistoric rulers wearing the Pschent.5 Archaeologyedit As is the case with the Deshret and the Hedjet Crowns no Pschent is currently known to have survived. It is known only from statuary depictions inscriptions and ancient tales. Mythologyedit Among the deities sometimes depicted wearing the Double Crown are Horus6 and Atum or Ra both representing the pharaoh or having a special relationship to the pharaoh.7 Galleryedit Fragment of an ivory label showing pharaoh Den wearing the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt. Discovered in the tomb of Den at Umm El Qaab now in the Egyptian Museum Pharaoh Ptolemy VIII between the goddesses Wadjet symbolizing lower Egypt and Nekhbet symbolizing upper Egypt. Basrelief on wall of Temple of Edfu Egypt Ring of Ptolemy VI Philometor wearing the Pschent Double Crown 
3 rd to 
2 nd Century BC. Ptolemaic rulers wore the Pschent in Egypt only and wore the Greek diadem in the other territories Statue head Senusret III wearing a pschent Horus falcon with Double Crown Statue of Amenhotep III wearing a pschent See alsoedit Atef  Hedjet Crown with feathers identified with Osiris Khepresh  Blue or War Crown also called Royal Crown Nred crown n hieroglyph Nwater ripple n hieroglyph Uraeus  Rearing Cobra Referencesedit  Griffith Francis Llewellyn A Collection of Hieroglyphs A Contribution to the History of Egyptian Writing the Egypt Exploration Fund 1898 p.56  Dunand Franoise Christiane ZivieCoche Gods and Men in Egypt 3000 BCE to 395 CE Cornell University Press 2004 pp.
32 f.  Wilkinson Toby A. H. Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge 1999 p.196  Trigger B. G. 1982. The rise of civilization in Egypt. In Clark J. Desmond ed.. The Cambridge History of Africa. Volume 1 From the Earliest Times to c.500 BC. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. p. 521. doi
10.1 0
17 CHOL97805212221
50.0 08. ISBN 9781139054553.  Kemp Barry John Ancient Egypt Anatomy Of A Civilization Routledge 2006 p.92  Zandee Jan Studies in Egyptian Religion Dedicated to Professor Jan Zandee Brill 1982 p.74  The New Encyclopdia Britannica Encyclopdia Britannica Inc. 2005 p. 689 External linksedit Media related to pschent at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of pschent at Wiktionary v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePschentoldid1208156271 Categories Crowns headgear Egyptian artefact types Wadjet Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 February 2024 at 1653 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width