The New Kingdom also referred to as the Egyptian Empire was the ancient Egyptian nation between the 
16 th century BC and the 
11 th century BC. This period of ancient Egyptian history covers the Eighteenth Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties. Through radiocarbon dating the establishment of the New Kingdom has been placed between 1570 BC and 1544 BC.3 The New Kingdom followed the Second Intermediate Period and was succeeded by the Third Intermediate Period. It was the most prosperous time for the Egyptian people and marked the peak of Egypts power.
4 In 1845 the concept of a New Kingdom as one of three golden ages was coined by German scholar Baron von Bunsen the original definition would evolve significantly throughout the 
19 th and 
20 th centuries.5 The later part of this period under the Nineteenth Dynasty 12951189 BC and the Twentieth Dynasty 11891069 BC is also known as the Ramesside period. It is named after the eleven pharaohs who took the name Ramesses after Ramesses I the founder of the Nineteenth Dynasty and his grandson Ramesses II its longestreigning monarch.
4 Possibly as a result of the foreign rule of the Hyksos during the Second Intermediate Period the New Kingdom saw a historic expansion into the Levant thus marking Egypts greatest territorial extent. Similarly in response to attacks by the Kushites who led raids into Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period67 the rulers of the New Kingdom felt compelled to expand far into Nubia and to hold wider territories in the Near East particularly on the Levantine frontier.The Eighteenth Dynasty included some of Egypts most famous kings including Ahmose I Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep III Akhenaten and Tutankhamun.Ahmose I is viewed to be the founder of the eighteenth dynasty. He continued the campaigns of his father Seqenenre Tao and of Kamose against the Hyksos until he reunified the country once more. Ahmose would then continue to campaign in the Levant the home of the Hyksos to prevent any future invasions on Egypt.
8 Ahmose was followed by Amenhotep I who campaigned in Nubia and was followed by Thutmose I. Thutmose I campaigned in the Levant and reached as far as the Euphrates thus becoming the first pharaoh to cross the river.9 During this campaign the Syrian princes declared allegiance to Thutmose. However after he returned they discontinued tribute and began fortifying against future incursions.
10 Hatshepsut was one of the most powerful pharaohs of this dynasty. She was the daughter of Thutmose I and the royal wife of Thutmose II. Upon the death of her husband she ruled jointly with his son by a minor wife Thutmose III who had ascended to the throne as a child of about two years of age but eventually she ruled in her own right as king. Hatshepsut built extensively in the Karnak temple in Luxor and throughout all of Egypt11 and she reestablished the trade networks that had been disrupted during the Hyksos rule of Lower Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period thereby building the wealth of the Eighteenth Dynasty. She oversaw the preparations and funding for a mission to the Land of Punt. After her death having gained valuable experience heading up the military for Hatshepsut Thutmose III assumed rule.Thutmose III expanded Egypts army and wielded it with great success to consolidate the empire created by his predecessors. This resulted in a peak in Egypts power and wealth during the reign of Amenhotep III. The term pharaoh originally the name of the kings palace became a form of address for the person who was king during his reign c.14791425 BC.
12 Widely considered a military genius by historians Thutmose III conducted at least 16 campaigns in 20 years.13 He was an active expansionist ruler.14 He is recorded to have captured 350 cities during his rule and conquered much of the Near East from the Euphrates to Nubia during seventeen known military campaigns. He was the first pharaoh after Thutmose I to cross the Euphrates doing so during his campaign against Mitanni. He continued north through the territory belonging to the still unconquered cities of Aleppo and Carchemish and quickly crossed the Euphrates in his boats taking the Mitannian king entirely by surprise.
15 The wealthiest of all the kings of this dynasty is Amenhotep III who built the Luxor Temple the Precinct of Monthu at Karnak and his massive Mortuary Temple. Amenhotep III also built the Malkata palace the largest built in Egypt.One of the bestknown eighteenth dynasty pharaohs is Amenhotep IV who changed his name to Akhenaten in honour of the Aten a representation of the Egyptian god Ra. His worship of the Aten as his personal deity is often interpreted as historys first instance of monotheism. Akhenatens wife Nefertiti contributed a great deal to his new direction in the Egyptian religion. Nefertiti was bold enough to perform rituals to Aten. Akhenatens religious fervour is cited as the reason why he and his wife were subsequently written out of Egyptian history.16 Under his reign in the fourteenth century BC Egyptian art flourished in a distinctive new style see Amarna Period.By the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty Egypts status had changed radically. Aided by Akhenatens apparent lack of interest in international affairs the Hittites had gradually extended their influence into the Levant to become a major power in international politicsa power that both Seti I and his son Ramesses II would confront during the nineteenth Dynasty.The last two members of the Eighteenth DynastyAy and Horemhebbecame rulers from the ranks of officials in the royal court although Ay might also have been the maternal uncle of Akhenaten and a fellow descendant of Yuya and Tjuyu.Ay may have married the widowed Great Royal Wife and young halfsister of Tutankhamun Ankhesenamun in order to obtain power she did not live long afterward. Ay then married Tey who originally had been wetnurse to Nefertiti.Ays reign was short. His successor was Horemheb a general during the reign of Tutankhamun whom the pharaoh may have intended as his successor in the event that he had no surviving children which came to pass.17 Horemheb may have taken the throne away from Ay in a coup dtat. Although Ays son or stepson Nakhtmin was named as his father or stepfathers Crown Prince Nakhtmin seems to have died during the reign of Ay leaving the opportunity for Horemheb to claim the throne next.Horemheb also died without surviving children having appointed his vizier Paramessu as his heir. This vizier ascended the throne in 1292 BC as Ramesses I and was the first pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty.The Nineteenth Dynasty was founded by the Vizier Ramesses I whom the last ruler of the eighteenth dynasty Pharaoh Horemheb had chosen as his successor. His brief reign marked a transition period between the reign of Horemheb and the powerful pharaohs of this dynasty in particular his son Seti I and grandson Ramesses II who would bring Egypt to new heights of imperial power.Seti I fought a series of wars in western Asia Libya and Nubia in the first decade of his reign. The main source for knowledge of Setis military activities are his battle scenes on the north exterior wall of the Karnak Hypostyle Hall along with several royal stelas with inscriptions mentioning battles in Canaan and Nubia. The greatest achievement of Seti Is foreign policy was the capture of the Syrian town of Kadesh and neighboring territory of Amurru from the Hittite Empire. Egypt had not held Kadesh since the time of Akhenaten. Seti I was successful in defeating a Hittite army that tried to defend the town and erected a victory stela at the site which has been found by archaeologists.18 Kadesh however soon reverted to Hittite control because the Egyptians did not or could not maintain a permanent military occupation of Kadesh and Amurru which were close to the Hittite homelands.Ramesses II sought to recover territories in the Levant that had been held by the 
18 th Dynasty. In his second year before confronting the Hittites Ramesses II had to deal with a raid by the Sherden sea people whom he defeated and incorporated into his army.19 His campaigns against the Hittites culminated in the Battle of Kadesh where he led Egyptian armies against those of the Hittite king Muwatalli II. Ramesses was caught in historys first recorded military ambush although he was able to rally his troops and turn the tide of battle against the Hittites thanks to the arrival of the Nearin possibly mercenaries in the employ of Egypt. The outcome of the battle was undecided with both sides claiming victory at their home front and ultimately resulting in a peace treaty between the two nations. He campaigned later in the Levant capturing Edom and Moab.20 New kingdom Egyptian stelae from this period have been found in Jordan.21 Later Egyptians conquered Qatna and Tunip where a statue of Ramses II was erected.22 Thus he recaptured Qadesh and northern Amurru.23 Nevertheless like Seti I he found that he could not permanently hold territory so far from base and after years of conflict a peace treaty was concluded between the two nations. Egypt was able to obtain wealth and stability under the rule of Ramesses for more than half a century.24 His immediate successors continued the military campaigns although an increasingly troubled courtwhich at one point put a usurper Amenmesse on the thronemade it increasingly difficult for a pharaoh to effectively retain control of the territories.Ramesses II built extensively throughout Egypt and Nubia and his cartouches are prominently displayed even in buildings that he did not construct.25 There are accounts of his honor hewn on stone statues and the remains of palaces and templesmost notably the Ramesseum in western Thebes and the rock temples of Abu Simbel. He covered the land from the Delta to Nubia with buildings in a way no king before him had.26 He also founded a new capital city in the Delta during his reign called PiRamesses. It previously had served as a summer palace during the reign of Seti I.
27 Ramesses II constructed many large monuments including the archaeological complex of Abu Simbel and the Mortuary temple known as the Ramesseum. He built on a monumental scale to ensure that his legacy would survive the ravages of time. Ramesses used art as a means of propaganda for his victories over foreigners which are depicted on numerous temple reliefs. Ramesses II erected more colossal statues of himself than any other pharaoh and also usurped many existing statues by inscribing his own cartouche on them.Ramesses II was also famed for the huge number of children he sired by his various wives and concubines the tomb he built for his sons many of whom he outlived in the Valley of the Kings has proven to be the largest funerary complex in Egypt.The immediate successors of Ramesses II continued the military campaigns although an increasingly troubled court complicated matters. He was succeeded by his son Merneptah and then by Merneptahs son Seti II. Seti IIs right to the throne seems to have been disputed by his halfbrother Amenmesse who may have temporarily ruled from Thebes.Upon his death Seti IIs son Siptah who may have been afflicted with poliomyelitis during his life was appointed to the throne by Bay a chancellor and a West Asian commoner who served as vizier behind the scenes. Siptah died early and throne was assumed by Twosret who was the royal wife of his father and possibly his uncle Amenmesses sister.A period of anarchy at the end of Twosrets short reign saw the enthronement of Setnakhte establishing the Twentieth Dynasty.The last great pharaoh from the New Kingdom is widely considered to be Ramesses III a Twentieth Dynasty pharaoh who reigned several decades after Ramesses II.
28 In the eighth year of his reign the Sea Peoples invaded Egypt by land and sea. Ramesses III defeated them in two great land and sea battles the Battle of Djahy and the Battle of the Delta. He incorporated them as subject peoples and is thought to have settled them in Southern Canaan although there is evidence that they forced their way into Canaan. Their presence in Canaan may have contributed to the formation of new states such as Philistia in this region after the collapse of the Egyptian Empire In the reign of Ramses III himself Egyptian presence in the Levant is still attested as far as Byblos2930. He later was compelled to fight invading Libyan tribesmen in two major campaigns in Egypts Western Delta in his sixth year and eleventh year respectively.
31 The heavy cost of this warfare slowly drained Egypts treasury and contributed to the gradual decline of the Egyptian Empire in Asia. The severity of the difficulties is indicated by the fact that the first known labour strike in recorded history occurred during the twentyninth year of Ramesses IIIs reign. At that time the food rations for Egypts favoured and elite royal tombbuilders and artisans in the village of Deir el Medina could not be provisioned.32 Air pollution limited the amount of sunlight penetrating the atmosphere affecting agricultural production and arresting global tree growth for almost two full decades until 1140 BC.33 One proposed cause is the Hekla 3 eruption of the Hekla volcano in Iceland but the dating of this remains disputed.Near the end of Ramesses IIIs reign one of his secondary wives plotted to assassinate the king in her quest to place her son on the throne. Palace personnel the harem government officials and army officers participated in the plot. A special court of 12 judges was formed to try the defendants who were sentenced to death. Written sources show that the coup failed and that the conspirators were successfully tried. However it is not clear from the documents whether Ramses survived the assassination attempt. The kings mummy showed no visible wounds and questions about his fate were left open to speculation for many years. In 2012 researchers announced that a CT scan had revealed a deep knife wound in the mummys throat indicating that Ramesses was indeed killed by the conspirators. He died in Thebes in the 
32 nd year of his reign and was succeeded by Crown Prince Ramesses IV.
34 Ramesses IIIs death was followed by years of bickering among his heirs. Three of his sons ascended the throne successively as Ramesses IV Rameses VI and Rameses VIII. Egypt was increasingly beset by droughts belownormal flooding of the Nile famine civil unrest and corruption of officials. The power of the last pharaoh of the dynasty Ramesses XI grew so weak that in the south the High Priests of Amun at Thebes became the de facto rulers of Upper Egypt and Smendes controlled Lower Egypt in the north even before Rameses XIs death. Smendes eventually founded the twentyfirst dynasty at Tanis.