Pharaoh - Wikipedia

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Functions 
3 Regalia Toggle Regalia subsection 
3.1 Scepters and staves 
3.2 The Uraeus 
4 Crowns and headdresses Toggle Crowns and headdresses subsection 
4.1 Deshret 
4.2 Hedjet 
4.3 Pschent 
4.4 Khat 
4.5 Nemes 
4.6 Atef 
4.7 Hemhem 
4.8 Khepresh 
4.9 Physical evidence 
5 Titles Toggle Titles subsection 
5.1 Horus name 
5.2 Nesu Bity name 
5.3 Nebty name 
5.4 Golden Horus 
5.5 Nomen and prenomen 
6 Divinity Toggle Divinity subsection 
6.1 Ancient Egypt 
6.2 Classical Greece 
6.3 Rabbinic literature 
7 See also 
8 Notes 
9 References 
10 Bibliography 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Pharaoh 117 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch     Asturianu Avae Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg      Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  Cebuano etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gaelg Galego    Hausa   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano  Jawa   Kiswahili Kurd  Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Limburgs Lingla Magyar  Malagasy  Malti    Bahasa Melayu   Mngdngng   Nederlands Nedersaksies   Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Ozbekcha      Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Taclit   Trke     Uyghurche Ting Vit Winaray   Yorb  Zeuws  Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Title of Ancient Egyptian rulers For other uses see Pharaoh disambiguation. For a list of the pharaohs see List of pharaohs. Pharaoh of Egypt The Pschent combined the Red Crown of Lower Egypt and the White Crown of Upper Egypt A typical depiction of a pharaoh usually depicted the king wearing the nemes headdress a false beard and an ornate shendyt kilt after Djoser of the Third Dynasty Details Style Fivename titulary First monarch Narmer or Menes by tradition Last monarch Nectanebo II native 343 BCE1 Caesarion officeholder 30 BCE Maximinus Daza to be called pharaoh CE 314 2 Formation c. 3150 BCE Residence Varies by era Appointer Hereditary pr3 Great house in hieroglyphs nswtbjt King of Upper and Lower Egypt in hieroglyphs Pharaoh fro US also fe.ro3 Egyptian pr note 1 Coptic  romanized Prro Biblical Hebrew  Par4 is the vernacular term often used for the monarchs of ancient Egypt who ruled from the First Dynasty c.3150 BCE until the annexation of Egypt by the Roman Republic in 30 BCE.5 However regardless of gender king was the term used most frequently by the ancient Egyptians for their monarchs through the middle of the Eighteenth Dynasty during the New Kingdom. The earliest confirmed instances of pharaoh used contemporaneously for a ruler were a letter to Akhenaten reigned c.13531336 BCE or an inscription possibly referring to Thutmose III c.14791425 BCE. In the early dynasties ancient Egyptian kings had as many as three titles the Horus the Sedge and Bee nswtbjtj and the Two Ladies or Nebty nbtj name.6 The Golden Horus and the nomen and prenomen titles were added later.7 In Egyptian society religion was central to everyday life. One of the roles of the king was as an intermediary between the deities and the people. The king thus was deputised for the deities in a role that was both as civil and religious administrator. The king owned all of the land in Egypt enacted laws collected taxes and served as commanderinchief of the military.8 Religiously the king officiated over religious ceremonies and chose the sites of new temples. The king was responsible for maintaining Maat mt or cosmic order balance and justice and part of this included going to war when necessary to defend the country or attacking others when it was believed that this would contribute to Maat such as to obtain resources.9 During the early days prior to the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt the Deshret or the Red Crown was a representation of the kingdom of Lower Egypt10 while the Hedjet the White Crown was worn by the kings of Upper Egypt.11 After the unification of both kingdoms the Pschent the combination of both the red and white crowns became the official crown of the pharaoh.12 With time new headdresses were introduced during different dynasties such as the Khat Nemes Atef Hemhem crown and Khepresh. At times a combination of these headdresses or crowns worn together was depicted. Etymology The word pharaoh ultimately derives from the Egyptian compound pr  pauwa great house written with the two biliteral hieroglyphs pr house and  column here meaning great or high. It was the title of the royal palace and was used only in larger phrases such as smr pr Courtier of the High House with specific reference to the buildings of the court or palace.13 From the Twelfth Dynasty onward the word appears in a wish formula Great House May it Live Prosper and be in Health but again only with reference to the royal palace and not a person. The Mask of Tutankhamun from tomb KV62 in the Valley of the Kings. Pharaohs tombs were provided with vast quantities of wealth Sometime during the era of the New Kingdom pharaoh became the form of address for a person who was king. The earliest confirmed instance where pr  is used specifically to address the ruler is in a letter to the eighteenth dynasty king Akhenaten reigned c.13531336 BCE that is addressed to Great House L W H the Lord.1415 However there is a possibility that the title pr  first might have been applied personally to Thutmose III c.14791425 BCE depending on whether an inscription on the Temple of Armant may be confirmed to refer to that king.16 During the Eighteenth dynasty sixteenth to fourteenth centuries BCE the title pharaoh was employed as a reverential designation of the ruler. About the late Twentyfirst Dynasty tenth century BCE however instead of being used alone and originally just for the palace it began to be added to the other titles before the name of the king and from the TwentyFifth Dynasty eighth to seventh centuries BCE during the declining Third Intermediate Period it was at least in ordinary use the only epithet prefixed to the royal appellative.17 From the Nineteenth dynasty onward pr on its own was used as regularly as m Majesty.18 The term therefore evolved from a word specifically referring to a building to a respectful designation for the ruler presiding in that building particularly by the time of the TwentySecond Dynasty and Twentythird Dynasty.citation needed The first dated appearance of the title pharaoh being attached to a rulers name occurs in Year 17 of Siamun tenth century BCE on a fragment from the Karnak Priestly Annals a religious document. Here an induction of an individual to the Amun priesthood is dated specifically to the reign of Pharaoh Siamun.19 This new practice was continued under his successor Psusennes II and the subsequent kings of the twentysecond dynasty. For instance the Large Dakhla stela is specifically dated to Year 5 of king Pharaoh Shoshenq beloved of Amun whom all Egyptologists concur was Shoshenq Ithe founder of the Twentysecond Dynastyincluding Alan Gardiner in his original 1933 publication of this stela.20 Shoshenq I was the second successor of Siamun. Meanwhile the traditional custom of referring to the sovereign as pr3 continued in official Egyptian narratives.citation needed The title is reconstructed to have been pronounced paro in the Late Egyptian language from which the Greek historian Herodotus derived the name of one of the Egyptian kings Koin Greek .21 In the Hebrew Bible the title also occurs as Hebrew  paroh22 from that in the Septuagint Koin Greek  romanized phara and then in Late Latin phara both n stem nouns. The Quran likewise spells it Arabic  firawn with n here always referring to the one evil king in the Book of Exodus story by contrast to the good king in surah Yusufs story. The Arabic combines the original ayin from Egyptian along with the n ending from Greek. In English the term was at first spelled Pharao but the translators for the King James Bible revived Pharaoh with h from the Hebrew. Meanwhile in Egypt paro evolved into Sahidic Coptic  prro and then rro by rebracketing p as the definite article the from ancient Egyptian p.23 Other notable epithets are nswt translated to king m Majesty jty for monarch or sovereign nb for lord
18 note 2 and q for ruler. Functions Main article Functions of the Pharaoh As a central figure of the state the pharaoh is the obligatory intermediary between the gods and humans. To the former he ensured the proper performance of rituals in the temples to the latter he guaranteed agricultural prosperity the defense of the territory and impartial justice. In the sanctuaries the image of the sovereign is omnipresent through parietal scenes and statues. In this iconography the pharaoh is invariably represented as the equal of the gods. In the religious speech he is however only their humble servant a zealous servant who makes multiple offerings. This piety expresses the hope of a just return of service. Filled with goods the gods must favorably activate the forces of nature for a common benefit to all Egyptians. The only human being admitted to dialogue with the gods on an equal level Pharaoh is the supreme officiant the first of the priests of the country. More widely the pharaonic gesture covers all the fields of activity of the collective and ignores the separation of powers. Also every member of the administration acts only in the name of the royal person by delegation of power. From the Pyramid Texts the political actions of the sovereign are framed by a single maxim Bring Maat and repel Isfet that is to say promote harmony and repel chaos. As the nurturing father of the people Pharaoh ensures prosperity by calling upon the gods to regulate the waters of the Nile by opening the granaries in case of famine and by guaranteeing a good distribution of arable land. Chief of the armies the pharaoh is the brave protector of the borders. Like Ra who fights the serpent Apophis the king of Egypt repels the plunderers of the desert fights the invading armies and defeats the internal rebels. Pharaoh is always the sole victor standing up and knocking out a bunch of prisoners or shooting arrows from his battle chariot. As the only legislator the laws and decrees he promulgates are inspired by divine wisdom. This legislation kept in the archives and placed under the responsibility of the vizier applies to all for the common good and social agreement. Regalia Main article Regalia of the Pharaoh Scepters and staves Beaded scepter of Khasekhemwy c.28902680 BCE Museum of Fine Arts Boston Sceptres and staves were a general symbol of authority in ancient Egypt.24 One of the earliest royal scepters was discovered in the tomb of Khasekhemwy in Abydos.24 Kings were also known to carry a staff and Anedjib is shown on stone vessels carrying a socalled mksstaff.25 The scepter with the longest history seems to be the heqasceptre sometimes described as the shepherds crook.26 The earliest examples of this piece of regalia dates to prehistoric Egypt. A scepter was found in a tomb at Abydos that dates to Naqada III. Another scepter associated with the king is the wassceptre.26 This is a long staff mounted with an animal head. The earliest known depictions of the wasscepter date to the First Dynasty. The wasscepter is shown in the hands of both kings and deities. The flail later was closely related to the heqascepter the crook and flail but in early representations the king was also depicted solely with the flail as shown in a late predynastic knife handle that is now in the Metropolitan museum and on the Narmer Macehead.27 The Uraeus The earliest evidence known of the Uraeusa rearing cobrais from the reign of Den from the first dynasty. The cobra supposedly protected the king by spitting fire at its enemies.28 Crowns and headdresses Main article Crowns of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer wearing the white crown Narmer wearing the red crown Deshret A guardian statue wearing the red crown which reflected the facial features of the reigning king probably Amenemhat II or Senwosret II and which functioned as a divine guardian for the imiut. Made of cedar wood and plaster c. 19191885 BCE29 The red crown of Lower Egypt the Deshret crown dates back to predynastic times and symbolised chief ruler. A red crown has been found on a pottery shard from Naqada and later Narmer is shown wearing the red crown on both the Narmer Macehead and the Narmer Palette. Hedjet The white crown of Upper Egypt the Hedjet was worn in the Predynastic Period by Scorpion II and later by Narmer. Pschent This is the combination of the Deshret and Hedjet crowns into a double crown called the Pschent crown. It is first documented in the middle of the First Dynasty of Egypt. The earliest depiction may date to the reign of Djet and is otherwise surely attested during the reign of Den.30 Khat Uraeus depicted on king Den ivory label found at his tomb in Abydos c.3000 BCE British Museum London The khat headdress consists of a kind of kerchief whose end is tied similarly to a ponytail. The earliest depictions of the khat headdress comes from the reign of Den but is not found again until the reign of Djoser. Nemes The Nemes headdress dates from the time of Djoser. It is the most common type of royal headgear depicted throughout Pharaonic Egypt. Any other type of crown apart from the Khat headdress has been commonly depicted on top of the Nemes. The statue from his Serdab in Saqqara shows the king wearing the nemes headdress.30 Statuette of Pepy I c.23382298 BCE wearing a nemes headdress Brooklyn Museum New York Atef Osiris is shown to wear the Atef crown which is an elaborate Hedjet with feathers and disks. Depictions of kings wearing the Atef crown originate from the Old Kingdom. Hemhem The Hemhem crown is usually depicted on top of Nemes Pschent or Deshret crowns. It is an ornate triple Atef with corkscrew sheep horns and usually two uraei. The depiction of this crown begins among New Kingdom rulers during the Early Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt. Khepresh Khepresh crown on Akhenaten 
18 th dynasty Also called the blue crown the Khepresh crown has been depicted in art since the New Kingdom. It is often depicted being worn in battle but it was also frequently worn during ceremonies. It used to be called a war crown by many but modern historians refrain from defining it thus. Physical evidence Egyptologist Bob Brier has noted that despite their widespread depiction in royal portraits no ancient Egyptian crown has ever been discovered. The tomb of Tutankhamun that was discovered largely intact contained such royal regalia as a crook and flail but no crown was found among his funerary equipment. Diadems have been discovered.31 It is presumed that crowns would have been believed to have magical properties and were used in rituals. Briers speculation is that crowns were religious or state items so a dead king likely could not retain a crown as a personal possession. The crowns may have been passed along to the successor much as the crowns of modern monarchies.32 Titles Main article Ancient Egyptian royal titulary During the Early Dynastic Period kings had three titles. The Horus name is the oldest and dates to the late predynastic period. The Nesu Bity name was added during the First Dynasty. The Nebty name Two Ladies was first introduced toward the end of the First Dynasty.30 The Golden falcon biknbw name is not well understood. The prenomen and nomen were introduced later and are traditionally enclosed in a cartouche.33 By the Middle Kingdom the official titulary of the ruler consisted of five names Horus Nebty Golden Horus nomen and prenomen 34 for some rulers only one or two of them may be known. Horus name The Horus name was adopted by the king when taking the throne. The name was written within a square frame representing the palace named a serekh. The earliest known example of a serekh dates to the reign of king Ka before the First Dynasty.35 The Horus name of several early kings expresses a relationship with Horus. Aha refers to Horus the fighter Djer refers to Horus the strong etc. Later kings express ideals of kingship in their Horus names. Khasekhemwy refers to Horus the two powers are at peace while Nebra refers to Horus Lord of the Sun.30 Nesu Bity name The Nesu Bity name also known as prenomen was one of the new developments from the reign of Den. The name would follow the glyphs for the Sedge and the Bee. The title is usually translated as king of Upper and Lower Egypt. The nsw bity name may have been the birth name of the king. It was often the name by which kings were recorded in the later annals and king lists.30 Nebty name The earliest example of a Nebty Two Ladies name comes from the reign of king Aha from the First Dynasty. The title links the king with the goddesses of Upper and Lower Egypt Nekhbet and Wadjet.3033 The title is preceded by the vulture Nekhbet and the cobra Wadjet standing on a basket the neb sign.30 Golden Horus The Golden Horus or Golden Falcon name was preceded by a falcon on a gold or nbw sign. The title may have represented the divine status of the king. The Horus associated with gold may be referring to the idea that the bodies of the deities were made of gold and the pyramids and obelisks are representations of golden sunrays. The gold sign may also be a reference to Nubt the city of Set. This would suggest that the iconography represents Horus conquering Set.30 Nomen and prenomen The prenomen and nomen were contained in a cartouche. The prenomen often followed the King of Upper and Lower Egypt nsw bity or Lord of the Two Lands nebtawy title. The prenomen often incorporated the name of Re. The nomen often followed the title Son of Re sara or the title Lord of Appearances nebkha.33 Nomen and prenomen of Ramesses III Divinity Ancient Egypt In Ancient Egypt the Pharaoh was often considered to be divine. This precept originated before 3000 BCE and the Egyptian office of divine kingship would go on to influence many other societies and kingdoms surviving into the modern era. The Pharaoh also became a mediator between the gods and man. This institution represents an innovation over that of Sumerian citystates where though the clan leader or king mediated between his people and the gods did not himself represent a god on Earth. The few Sumerian exceptions to this would postdate the origins of this practice in ancient Egypt. For example the legendary king Gilgamesh thought to have reigned in Uruk as a contemporary of the Egyptian ruler Djoser was cast as having had his mother as the Mesopotamian goddess Ninsun alongside his father the previous human ruler of Uruk. Another Mesopotamian example of a godking was NaramSin of Akkad. During the Early Dynastic Period the Pharaoh was represented as the divine incarnation of Horus and the unifier of Upper and Lower Egypt. By the time of Djedefre 
26 th century BCE the Pharaoh also ceased to have a father as his mother was magically impregnated by the solar deity Ra. According to Pyramid Text Utterance 571 ... the King was fashioned by his father Atum before the sky existed before earth existed before men existed before the gods were born before death existed ... According to an inscription on the statue of Horemheb 
14 th
13 th centuries BCE he Horemheb already came out of his mothers bosom adorned with the prestige and the divine color ...36 Inscriptions regularly described the Pharaoh as the good god or perfect god nfr ntr. By the time of the New Kingdom the divinity of the king was imbued as he possessed the manifestation of the god AmunRe this was referred to as his living royal ka which he received during the coronation ceremony. The divinity of Pharaoh was still held to during the period of Persian domination of Egypt. The Persian emperor Darius the Great 522486 BCE was referred to as a divine being in Egyptian temple texts. Such descriptions continued and were designated to Alexander the Great after his conquest of Egypt and later still for the rulers of the Ptolemaic Kingdom that succeeded Alexanders rule.37 Classical Greece Descriptions of the divinity of the Pharaoh are much more infrequent in sources from Classical Greece. One Ptolemaicera hymn describes the divinity of the Pharaoh though this may reflect Greek notions of divine kingship just as much as it could reflect Egyptian ones. The historian Herodotus explicitly denies this claiming that Egyptian priests rejected any notion of the divinity of the king. The only explicit classical Greek source which describes the divinity of Pharaoh is contained in the writings of Diodorus Siculus in the 
1 st century BCE who in turn relies on Hecataeus of Abdera as his source of information. Diodorus slightly contradicts himself in a different passage where he asserts that Darius I was the first ruler of Egypt to be honored as a king.37 Rabbinic literature Even after the reign of the Egyptian kings and pharaohs the notion of Pharaohs selfnotion as a divine being survived and is described in rabbinic literature. In these sources the Pharaoh is described as hubristically asserting his own divinity and yet compared to the one true God is no more than an impotent human. Genesis Rabbah 893 invokes Pharaoh describing himself as the god over the Nile river. In Exodus Rabbah 102 Pharaoh boasts that he is the creator and owner of the Nile. God is then said to have responded to this statement by challenging the Pharaoh over who owns the Nile as God proceeds to create a disaster by bringing forth frogs from it that consume Egypts agriculture. In other midrashic texts Pharaoh asserts himself as the creator of the universe and even of himself.38 In the Tanhuma in commentary on Ezekiel 299 Pharaoh is said to have proclaimed himself as lord of the universe. Pharaoh is represented as a heretical figure who presents himself as divine and these texts then claim that his claims were exposed when he had to go to the Nile to relieve himself.39 See also Ancient Egypt portal Monarchy portal List of pharaohs Roman pharaoh Coronation of the pharaoh Curse of the pharaohs Egyptian chronology Pharaohs in the Bible Notes  Likely pronounced parwar in Old Egyptian c.2500 BCE and Middle Egyptian c.1700 BCE and pra or pr in Late Egyptian c.800 BCE  nb.f means his lord the monarchs were introduced with .f for his .k for your.18 References  Clayton 1995 p. 217. Although paying lipservice to the old ideas and religion in varying degrees pharaonic Egypt had in effect died with the last native pharaoh Nectanebo II in 343 BCE  von Beckerath Jrgen 1999. Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen. Verlag Philipp von Zabern. pp. 266267. ISBN 9783422008328.  Wells John C. 2008 Longman Pronunciation Dictionary 
3 rd ed. Longman ISBN 9781405881180  Strongs Hebrew Concordance  6547. Paroh. Bible Hub. Archived from the original on 20221018. Retrieved 20221020.  Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs the Reignbyreign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson CE 2012. Print.  Wilkinson Toby A. H. 2002. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge. ISBN 9781134664207.  Bierbrier Morris L. 2008. Historical Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810862500.  Pharaoh. AncientEgypt.co.uk. The British Museum. 1999. Archived from the original on 27 November 1999. Retrieved 20 December 2017.  Mark Joshua 2 September 2009. Pharaoh  World History Encyclopedia. World History Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 20 December 2017.  Hagen RoseMarie Hagen Rainer 2007. Egypt Art. New Holland Publishers Pty Limited. ISBN 9783822854587.  The royal crowns of Egypt. Egypt Exploration Society. 7 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20220518. Retrieved 20220502.  Gaskell G. 2016. A Dictionary of the Sacred Language of All Scriptures and Myths Routledge Revivals. Routledge. ISBN 9781317589426.  A. Gardiner Ancient Egyptian Grammar 
3 rd edn 1957 7176.  Hieratic Papyrus from Kahun and Gurob F. LL. Griffith 38 17.  Petrie W. M. William Matthew Flinders Sayce A. H. Archibald Henry Griffith F. Ll Francis Llewellyn 1891. Illahun Kahun and Gurob  18891890. Cornell University Library. London  D. Nutt. pp. 50.  Robert Mond and O.H. Meyers. Temples of Armant a Preliminary Survey The Text The Egypt Exploration Society London 1940 160.  pharaoh in Encyclopdia Britannica. Ultimate Reference Suite. Chicago Encyclopdia Britannica 2008.  a b c Doxey Denise M. 1998. Egyptian NonRoyal Epithets in the Middle Kingdom A Social and Historical Analysis. BRILL. p. 119. ISBN 9004110771.  JM. Kruchten Les annales des pretres de Karnak OLA 32 1989 pp. 474478.  Alan Gardiner The Dakhleh Stela Journal of Egyptian Archaeology Vol. 19 No. 12 May 1933 pp. 193200.  Herodotus Histories 
2.1 
11.1 . See Anne Burton 1972. Diodorus Siculus Book 1 A Commentary. Brill. commenting on ch. 
59.1 .  Elazar Ari Lipinski Pesach  A holiday of questions. About the HaggadahCommentary Zevach Pesach of Rabbi Isaak Abarbanel 14371508. Archived 20170316 at the Wayback Machine Explaining the meaning of the name Pharaoh. Published first in German in the official quarterly of the Organization of the Jewish Communities of Bavaria Jdisches Leben in Bayern. Mitteilungsblatt des Landesverbandes der Israelitischen Kultusgemeinden in Bayern. PessachAusgabe Nr. 109 2009 ZDBID 20774576 S. 34.  Walter C. Till Koptische Grammatik. VEB Verlag Enzyklopdie Leipzig 1961. p. 62.  a b Wilkinson Toby A. H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge 2001 p. 158.  Wilkinson Toby A. H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge 2001 p. 159.  a b Wilkinson Toby A. H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge 2001 p. 160.  Wilkinson Toby A. H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge 2001 p. 161.  Wilkinson Toby A. H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge 2001 p. 162.  Guardian Figure. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022.  a b c d e f g h Wilkinson Toby A. H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge 2001 ISBN 9780415260114  Shaw Garry J. The Pharaoh Life at Court and on Campaign. Thames and Hudson 2012 pp. 21 77.  Bob Brier The Murder of Tutankhamen 1998 p. 95.  a b c Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2004. ISBN 0500051283  Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt Oxford University Press 2000 p. 477  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge 1999 pp. 
57 f.  Najovits Simson R. 2003. Egypt trunk of the tree. 1 The contexts. Algora Publ. pp. 151157. ISBN 9780875862347.  a b Collins Andrew 2014. The Divinity of the Pharaoh in Greek Sources. The Classical Quarterly. 64 2 841844 also see n. 1. doi
10.1 0
17 S0009838814000
07 X. ISSN 00098388.  Ulmer Rivka 2009. Egyptian cultural icons in Midrash. Studia Judaica Forschungen zur Wissenschaft des Judentums. Berlin  New York Walter De Gruyter. pp. 7476. ISBN 9783110223927.  Kalimi Isaac 2016. Bridging between sister religions studies of Jewish and Christian scriptures offered in honor of Prof. John T. Townsend. The Brill reference library of Judaism. Leiden Boston Mass. Brill. p. 208. ISBN 9789004324541. Bibliography Shaw Garry J. The Pharaoh Life at Court and on Campaign Thames and Hudson 2012. Sir Alan Gardiner Egyptian Grammar Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs Third Edition Revised. London Oxford University Press 1964. Excursus A pp. 7176. Jan Assmann Der Mythos des Gottknigs im Alten gypten in Christine Schmitz und Anja Bettenworth hg. Menschen  Heros  Gott Weltentwrfe und Lebensmodelle im Mythos der Vormoderne Stuttgart Franz Steiner Verlag 2009 pp. 1126. External links Pharaoh at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Digital Egypt for Universities Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Pharaohs. v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Kushite monarchs and rulers Main topics Main article Qore Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Ancient Egyptian titulary Royal titulary Great Royal Wife Khenemetneferhedjet Pharaoh Religious titulary Divine Adoratrice of Amun Gods Wife Gods Wife of Amun High Priest of Amun High Priest of Osiris High Priest of Ptah High Priest of Ra Lector priest Priestess of Hathor Second Prophet of Amun Servant in the Place of Truth Stolist Two Ladies Courtly and administrative titulary Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King Hatya High steward Irypat Khekeretnisut Nomarch Overseer of cattle Overseer of fields Overseer of the treasuries Overseer of Upper Egypt Royal sealer Ancient Egypt Treasurer Viceroy of Kush Vizier Reporter Ancient Egypt portal Authority control databases National Spain France BnF data Germany Israel United States Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePharaoholdid1221974942 Categories Ancient Egyptian titles Heads of state Royal titles Noble titles Pharaohs Positions of authority Monarchs in the Torah Titles of national or ethnic leadership Egyptian royal titles Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semiprotected pages Articles containing Copticlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Pages with plain IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 Articles containing Koin Greeklanguage text Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using Sister project links with default search Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 3 May 2024 at 0313 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width