File:Cylinder Sedjefakare Petrie.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileCylinder Sedjefakare Petrie.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. CylinderSedjefakarePetrie.jpg 240  160 pixels file size 5 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionCylinder Sedjefakare Petrie.jpg English A pair of cylinder seals bearing the name of pharaoh Sedjefakare KayAmenemhat VII both with the inscription Sedjefakare beloved by Sobek lord of Sumenu. Blueglazed steatite 
13 th Dynasty now at the Petrie Museum. Left UC11533 from Harageh in the Faiyum Right UC11534 from Lahun in the Faiyum. Date 17 May 2014 163537 Source Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XVIII Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic     Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 17 May 2014 media type imagejpeg checksum d
1 ff
61 c89
07 a
01 d
0 dc6
20 d77
41 c
7 c14
58 c0
43 bc7 determination method SHA1 data size 5312 byte height 160 pixel width 240 pixel File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1449 17 May 2014 240  160 5 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Sedjefakare Kay Amenemhat VII Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org  Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org      Usage on az.wikipedia.org VII Amenemhet On nc slal Misir Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Amenemhet VII Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Amenemhat VII.a Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Sedjfakar KayAmenemhat Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org VII. Amenemhat Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Amenemhat VII Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 7 Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Amenemhat VII Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras XIII dinastia egpcia Amenems VII Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  VII Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Trinajsta egipanska dinastija Amenemhet VII. Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  VII Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Sedjefakare Usage on www.wikidata.org Q462375 TalkQ37110 Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileCylinderSedjefakarePetrie.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width