Semitic languages - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name and identification 
2 History Toggle History subsection 
2.1 Ancient Semiticspeaking peoples 
2.2 Common Era 
3 Present distribution 
4 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 
4.1 Consonants 
4.2 Vowels 
5 Grammar Toggle Grammar subsection 
5.1 Word order 
5.2 Cases in nouns and adjectives 
5.3 Number in nouns 
5.4 Verb aspect and tense 
5.5 Morphology triliteral roots 
5.6 Independent personal pronouns 
5.7 Cardinal numerals 
5.8 Typology 
6 Common vocabulary 
7 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 
7.1 Detailed list 
8 Semiticspeaking peoples Toggle Semiticspeaking peoples subsection 
8.1 Central Semitic 
8.2 East Semitic 
8.3 South Semitic 
8.4 Unknown 
9 See also 
10 Notes 
11 References 
12 Bibliography 
13 External links Toggle the table of contents Semitic languages 115 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch    Aragons  Asturianu Azrbaycanca        Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Froyskt Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego    Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano    Kernowek Kiswahili Kurd  Ladino Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar  Malagasy Malti    Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Nordfriisk Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha      Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn   Sardu Seeltersk Shqip Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina Soomaaliga    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Taclit Taqbaylit  Trke Trkmene     Uyghurche Ting Vit   Yorb  Zazaki    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Branch of the Afroasiatic languages Not to be confused with Sinitic languages. Semitic Geographic distribution West Asia North Africa Horn of Africa Malta Linguistic classification AfroAsiatic Semitic Protolanguage ProtoSemitic Subdivisions East Semitic  West Semitic ISO 6392  5 sem Glottolog semi1276 Modern distribution of the Semitic languages Approximate historical distribution of Semitic languages The Semitic languages are a branch of the Afroasiatic language family. They include Arabic Amharic Aramaic Hebrew and numerous other ancient and modern languages. They are spoken by more than 330 million people across much of West Asia North Africaa the Horn of Africabc Maltad and in large immigrant and expatriate communities in North America Europe and Australasia. The terminology was first used in the 17
80 s by members of the Gttingen school of history who derived the name from Shem one of the three sons of Noah in the Book of Genesis. Semitic languages occur in written form from a very early historical date in West Asia with East Semitic Akkadian and Eblaite texts written in a script adapted from Sumerian cuneiform appearing from c.2500 BCE in Mesopotamia and the northeastern Levant respectively. The only earlier attested languages are Sumerian and Elamite 2800 BCE to 550 BCE both language isolates and Egyptian c.3000 BCE a sister branch within the Afroasiatic family related to the Semitic languages but not part of them. Amorite appeared in Mesopotamia and the northern Levant c.2000 BC followed by the mutually intelligible Canaanite languages including Hebrew Phoenician Moabite Edomite and Ammonite and perhaps Ekronite Amalekite and Sutean the still spoken Aramaic and Ugaritic during the 
2 nd millennium BC. Most scripts used to write Semitic languages are abjads  a type of alphabetic script that omits some or all of the vowels which is feasible for these languages because the consonants are the primary carriers of meaning in the Semitic languages. These include the Ugaritic Phoenician Aramaic Hebrew Syriac Arabic and ancient South Arabian alphabets. The Geez script used for writing the Semitic languages of Ethiopia and Eritrea is technically an abugida  a modified abjad in which vowels are notated using diacritic marks added to the consonants at all times in contrast with other Semitic languages which indicate vowels based on need or for introductory purposes. Maltese is the only Semitic language written in the Latin script and the only Semitic language to be an official language of the European Union. The Semitic languages are notable for their nonconcatenative morphology. That is word roots are not themselves syllables or words but instead are isolated sets of consonants usually three making a socalled triliteral root. Words are composed from roots not so much by adding prefixes or suffixes but rather by filling in the vowels between the root consonants although prefixes and suffixes are often added as well. For example in Arabic the root meaning write has the form ktb. From this root words are formed by filling in the vowels and sometimes adding consonants e.g.  kitb book  kutub books  ktib writer  kuttb writers  kataba he wrote  yaktubu he writes etc. Name and identificationedit 1538 comparison of Hebrew and Arabic by Guillaume Postel  possibly the first such representation in Western European literature. The similarity of the Hebrew Arabic and Aramaic languages has been accepted by all scholars since medieval times. The languages were familiar to Western European scholars due to historical contact with neighbouring Near Eastern countries and through Biblical studies and a comparative analysis of Hebrew Arabic and Aramaic was published in Latin in 1538 by Guillaume Postel.4 Almost two centuries later Hiob Ludolf described the similarities between these three languages and the Ethiopian Semitic languages.
5 page needed However neither scholar named this grouping as Semitic.
5 page needed The term Semitic was created by members of the Gttingen school of history initially by August Ludwig von Schlzer 1781 to designate the languages closely related to Arabic Aramaic and Hebrew.67 The choice of name was derived from Shem one of the three sons of Noah in the genealogical accounts of the biblical Book of Genesis8 or more precisely from the Koine Greek rendering of the name  Sm. Johann Gottfried Eichhorn is credited with popularising the term9108 particularly via a 1795 article Semitische Sprachen Semitic languages in which he justified the terminology against criticism that Hebrew and Canaanite were the same language despite Canaan being Hamitic in the Table of Nations11 In the Mosaic Table of Nations those names which are listed as Semites are purely names of tribes who speak the socalled Oriental languages and live in Southwest Asia. As far as we can trace the history of these very languages back in time they have always been written with syllabograms or with alphabetic script never with hieroglyphs or pictograms and the legends about the invention of the syllabograms and alphabetic script go back to the Semites. In contrast all so called Hamitic peoples originally used hieroglyphs until they here and there either through contact with the Semites or through their settlement among them became familiar with their syllabograms or alphabetic script and partly adopted them. Viewed from this aspect too with respect to the alphabet used the name Semitic languages is completely appropriate.12 Previously these languages had been commonly known as the Oriental languages in European literature.13 In the 
19 th century Semitic became the conventional name however an alternative name SyroArabian languages was later introduced by James Cowles Prichard and used by some writers.10 Historyedit Ancient Semiticspeaking peoplesedit Main article Ancient Semiticspeaking peoples Chronology mapping of Semitic languages Semitic languages were spoken and written across much of the Middle East and Asia Minor during the Bronze Age and Iron Age the earliest attested being the East Semitic Akkadian of Mesopotamia Akkad Assyria Isin Larsa and Babylonia from the third millennium BC.14 The origin of Semiticspeaking peoples is still under discussion. Several locations were proposed as possible sites of a prehistoric origin of Semiticspeaking peoples Mesopotamia the Levant Ethiopia15 the Eastern Mediterranean region the Arabian Peninsula and North Africa. According to a 2009 study the Semitic languages originated in the Levant c.3750 BC and were introduced to the Horn of Africa c. 800 BC from the southern Arabian peninsula and to North Africa via Phoenician colonists at approximately the same time.1617 Others assign the arrival of Semitic speakers in the Horn of Africa to a much earlier date.18 According to another hypothesis Semitic originated from an offshoot of a still earlier language in North Africa and desertification made its inhabitants to migrate in the fourth millennium BC into what is now Ethiopia others northwest out of Africa into West Asia.19 The various extremely closely related and mutually intelligible Canaanite languages a branch of the Northwest Semitic languages included Edomite Hebrew Ammonite Moabite Phoenician PunicCarthaginian Samaritan Hebrew and Ekronite. They were spoken in what is today Israel and the Palestinian territories Syria Lebanon Jordan the northern Sinai peninsula some northern and eastern parts of the Arabian peninsula southwest fringes of Turkey and in the case of Phoenician coastal regions of Tunisia Carthage Libya Algeria and parts of Morocco Spain and possibly in Malta and other Mediterranean islands. Ugaritic a Northwest Semitic language closely related to but distinct from the Canaanite group was spoken in the kingdom of Ugarit in north western Syria. Epic of Gilgamesh an epic poem from ancient Mesopotamia regarded as the earliest surviving notable literature written in Akkadian.20 A hybrid CanaanoAkkadian language also emerged in Canaan Israel and the Palestinian territories Jordan Lebanon during the 
14 th century BC incorporating elements of the Mesopotamian East Semitic Akkadian language of Assyria and Babylonia with the West Semitic Canaanite languages.21 Aramaic a still living ancient Northwest Semitic language first attested in the 
12 th century BC in the northern Levant gradually replaced the East Semitic and Canaanite languages across much of the Near East particularly after being adopted as the lingua franca of the vast NeoAssyrian Empire 911605 BC by TiglathPileser III during the 
8 th century BC and being retained by the succeeding NeoBabylonian and Achaemenid Empires.22 The Chaldean language not to be confused with Aramaic or its Biblical variant sometimes referred to as Chaldean was a Northwest Semitic language possibly closely related to Aramaic but no examples of the language remain as after settling in south eastern Mesopotamia from the Levant during the 
9 th century BC the Chaldeans appear to have rapidly adopted the Akkadian and Aramaic languages of the indigenous Mesopotamians. Old South Arabian languages classified as South Semitic and therefore distinct from the CentralSemitic Arabic were spoken in the kingdoms of Dilmun Sheba Ubar Socotra and Magan which in modern terms encompassed part of the eastern coast of Saudi Arabia and Bahrain Qatar Oman and Yemen.citation needed South Semitic languages are thought to have spread to the Horn of Africa circa 
8 th century BC where the Geez language emerged though the direction of influence remains uncertain. Common Eraedit Example of Arabic calligraphy Classical Syriac a 200 CE23 Eastern Middle Aramaic dialect24 used as a liturgical language in Mesopotamia the Levant and Kerala India25 rose to importance as a literary language of early Christianity in the third to fifth centuries and continued into the early Islamic era. The Arabic language although originating in the Arabian Peninsula first emerged in written form in the 
1 st to 
4 th centuries CE in the southern regions of The Levant. With the advent of the early Arab conquests of the seventh and eighth centuries Classical Arabic eventually replaced many but not all of the indigenous Semitic languages and cultures of the Near East. Both the Near East and North Africa saw an influx of Muslim Arabs from the Arabian Peninsula followed later by nonSemitic Muslim Iranian and Turkic peoples. The previously dominant Aramaic dialects maintained by the Assyrians Babylonians and Persians gradually began to be sidelined however descendant dialects of Eastern Aramaic including Suret Assyrian and Chaldean varieties Turoyo and Mandaic survive to this day among the AssyriansSyriacs and Mandaeans of northern and southern Iraq northwestern Iran northeastern Syria and southeastern Turkey with up to a million fluent speakers. Syriac is a recognized language in Iraq furthermore Mesopotamian Arabic is one of the most Syriac influenced dialects of Arabic due to Syriac the dialect of Edessa specifically having originated in Mesopotamia.26 Meanwhile Western Aramaic is now only spoken by a few thousand Christian and Muslim Arameans Syriacs in western Syria. The Arabs spread their Central Semitic language to North Africa Egypt Libya Tunisia Algeria Morocco and northern Sudan and Mauritania where it gradually replaced Egyptian Coptic and many Berber languages although Berber is still largely extant in many areas and for a time to the Iberian Peninsula modern Spain Portugal and Gibraltar and Malta. Page from a 
12 thcentury Quran in Arabic With the patronage of the caliphs and the prestige of its liturgical status Arabic rapidly became one of the worlds main literary languages. Its spread among the masses took much longer however as many although not all of the native populations outside the Arabian Peninsula only gradually abandoned their languages in favour of Arabic. As Bedouin tribes settled in conquered areas it became the main language of not only central Arabia but also Yemen27 the Fertile Crescent and Egypt. Most of the Maghreb followed specifically in the wake of the Banu Hilals incursion in the 
11 th century and Arabic became the native language of many inhabitants of alAndalus. After the collapse of the Nubian kingdom of Dongola in the 
14 th century Arabic began to spread south of Egypt into modern Sudan soon after the Beni assn brought Arabization to Mauritania. A number of Modern South Arabian languages distinct from Arabic still survive such as Soqotri Mehri and Shehri which are mainly spoken in Socotra Yemen and Oman. Meanwhile the Semitic languages that had arrived from southern Arabia in the 
8 th century BC were diversifying in Ethiopia and Eritrea where under heavy Cushitic influence they split into a number of languages including Amharic and Tigrinya. With the expansion of Ethiopia under the Solomonic dynasty Amharic previously a minor local language spread throughout much of the country replacing both Semitic such as Gafat and nonSemitic such as Weyto languages and replacing Geez as the principal literary language though Geez remains the liturgical language for Christians in the region this spread continues to this day with Qimant set to disappear in another generation. Present distributionedit Approximate distribution of the Semitic languages around the 
1 st century AD Arabic is currently the native language of majorities from Mauritania to Oman and from Iraq to the Sudan. Classical Arabic is the language of the Quran. It is also studied widely in the nonArabicspeaking Muslim world. The Maltese language is a descendant of the extinct SiculoArabic a variety of Maghrebi Arabic formerly spoken in Sicily. The modern Maltese alphabet is based on the Latin script with the addition of some letters with diacritic marks and digraphs. Maltese is the only Semitic official language within the European Union. Successful as second languages far beyond their numbers of contemporary firstlanguage speakers a few Semitic languages today are the base of the sacred literature of some of the worlds major religions including Islam Arabic Judaism Hebrew and Aramaic Biblical and Talmudic churches of Syriac Christianity Classical Syriac and Ethiopian and Eritrean Orthodox Christianity Geez. Millions learn these as a second language or an archaic version of their modern tongues many Muslims learn to read and recite the Quran and Jews speak and study Biblical Hebrew the language of the Torah Midrash and other Jewish scriptures. The followers of the Assyrian Church of the East Chaldean Catholic Church Ancient Church of the East Assyrian Pentecostal Church Assyrian Evangelical Church and the Syriac Orthodox Church speak Eastern Aramaic languages and use Classical Syriac as their liturgical language. Classical Syriac is also used liturgically by the primarily Arabicspeaking followers of the Maronite Church Syriac Catholic Church and was originally the liturgical language of the Melkites in Antioch and ancient Syria.2829303132 Koine Greek and Classical Arabic are the main liturgical languages of Oriental Orthodox Christians in the Middle East who compose the patriarchates of Antioch Jerusalem and Alexandria. Mandaic is both spoken and used as a liturgical language by the Mandaeans. Although the majority of NeoAramaic dialects spoken today are descended from Eastern varieties Western NeoAramaic is still spoken in two villages in Syria. Despite the ascendancy of Arabic in the Middle East other Semitic languages still exist. Biblical Hebrew long extinct as a colloquial language and in use only in Jewish literary intellectual and liturgical activity was revived in spoken form at the end of the 
19 th century. Modern Hebrew is the main language of Israel with Biblical Hebrew remaining as the language of liturgy and religious scholarship of Jews worldwide. In Arabdominated Yemen and Oman on the southern rim of the Arabian Peninsula a few tribes continue to speak Modern South Arabian languages such as Mahri and Soqotri. These languages differ greatly from both the surrounding Arabic dialects and from the languages of the Old South Arabian inscriptions. Historically linked to the peninsular homeland of Old South Arabian of which only one language Razihi remains Ethiopia and Eritrea contain a substantial number of Semitic languages the most widely spoken are Amharic in Ethiopia Tigre in Eritrea and Tigrinya in both. Amharic is the official language of Ethiopia. Tigrinya is a working language in Eritrea. Tigre is spoken by over one million people in the northern and central Eritrean lowlands and parts of eastern Sudan. A number of Gurage languages are spoken by populations in the semimountainous region of central Ethiopia while Harari is restricted to the city of Harar. Geez remains the liturgical language for certain groups of Christians in Ethiopia and in Eritrea. Phonologyedit The phonologies of the attested Semitic languages are presented here from a comparative point of view. See ProtoSemitic languagePhonology for details on the phonological reconstruction of ProtoSemitic used in this article. The reconstruction of ProtoSemitic PS was originally based primarily on Arabic whose phonology and morphology particularly in Classical Arabic is very conservative and which preserves as contrastive 28 out of the evident 29 consonantal phonemes.33 with s s and   merging into Arabic s  and   becoming Arabic  . ProtoSemitic consonant phonemes34 Type Manner Voicing Labial Interdental Alveolar Palatal Lateral VelarUvular Pharyngeal Glottal Obstruent Stop voiceless p p t t k k emphatic pe  t q k   voiced b b d d g  Fricative voiceless   s s      x   h h emphatic f   s   xg voiced   z z     Resonant Trill r r Approximant w w y j l l Nasal m m n n  Arabic is one of the worlds largest languages spoken natively in West Asia and Africa by about 300 million speakers and as a second language by perhaps another 60 million.1  Amharic has perhaps fifteen million speakers in Africa probably fewer than only Arabic Swahili Hausa and Oromo and is the second most populous Semitic language after just Arabic. It is the lingua franca and constitutionally recognized national language of Ethiopia and the national language of instruction of Ethiopian public education in the primary grades.2  Tigrinya not to be confused with the related but distinct language Tigre is like Amharic a northern Ethiopian Semitic language is spoken as a native language by the overwhelming majority of the population in the Tigre province of Ethiopia and in the highland part of Eritrea the provinces of Akkele Guzay Serae and Hamasien where the capital of the state Asmara is situated. Outside of this area Tigrinya is also spoken in the Tambien and Wolqayt historical districts Ethiopia and in the administrative districts of Massara and Keren Eritrea these being respectively the southern and northern limits of its expansion. The number of speaker of Tigrinya has been estimated at 4 million in 1995 
1.3  million of them live in Eritrea around 50 percent of the population of the country in 2008 by an estimated 5 million.3 Hebrew speaking about 5 million nativeL1 speakerscitation needed Gurage has around 
1.5  million speakerscitation needed Tigre has c. 
1.0 5 million speakerscitation needed Aramaic is spoken by around 575000 to 1 million largely Assyrian speakers.citation needed  Maltese has around 483000 speakerscitation needed  Woodard 2008 p. 219 suggests the presence of an emphatic p in some disparate Semitic languages may indicate that such an emphatic was present in ProtoSemitic.  The emphatic interdental fricative is usually spelled  but is replaced here by  for better readability.  Huehnergard 2003 p.49 presents a minority opinion that an ejective velar fricative existed in ProtoSemitic. Note the fricatives s z     may also be interpreted as affricates ts dz ts t t t as discussed in ProtoSemitic language  Fricatives. This comparative approach is natural for the consonants as sound correspondences among the consonants of the Semitic languages are very straightforward for a family of its time depth. Sound shifts affecting the vowels are more numerous and at times less regular. Consonantsedit Each ProtoSemitic phoneme was reconstructed to explain a certain regular sound correspondence between various Semitic languages. Note that Latin letter values italicized for extinct languages are a question of transcription the exact pronunciation is not recorded. Most of the attested languages have merged a number of the reconstructed original fricatives though South Arabian retains all fourteen and has added a fifteenth from p  f. In Aramaic and Hebrew all nonemphatic stops occurring singly after a vowel were softened to fricatives leading to an alternation that was often later phonemicized as a result of the loss of gemination. In languages exhibiting pharyngealization of emphatics the original velar emphatic has rather developed to a uvular stop q. Regular correspondences of the ProtoSemitic consonants35 Proto Semitic IPA Arabic Maltese Akkadian Ugaritic Phoenician Hebrew Aramaic Geez Tigrinya Amharic14 Written Classical36 Modern Written Pronounce Written Pronounce Written Translit. Alt. Transl. Written Biblical Tiberian Modern Imperial Syriac Translit. b b  b b b b b  b  b b  b5  b5 b v b  b5 v b    b5  b g      d9 d11  d g  g  g g  g5  g5    g5     g5   p p  p f f f p  p  p p p p5  p5 p f p f p5 f p   p p5  f k k  k k k k k  k  k k  k5  k5 k x k  k5  k    k5  k  k  q   q9 q12 q   q q    q q q  q q q q k   q  k d d  d d d d d  d  d d  d5  d5 d  d dh d5 d    d5  d      z    d  z z z  z z z z z 3  3  3 d  z z z  z z  z  z   z s s  s s s s s  s   s 1  s s s s s   s  s s  s        s       sh          x  s1 1 1  s 1 s 3  3  3 s        t t        sh  3  3  3 t  s t t  t t t  t  t t  t5  t5 t  t th t5 t    t5  t  t   t          t t  t     t      d d   13         s s ts ts 3  3  3   ts s ts  s ts  s t  s   s s s         s   d d d d 3  3  3           g      o  o 2 2   2   15 3 3 3           4                   a i u10  q  q              x  h x         h  h2 2 2    2  15 3 3 3     x h        4         h h  h h h    h   h 2  h h h h h    h  h m m  m m m m m  m  m m m  m m m m m   m  m n n  n n n n n  n  n n n  n n n n n   n  n r   r r r r r  r  r r r  r r  r  r    r  r l l  l l l l l  l  l l l  l l l l l   l  l y j  y j j j y  y  j y j  y j j y j   y  j w w  w w w w w  w  w w w  w w w v w v w   w  w Note the fricatives s z     may also be interpreted as affricates ts dz ts t t t. Notes ProtoSemitic  was still pronounced as  in Biblical Hebrew but no letter was available in the Early Linear Script so the letter  did double duty representing both  and . Later on however  merged with s but the old spelling was largely retained and the two pronunciations of  were distinguished graphically in Tiberian Hebrew as   vs.  s  . Biblical Hebrew as of the 
3 rd century BCE apparently still distinguished the phonemes   and   from   and   respectively based on transcriptions in the Septuagint. As in the case of  no letters were available to represent these sounds and existing letters did double duty    and   . In both of these cases however the two sounds represented by the same letter eventually merged leaving no evidence other than early transcriptions of the former distinctions. Although early Aramaic pre
7 th century BCE had only 22 consonants in its alphabet it apparently distinguished all of the original 29 ProtoSemitic phonemes including       and   although by Middle Aramaic times these had all merged with other sounds. This conclusion is mainly based on the shifting representation of words etymologically containing these sounds in early Aramaic writing the first five are merged with z    q respectively but later with d t  s .3738 Also note that due to begadkefat spirantization which occurred after this merger OAm. t   and d   in some positions so that PS t and d  may be realized as either of t  and d  respectively. The sounds  and  were always represented using the pharyngeal letters   but they are distinguished from the pharyngeals in the Demoticscript papyrus Amherst 63 written about 200 BCE.39 This suggests that these sounds too were distinguished in Old Aramaic language but written using the same letters as they later merged with. The earlier pharyngeals can be distinguished in Akkadian from the zero reflexes of   by ecoloring adjacent a e.g. pS baalum owner lord  Akk. blum.40 Hebrew and Aramaic underwent begadkefat spirantization at a certain point whereby the stop sounds b  d k p t were softened to the corresponding fricatives v   x f  written     p  when occurring after a vowel and not geminated. This change probably happened after the original Old Aramaic phonemes   disappeared in the 
7 th century BCE41 and most likely occurred after the loss of Hebrew   c.200 BCE.note 1 It is known to have occurred in Hebrew by the 
2 nd century CE.43 After a certain point this alternation became contrastive in wordmedial and final position though bearing low functional load but in wordinitial position they remained allophonic.44 In Modern Hebrew the distinction has a higher functional load due to the loss of gemination although only the three fricatives v  f are still preserved the fricative x is pronounced  in modern Hebrew. In the Northwest Semitic languages w became j at the beginning of a word e.g. Hebrew yeled boy  wald cf. Arabic walad. There is evidence of a rule of assimilation of j to the following coronal consonant in pretonic positionclarification needed shared by Hebrew Phoenician and Aramaic.45 In Assyrian NeoAramaic  is nonexistent. In general cases the language would lack pharyngeal fricative  as heard in Ayin. However  is retained in educational speech especially among Assyrian priests.46 The palatalization of ProtoSemitic gm g to Arabic d jm is most probably connected to the pronunciation of qf q as a g gf this sound change also occurred in Yemenite Hebrew hence in most of the Arabian peninsula which is the homeland of the Arabic language  is jm d and  is gf g except in western and southern Yemen and parts of Oman where  is gm g and  is qf q. Ugaritic orthography indicated the vowel after the glottal stop. The Arabic letter jm  has three main pronunciations in Modern Standard Arabic. d in north Algeria Iraq also in most of the Arabian peninsula and as the predominant pronunciation of Literary Arabic outside the Arab world  occurs in most of the Levant and most North Africa and  is used in northern Egypt and some regions in Yemen and Oman. In addition to other minor allophones. The Arabic letter qf  has three main pronunciations in spoken varieties.  in most of the Arabian Peninsula Northern and Eastern Yemen and parts of Oman Southern Iraq Upper Egypt Sudan Libya some parts of the Levant and to lesser extent in some parts mostly rural of Maghreb. q in most of Tunisia Algeria and Morocco Southern and Western Yemen and parts of Oman Northern Iraq parts of the Levant especially Druze dialects.  in most of the Levant and Lower Egypt as well as some North African towns such as Tlemcen and Fez. In addition to other minor allophones.  can be written  and always is in the Ugaritic and Arabic contexts. In Ugaritic sometimes assimilates to  as in m thirsty Arabic m Hebrew m but Ugaritic mm thirsty root m is also attested. Early Amharic might have had a different phonology. The pronunciations  and  for Ayin and et respectively still occur among some older Mizrahi speakers but for most modern Israelis Ayin and et are realized as   and   x respectively. The following table shows the development of the various fricatives in Hebrew Aramaic Arabic and Maltese through cognate words ProtoSemitic Arabic Maltese Aramaic Hebrew Examples Arabic Maltese Aramaic Hebrew meaning     d d d  z    deheb      gold male z1 z z  z  z    miien mien     scale time s s s    s s  x s  s    sikkina xahar     knife moonmonth      x s  s   gaxra   ten   s  s s       sena sliem     year peace     t t t    tlieta tnejn     three two 1    d d t  sts1    dell      shadow noon 1  d  t t d d     art daaq     land laughed s1  s  s        shout water melon like plant   x          amsa      five shout         mel olm     salt dream      g       gorab garb     raven west      g   gabid sebga     slave seven possibly affricated dz t  t t Vowelsedit See also ProtoAfroasiatic language  Consonant correspondences ProtoSemitic vowels are in general harder to deduce due to the nonconcatenative morphology of Semitic languages. The history of vowel changes in the languages makes drawing up a complete table of correspondences impossible so only the most common reflexes can be given Vowel correspondences in Semitic languages in protoSemitic stressed syllables47 pS Arabic Aramaic Hebrew Geez Akkadian Classical Modern usually4 C.V .1 C2 C.C3 a a a a   a  a later  a e 5 i i i e i WSyr.    e  e  i u u u u o   o o  6 u     note 2  later a        i        u  ay ay  ay BA JA ayi  WSyr. ay  ay ayi ay e  aw aw  aw  WSyr. aw  pausal w o  in a stressed open syllable in a stressed closed syllable before a geminate in a stressed closed syllable before a consonant cluster when the protoSemitic stressed vowel remained stressed pS a  Akk. e in the neighborhood of pS  and before r. i.e. pS gk  Geez g k  u Grammaredit The Semitic languages share a number of grammatical features although variation  both between separate languages and within the languages themselves  has naturally occurred over time. Word orderedit The reconstructed default word order in ProtoSemitic is verbsubjectobject VSO possessedpossessor NG and nounadjective NA. This was still the case in Classical Arabic and Biblical Hebrew e.g. Classical Arabic    ra muammadun fardan. literally saw Muhammad Farid Muhammad saw Farid. In the modern Arabic vernaculars however as well as sometimes in Modern Standard Arabic the modern literary language based on Classical Arabic and Modern Hebrew the classical VSO order has given way to SVO. Modern Ethiopian Semitic languages follow a different word order SOV possessorpossessed and adjectivenoun however the oldest attested Ethiopian Semitic language Geez was VSO possessedpossessor and nounadjective.48 Akkadian was also predominantly SOV. Cases in nouns and adjectivesedit The protoSemitic threecase system nominative accusative and genitive with differing vowel endings u a i fully preserved in Quranic Arabic see Irab Akkadian and Ugaritic has disappeared everywhere in the many colloquial forms of Semitic languages. Modern Standard Arabic maintains such case distinctions although they are typically lost in free speech due to colloquial influence. An accusative ending n is preserved in Ethiopian Semitic.note 3 In the northwest the scarcely attested Samalian reflects a case distinction in the plural between nominative  and oblique  compare the same distinction in Classical Arabic.50 Additionally Semitic nouns and adjectives had a category of state the indefinite state being expressed by nunation.51 Number in nounsedit Semitic languages originally had three grammatical numbers singular dual and plural. Classical Arabic still has a mandatory dual i.e. it must be used in all circumstances when referring to two entities marked on nouns verbs adjectives and pronouns. Many contemporary dialects of Arabic still have a dual as in the name for the nation of Bahrain bar sea  ayn two although it is marked only on nouns. It also occurs in Hebrew in a few nouns ana means one year natayim means two years and anim means years but for those it is obligatory. The curious phenomenon of broken plurals  e.g. in Arabic sadd one dam vs. sudd dams  found most profusely in the languages of Arabia and Ethiopia may be partly of protoSemitic origin and partly elaborated from simpler origins. Verb aspect and tenseedit Paradigm of a regular Classical Arabic verb Form I kataba yaktubu to write Past Present Indicative Singular 
1 st katabtu  aktubu  
2 nd masculine katabta  taktubu  feminine katabti  taktubna  
3 rd masculine kataba  yaktubu  feminine katabat  taktubu  Dual 
2 nd masculine  feminine katabtum  taktubni  
3 rd masculine katab  yaktubni  feminine katabat  taktubni  Plural 
1 st katabn  naktubu  
2 nd masculine katabtum  taktubna  feminine katabtunna  taktubna  
3 rd masculine katab  yaktubna  feminine katabna  yaktubna  All Semitic languages show two quite distinct styles of morphology used for conjugating verbs. Suffix conjugations take suffixes indicating the person number and gender of the subject which bear some resemblance to the pronominal suffixes used to indicate direct objects on verbs I saw him and possession on nouns his dog. Socalled prefix conjugations actually takes both prefixes and suffixes with the prefixes primarily indicating person and sometimes number or gender while the suffixes which are completely different from those used in the suffix conjugation indicate number and gender whenever the prefix does not mark this. The prefix conjugation is noted for a particular pattern of  t y n prefixes where 1 a t prefix is used in the singular to mark the second person and thirdperson feminine while a y prefix marks the thirdperson masculine and 2 identical words are used for secondperson masculine and thirdperson feminine singular. The prefix conjugation is extremely old with clear analogues in nearly all the families of Afroasiatic languages i.e. at least 10000 years old. The table on the right shows examples of the prefix and suffix conjugations in Classical Arabic which has forms that are close to ProtoSemitic. In ProtoSemitic as still largely reflected in East Semitic prefix conjugations are used both for the past and the nonpast with different vocalizations. Cf. Akkadian niprus we decided preterite niptaras we have decided perfect niparras we decide nonpast or imperfect vs. suffixconjugated parsnu we arewerewill be deciding stative. Some of these features e.g. gemination indicating the nonpastimperfect are generally attributed to Afroasiatic. ProtoSemitic had an additional form the jussive which was distinguished from the preterite only by the position of stress the jussive had final stress while the preterite had nonfinal retracted stress.52 The West Semitic languages significantly reshaped the system. The most substantial changes occurred in the Central Semitic languages the ancestors of modern Hebrew Arabic and Aramaic. Essentially the old prefixconjugated jussive or preterite became a new nonpast or imperfect while the stative became a new past or perfect and the old prefixconjugated nonpast or imperfect with gemination was discarded. New suffixes were used to mark different moods in the nonpast e.g. Classical Arabic u indicative a subjunctive vs no suffix jussive. It is not generally agreed whether the systems of the various Semitic languages are better interpreted in terms of tense i.e. past vs. nonpast or aspect i.e. perfect vs. imperfect. A special feature in classical Hebrew is the wawconsecutive prefixing a verb form with the letter waw in order to change its tense or aspect. The South Semitic languages show a system somewhere between the East and Central Semitic languages. Later languages show further developments. In the modern varieties of Arabic for example the old mood suffixes were dropped and new mood prefixes developed e.g. bi for indicative vs. no prefix for subjunctive in many varieties. In the extreme case of NeoAramaic the verb conjugations have been entirely reworked under Iranian influence. Morphology triliteral rootsedit Main article Semitic root All Semitic languages exhibit a unique pattern of stems called Semitic roots consisting typically of triliteral or threeconsonant consonantal roots two and fourconsonant roots also exist from which nouns adjectives and verbs are formed in various ways e.g. by inserting vowels doubling consonants lengthening vowels or by adding prefixes suffixes or infixes. For instance the root ktb dealing with writing generally yields in Arabic katabtu  or  I wrote f and m yuktabu  or  being written masculine tuktabu  or  being written feminine yataktabna  or  they write to each other masculine istiktb  or  causing to write kitb  or  book the hyphen shows end of stem before various case endings kutayyib  or  booklet diminutive kitbat  or  writing kuttb  or  writers broken plural katabat  or  clerks broken plural maktab  or  desk or office maktabat  or  library or bookshop maktb  or  written participle or postal letter noun katbat  or  squadron or document iktitb  or  registration or contribution of funds muktatib  or  subscription and the same root in Hebrew kati  or  I wrote katt  or  reporter m kattee  or  reporter f katt  or  article plural katt  mit  or  postal letter plural mitm  mit  writing desk plural mit  ke  address plural k  k  handwriting k  written f k  hit  he dictated f hit  hikatt  he corresponded f hikatt  nita  it was written m nit  it was written f k  spelling m tat  prescript m mutt  addressee meuttee  f kubb  ketubah a Jewish marriage contract f Underlined consonants    represent the fricatives x  v respectively. In Tigrinya and Amharic this root was used widely but is now seen as an archaic form. Ethiopicderived languages use different roots for things that have to do with writing and in some cases counting. The primitive root f and the trilateral root stems mf hf and fr are used. This root also exists in other Semitic languages such as Hebrew seper book sper scribe mispr number and sippr story. This root also exists in Arabic and is used to form words with a close meaning to writing such as afa journalism and afa newspaper or parchment. Verbs in other nonSemitic Afroasiatic languages show similar radical patterns but more usually with biconsonantal roots e.g. Kabyle afeg means fly while affug means flight and yufeg means he flew compare with Hebrew where hapl means set sail hapl means a sailing trip and hipl means he sailed while the unrelated p tp and p pertain to flight. Independent personal pronounsedit English ProtoSemitic Akkadian Arabic Geez Hebrew Aramaic Suret Maltese standard common vernaculars I ankunote 4 aniya anku  an an an ana ni na nig  ana   n n  an n jiena jien You sg. masc. anka  anta atta  anta ant ant inta inte inti int inta  nta  att  ant t ty ten int inti You sg. fem. anti atti  anti anti anti inti init inti intch  nti  att  anti t ty ten int inti He sua   huwa h huwwa huwwe h  wtu  h  hu ow hu huwa She sia   hiya h hiyya hiyye h  yti  h  hi ay hi hija We niyan niyan nnu  nanu nina ina inna  nn   n nan  nn axnan ana You dual antun  antum Plural form is used They dual sunnote 5 sunti  hum Plural form is used You pl. masc. antun attunu  antum antumu antum antum antu intu intum intma  antmu  attem  antun axtxn intom You pl. fem. antin attina  antunna antin antin antum antu intu intum intma  antn  atten  anten axtxn intom They masc. sun unu  hum humu hum humma hma hom hinnen  muntu   hm hmm  hinnun eni huma They fem. sin ina  hunna hin hinnen hum humma hma  mntu   hn hnn  hinnin eni huma Cardinal numeralsedit English ProtoSemitic54 IPA Arabic Hebrew Sabaean Assyrian NeoAramaic Maltese Geez One aad it aad it   waid aad  e ead d x wieed  du Two inn nom. inayn obl. kil inan inajn kil  inni nom.  inajni obj.  fem. inatni  inatajni  nyim najim fem.  tyim tajim ny treh tnejn  kletu Three al  alnote 6 ala  ala  ala fem.  l alo l l tlieta  lstu Four arba arba  arba fem.  rba aba rb arp erbga  rbatu Five am am  ams fem.  m ame m xam amsa  mstu Six idnote 7 id  sitt ordinal  sadis fem.   e d t sitta  sdstu Seven ab ab  sab fem.  a eva b ow sebga  sbtu Eight amniy amanij  amanij fem.  mneh mone mnymn tmany tmienja  smantu Nine ti ti  tis fem.  ta teja t u disga  tstu Ten ar ar  aar fem.  er ese r ur gaxra  rtu These are the basic numeral stems without feminine suffixes. In most older Semitic languages the forms of the numerals from 3 to 10 exhibit polarity of gender also called chiastic concord or reverse agreement i.e. if the counted noun is masculine the numeral would be feminine and vice versa. Typologyedit Some early Semitic languages are speculated to have had weak ergative features.57 Common vocabularyedit Due to the Semitic languages common origin they share some words and roots. Others differ. For example English ProtoSemitic Akkadian Arabic Aramaic Suret Hebrew Geez Mehri Maltese father ab ab ab a bb  ab ayb bu missier heart libab libb lubb qalb lebb lb l l lbb awbb ilbieba qalb house bayt btu btu bayt dr bayt bt byi bet beyt bt bejt dar peace alm alm salm lm lm lm salm slm sliem tongue linlan lin lisn len lin ln lssn wn ilsien water maymy m root mmy mmy mayy my myim my m ilma Terms given in brackets are not derived from the respective ProtoSemitic roots though they may also derive from ProtoSemitic as does e.g. Arabic dr cf. Biblical Hebrew dr dwelling. Sometimes certain roots differ in meaning from one Semitic language to another. For example the root by in Arabic has the meaning of white as well as egg whereas in Hebrew it only means egg. The root lbn means milk in Arabic but the color white in Hebrew. The root lm means meat in Arabic but bread in Hebrew and cow in Ethiopian Semitic the original meaning was most probably food. The word medina root dyndwn has the meaning of metropolis in Amharic city in Arabic and Ancient Hebrew and State in Modern Hebrew. Of course there is sometimes no relation between the roots. For example knowledge is represented in Hebrew by the root yd but in Arabic by the roots rf and lm and in Ethiosemitic by the roots wq and fl. For more comparative vocabulary lists see the Wiktionary appendix List of ProtoSemitic stems. Classificationedit There are six fairly uncontroversial nodes within the Semitic languages East Semitic Northwest Semitic North Arabian Old South Arabian also known as Sayhadic Modern South Arabian and Ethiopian Semitic. These are generally grouped further but there is ongoing debate as to which belong together. The classification based on shared innovations given below established by Robert Hetzron in 1976 and with later emendations by John Huehnergard and Rodgers as summarized in Hetzron 1997 is the most widely accepted today. In particular several Semiticists still argue for the traditional partially nonlinguistic view of Arabic as part of South Semitic and a few e.g. Alexander Militarev or the GermanEgyptian professor Arafa Hussein Mustafacitation needed see Modern South Arabian as a third branch of Semitic alongside East and West Semitic rather than as a subgroup of South Semitic. However a new classification groups Old South Arabian as Central Semitic instead.58 Roger Blench notes that the Gurage languages are highly divergent and wonders whether they might not be a primary branch reflecting an origin of Afroasiatic in or near Ethiopia.59 At a lower level there is still no general agreement on where to draw the line between languages and dialects  an issue particularly relevant in Arabic Aramaic and Gurage  and the strong mutual influences between Arabic dialects render a genetic subclassification of them particularly difficult. A computational phylogenetic analysis by Kitchen et al. 2009 considers the Semitic languages to have originated in the Levant c.3750 BCE during the Early Bronze Age with early Ethiosemitic originating from southern Arabia c.800 BCE.16 Evidence for gene movements consistent with this were found in Almarri et al. 20
21.6 0 The Himyaritic and Sutean languages appear to have been Semitic but are unclassified due to insufficient data. Summary classification East Semitic West Semitic Central Semitic Northwest Semitic Arabic South Semitic Western Ethiopian Semitic and Old South Arabian Eastern Modern South Arabian Detailed listedit Semitic East Semitic All extinct Akkadian Old Akkadian Babylonian Assyrian CanaanoAkkadian Eblaite Kishite West Semitic Central Semitic Northwest Semitic Aramaic Old Aramaic Samalian extinct Imperial Aramaic extinct Biblical Aramaic extinct Middle Aramaic Eastern Aramaic dialect continuum Eastern Middle Aramaic Classical Syriac Hatran Aramaic extinct Central NeoAramaic Turoyo Surayt Mlas extinct Northeastern NeoAramaic dialect continuum Sureth Assyrian NeoAramaic Christian Urmi NeoAramaic Bohtan NeoAramaic Senaya NeoAramaic Chaldean NeoAramaic Koy Sanjaq Christian NeoAramaic Hertevin NeoAramaic Qaraqosh NeoAramaic Jewish Assyrian NeoAramaic Lishanid Noshan Barzani Jewish NeoAramaic Hulaul Lishana Deni Lishn Didn Betanure Jewish NeoAramaic Koy Sanjaq Jewish NeoAramaic Southeastern Aramaic Mandaic NeoMandaic Jewish Babylonian Aramaic extinct Western Aramaic dialect continuum Western Middle Aramaic Nabataean Aramaic extinct Palmyrene Aramaic extinct Western NeoAramaic Palestinian Aramaic All extinct Samaritan Aramaic Jewish Palestinian Aramaic Galilean dialect Christian Palestinian Aramaic Lebanese Aramaic extinct Armazic extinct Canaanite North Canaanite Phoenician extinct Punic extinct South Canaanite Ammonite extinct Moabite extinct Edomite extinct Biblical Hebrew Mishnaic Hebrew Medieval Hebrew Hebrew Modern Hebrew revived Samaritan Hebrew extinct apart from modern liturgical uses Ugaritic extinct Amorite extinct Taymanitic  extinct North Arabian Old Arabic Preclassical Arabic Arabic Classical Arabic Modern Standard Arabic Mashriqi Arabic Eastern Arabic dialect continuum Peninsular Arabic dialect continuum Old Hijazi Arabic Hejazi Arabic Gulf Arabic Emirati Arabic Bahraini Gulf Arabic Kuwaiti Arabic Bahrani Arabic Omani Arabic Shihhi Arabic Dhofari Arabic Yemeni Arabic dialect continuum Hadhrami Arabic Sanani Arabic TaizziAdeni Arabic Taizzi Arabic Adeni Arabic Djibouti Arabic JudeoYemeni Arabic Tihamiyya Arabic Zabidi dialect Yafii Arabic Northwest Arabian Arabic Levantine Bedawi Arabic Eastern Egyptian Bedawi Arabic Najdi Arabic Bareqi Arabic EgyptoSudanic Arabic dialect continuum Egyptian Arabic dialect continuum JudeoEgyptian Arabic Saidi Arabic Cairene Arabic SudaneseChadian Arabic dialect continuum Sudanese Arabic Chadian Arabic Levantine Arabic dialect continuum North Levantine Arabic Cilician Arabic Aleppine Arabic Damascene Arabic JudeoSyrian Arabic Lebanese Arabic South Levantine Arabic Palestinian Arabic Modern Palestinian JudeoArabic Jordanian Arabic Mesopotamian ArabicIraqi Arabic dialect continuum Gilit Dialects dialect continuum Baghdadi Arabic Shawi Arabic Khuzestani Arabic South Mesopotamian Arabic Qeltu Dialects dialect continuum North Mesopotamian Arabic Anatolian Arabic JudeoIraqi Arabic Jewish Baghdadi Arabic Cypriot Arabic Central Asian Arabic dialect continuum Bakhtiari Arabic Bukharian Arabic Kashkadarian Arabic Khorasani Arabic Shirvani Arabic extinct Maghrebi Arabic Western Arabic dialect continuum PreHilalian dialects PreHilalian Urban Arabic dialects Fessi dialect Jebli Arabic Jijel Arabic Maghrebi JudeoArabic JudeoMoroccan Arabic JudeoTripolitanian Arabic JudeoTunisian Arabic JudeoAlgerian Arabic SiculoArabic Maltese Cottonera Dialect Gozitan dialects Qormi dialect ejtun dialect Maltralian Corfiot Maltese extinct Andalusi Arabic extinct Eastern preHilali Dialects Tunisian Arabic Western preHilali dialects Hilalian dialects Sulaym dialects Libyan Arabic Western Egyptian Bedawi Arabic Eastern Hilali dialects Central Hilali dialects Algerian Saharan Arabic Western Hilali dialects Maqil dialects Hassaniya Arabic Koines Algerian Arabic Moroccan Arabic Azd dialect extinct Huayl dialect extinct ayyi dialect extinct Safaitic extinct Hismaic extinct Hasaitic extinct Nabataean Arabic extinct Dadanitic  extinct Thamudic  extinct South Semitic Western South Semitic Ethiopic North Ethiopic Geez Classical Ethiopic Dahalik Tigre Tigrinya South Ethiopic Transversal South Ethiopic AmharicArgobba Amharic Argobba HarariEast Gurage Harari East Gurage Silte Zway Outer South Ethiopic ngroup Gafat extinct Soddo ttgroup Mesmes extinct Muher West Gurage Mesqan Sebat Bet Sebat Bet Gurage Inor Old South Arabian ayhadic Sabaic extinct Minaean extinct Qatabanian extinct Awsnian extinct Hadramautic extinct Razihi  Faifi  Himyaritic  extinct Modern South Arabian Eastern South Semitic Baari arsusi Hobyt Mehri Shehri Soqotri Unclassified Sutean extinct Semiticspeaking peoplesedit The following is a list of some modern and ancient Semiticspeaking peoples and nations Distribution of the Semiticspeaking peoples Central Semiticedit Amorites Arabs Alawites Ancient North Arabianspeaking bedouins Itureans Nabataeans Tayy Thamud  
2 nd to 
5 th centuries AD Arameans  an ancient Northwest Semitic people. They had various kingdoms and citystates and were historically organized in tribal structures. Ahlamu Arameans Syriacs  a minority ethnic group in the Qalamoun mountains who still speak Western Aramaic.61626364656667686970 Mhallami Canaanitespeaking nations of the early Iron Age Ammonites Edomites  appeared in Transjordan between 
11 th to 
2 nd centuries BCE. Eventually assimilated into Jewish population during Hasmonean conquest.71 HebrewsIsraelites  founded the nation of Israel which later split into the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah. Jews Samaritans Moabites Phoenicians  founded Mediterranean colonies including Tyre Sidon and ancient CarthagePunics. The remnants of these people became the modern inhabitants of Lebanon. Chaldea  appeared in southern Mesopotamia c.1000 BC and eventually disappeared into the general Babylonian population. Druze Maltese Mandaeans Maronites Samalians Ugarites 
14 th to 
12 th centuries BC East Semiticedit Akkadians  ancient East Semitic speakers who moved from the Arabian Desert72 into Mesopotamia in the fourth millennium BC and settled among the indigenous peoples of Sumer.7374 Assyrians Modern Assyrian people Babylonians Eblaites  
23 rd century BC South Semiticedit Abyssinianspeaking peoples Axum  
4 th century BC to 
7 th century AD Amhara people Argobba people Dahalik people Gurage people Harari people Beta Israel Beta Abraham and Falash Muras. Jeberti people Silte people Tigrigna People Tigray people Tigre people Wolane people Zay people Old and Modern South Arabianspeaking peoples Bathari people Faifi people Ancient Hadramiticspeakers. Eventually evolved into the modern day Hadhrami people. Himyarites from 110 BCE until 578 CE Yemenite Jews Harsusi people Hobyot people Mehri people Minaeans 
8 th century BCE to 
2 nd centuries BC Qatabanians Shehri people Razihi people Sabaeans of Yemen  
8 th to 
1 st centuries BC Soqotri people Unknownedit Suteans  
14 th century BC See alsoedit ProtoSemitic language Middle Bronze Age alphabets Notesedit  According to the generally accepted view it is unlikely that begadkefat spirantization occurred before the merger of   and   or else x  and   would have to be contrastive which is crosslinguistically rare. However Blau argues that it is possible that lenited k and  could coexist even if pronounced identically since one would be recognized as an alternating allophone as apparently is the case in Nestorian Syriac.42  see Canaanite shift  In the historically attested Semitic languages the endings of the singular nounflexions survive as is well known only partially in Akkadian and Arabic and Ugaritic and limited to the accusative in Ethiopic.49  While some believe that anku was an innovation in some branches of Semitic utilizing an intensifying ku comparison to other AfroAsiatic 
1 ps pronouns e.g. 
3 nk Coptic anak anok protoBerber nakk suggests that this goes further back.53  The Akkadian form is from Sargonic Akkadian. Among the Semitic languages there are languages with i as the final vowel this is the form in Mehri. For a recent discussion concerning the reconstruction of the forms of the dual pronouns see BarAsher Elitzur. 2009. Dual Pronouns in Semitics and an Evaluation of the Evidence for their Existence in Biblical Hebrew Ancient Near Eastern Studies 46 3249  This root underwent regressive assimilation.
55 page needed This parallels the nonadjacent assimilation of ...  ... in protoCanaanite or protoNorthWestSemitic in the roots am  am sun and ur  ur root.56 The form al appears in most languages e.g. Aramaic Arabic Ugaritic but the original form l appears in the Old South Arabian languages and a form with s   rather than    appears in Akkadian.  This root was also assimilated in various ways. For example Hebrew reflects i with total assimilation Arabic reflects itt in cardinal numerals but less assimilated di in ordinal numerals. Epigraphic South Arabian reflects original d Ugaritic has a form  in which the  has been assimilated throughout the root.
55 page needed Referencesedit  Owens 2013 p. 2.  Hudson  Kogan 1997 p. 457.  Hudson  Kogan 1997 p. 424 Austin 2008 p. 74  Kuntz 1981 p. 25.  a b Ruhlen 1991.  Vermeulen H.F. 2015. Before Boas The Genesis of Ethnography and Ethnology in the German Enlightenment. Critical Studies in the History of Anthropology Series. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 9780803277380. Retrieved 7 October 2022. Schlzer 1781 p.161 From the Mediterranean to the Euphrates from Mesopotamia to Arabia ruled one language as is well known. Thus Syrians Babylonians Hebrews and Arabs were one people ein Volk. Phoenicians Hamites also spoke this language which I would like to call the Semitic die Semitische. To the north and east of this Semitic language and national district Semitische Sprach und VlkerBezirke begins a second one With Moses and Leibniz I would like to call it the Japhetic.  Kiraz 2001 p. 25 Baasten 2003 p. 67  a b Kiraz 2001 p. 25.  Baasten 2003 p. 6869.  a b Kitto 1845 p. 192.  Eichhorn 1794 pp. 7736 Baasten 2003 p. 69  Johann Gottfried Eichhorn Semitische Sprachen 1795  Kiraz 2001 p. 25 Kitto 1845 p. 192  1 Archived 20200731 at the Wayback Machine Andrew George Babylonian and Assyrian A History of Akkadian In Postgate J. N. ed. Languages of Iraq Ancient and Modern. London British School of Archaeology in Iraq pp. 37.  Early Semitic. A diachronical inquiry into the relationship of Ethiopic to the other socalled SouthEast Semitic languages  a b Kitchen Ehret  Assefa 2009 pp. 270310.  Semite. Encyclopdia Britannica. Retrieved 24 March 2014.  Phillipson David 2012. Foundations of an African Civilization Aksum and the Northern Horn 1000 BCAD 1300. Boydell  Brewer. p. 11. ISBN 9781846158735. Retrieved 6 May 2021. The former belief that this arrival of SouthSemiticspeakers took place in about the second quarter of the first millennium BC can no longer be accepted in view of linguistic indications that these languages were spoken in the northern Horn at a much earlier date.  The Origin of the Jews The Quest for Roots in a Rootless Age By Steven Weitzman page 69  Brando 2020 p. 23. sfn error no target CITEREFBrando2020 help  Izreel 19
87 c p. 4.  Waltke  OConnor 1990 p. 8.  Syriac the Classical dialect of Aramaic first attested in Edessa about 200 CE but which spread through the Christian communities of Mesopotamia and the Levant in the following centuries. Revival and Awakening American Evangelical Missionaries in Iran and the Origins of Assyrian Nationalism p.49  Brock 1998 p. 708.  Harrak 1992 pp. 20914.  Afsaruddin  Zahniser 1997 p. 464 Smart 2013 p. 253 Snchez 2013 p. 129  Nebes 2005 p. 335.  CLASSICAL SYRIAC. Gorgias Handbooks. p. 14. In contrast to Nestorians and Jacobites a small group of Syriacs accepted the decisions of the Council of Chalcedon. NonChalcedonian Syriacs called them Melkites from Aramaic malka king thereby connecting them to the Byzantine Emperors denomination. Melkite Syriacs were mostly concentrated around Antioch and adjacent regions of northern Syria and used Syriac as their literary and liturgical language. The Melkite community also included the Aramaicspeaking Jewish converts to Christianity in Palestine and the Orthodox Christians of Transjordan. During the 
5 th
6 th centuries they were engaged in literary work mainly translation in Palestinian Christian Aramaic a Western Aramaic dialect using a script closely resembling the Estrangela cursive of Osrhoene.  JACOB BARcLAY Melkite Orthodox SyroByzantine Manuscripts in Syriac and Palestinian Aramaic quote from the German book Internationale Zeitschriftenschau fr Bibelwissenschaft und Grenzgebiete p. 291  However in contrast to what went on in northern Syria and Mesopotamia where Syriac competed well with Greek to remain a great cultural language Syropalestinian was in a weak position with regard to Greek and later to Arabic. quote from the book The Fourth International Conference on the History of Bild AlShm During the Umayyad Period English section p.31  Some Chalcedonians of Palestine and the Transjordan chose to write in Christian Palestinian Aramaic CPA rather than Syriac. quote from the book A Companion to Byzantine Epistolography p.68  Arman Akopian 11 December 2017. Other branches of Syriac Christianity Melkites and Maronites. Introduction to Aramean and Syriac Studies. Gorgias Press. p. 573. ISBN 9781463238933. The main center of Aramaicspeaking Melkites was Palestine. During the 
5 th
6 th centuries they were engaged in literary mainly translation work in the local Western Aramaic dialect known as Palestinian Christian Aramaic using a script closely resembling the cursive Estrangela of Osrhoene. Palestinian Melkites were mostly Jewish converts to Christianity who had a long tradition of using Palestinian Aramaic dialects as literary languages. Closely associated with the Palestinian Melkites were the Melkites of Transjordan who also used Palestinian Christian Aramaic. Another community of Aramaicspeaking Melkites existed in the vicinity of Antioch and parts of Syria. These Melkites used Classical Syriac as a written language the common literary language of the overwhelming majority of Christian Arameans.  Versteegh 1997 p. 13.  Kogan 2011 p. 54.  Kogan 2012 pp. 54151.  Watson 2002 p. 13.  Bekins Peter 12 September 2008. Old Aramaic c. 850 to c. 612 BCE. Retrieved 22 August 2011.  Harrison Shelly. LIN325 Introduction to Semitic Languages. Common Consonant Changes PDF. Archived from the original PDF on 21 August 2006. Retrieved 25 June 2006.  Kaufman Stephen 1997 Aramaic in Hetzron Robert ed. The Semitic Languages Routledge pp. 117119.  Dolgopolsky 1999 p. 35.  Dolgopolsky 1999 p. 72.  Blau 2010 p. 56.  Dolgopolsky 1999 p. 73.  Blau 20107881  Garnier Romain Jacques Guillaume 2012. A neglected phonetic law The assimilation of pretonic yod to a following coronal in NorthWest Semitic. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 75 1 135145. CiteSeerX 

10.1.1 .3
95.1 033. doi
10.1 0
17 s00419
77 x11001261. S
2 CID 16649580.  Brock Sebastian 2006. An Introduction to Syriac Studies. Piscataway NJ Gorgias Press. ISBN 1593333498.  Dolgopolsky 1999 pp. 8586.  Greenberg 1999 p. 157.  Moscati 1958 pp. 14243.  Hetzron 1997 p. 123.  Semitic languages  Definition Map Tree Distribution  Facts. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 23 January 2020.  Hetzron Kaye  Zuckermann 2018 p. 568.  Dolgopolsky 1999 pp. 1011.  Weninger Stefan 2011. Reconstructive Morphology. In Weninger Stefan ed.. Semitic languages an international handbook. Berlin Walter de Gruyter. p. 166. doi
10.1 51597831102515
86.1 51. ISBN 9783110186130.  a b Lipiski 2001.  Dolgopolsky 1999 pp. 6162.  Mller 1995 pp. 26171 Coghill 20
16 page needed  Hackett 2006 pp. 92935.  Blench Roger 2006. Archaeology Language and the African Past. Lanham Maryland Altamira Press. p. 157. ISBN 9780759104662.  Almarri Mohamed A. Haber Marc Lootah Reem A. Hallast Pille Turki Saeed Al Martin Hilary C. Xue Yali TylerSmith Chris 2020. The Genomic History of the Middle East. Cell. 184 18 46124625.e14. bioRxiv 
10.1 10120
20.1 
0.1 
8.3 42816. doi
10.1 0
16 j.cell.20
21.0 
7.0 13. PMC 8445022. PMID 34352227.  Ab alFaraj Ishsh.     in Arabic. AlMabaah alJaddah. p. 56.           i   .       in Arabic. . p. 45. ...                       .                    ...  Rafik Schami 25 July 2011. Mrchen aus Malula in German. Carl Hanser Verlag GmbH  Company KG. p. 151. ISBN 9783446239005. Ich kenne das Dorf nicht doch gehrt habe ich davon. Was ist mit Malula fragte der festgehaltene Derwisch. Das letzte Dorf der Aramer lachte einer der  Yaron Matras Jeanette Sakel 2007. Grammatical Borrowing in CrossLinguistic Perspective. De Gruyter. p. 185. doi
10.1 5159783110199192. ISBN 9783110199192. The fact that nearly all Arabic loans in Malula originate from the period before the change from the rural dialect to the city dialect of Damascus shows that the contact between the Aramaeans and the Arabs was intimate  Dr. Emna Labidi 2022. Untersuchungen zum Spracherwerb zweisprachiger Kinder im Aramerdorf Dschubbadin Syrien in German. LIT. p. 133. ISBN 9783643152619. Aramer von ubbadn  Prof. Dr. Werner Arnold P. Behnstedt 1993. Arabischaramische Sprachbeziehungen im Qalamn Syrien in German. Harassowitz. p. 42. ISBN 9783447033268. Die arabischen Dialekte der Aramer  Prof. Dr. Werner Arnold P. Behnstedt 1993. Arabischaramische Sprachbeziehungen im Qalamn Syrien in German. Harassowitz. p. 5. ISBN 9783447033268. Die Kontakte zwischen den drei Aramerdrfern sind nicht besonders stark.  Prof. Dr. Werner Arnold 2006. Lehrbuch des Neuwestaramischen in German. Harrassowitz. p. 133. ISBN 9783447053136. Aramern in Malla  Prof. Dr. Werner Arnold 2006. Lehrbuch des Neuwestaramischen in German. Harrassowitz. p. 15. ISBN 9783447053136. Viele Aramer arbeiten heute in Damaskus Beirut oder in den Golfstaaten und verbringen nur die Sommermonate im Dorf.  Hilfe fr das Aramerdorf Maaloula e.V.  an aid project in Syria.  Weitzman Steven 1999. Forced Circumcision and the Shifting Role of Gentiles in Hasmonean Ideology. The Harvard Theological Review. 92 1 3759. doi
10.1 0
17 S0017816000017843. ISSN 00178160. JSTOR 1510155. S
2 CID 162887617.  Zaide Gregorio F. 16 December 1994. World History. Rex Bookstore. p. 57. ISBN 9789712314728. About 3000 B.C. the nomadic Akkadians a Semitic people from the Arabian Desert migrated to Mesopotamia and founded the citystate of Akkad in a region north of Sumer.  Mesopotamian religion  Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Britannica.com. Retrieved 27 January 2013.  Akkadian language  Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Britannica.com. Retrieved 27 January 2013. Bibliographyedit Afsaruddin Asma Zahniser A. H. Mathias 1997. Humanism Culture and Language in the Near East Studies in Honor of Georg Krotkoff. Winona Lake Ind. Penn State University Press. doi
10.5 3
25 j.ctv
1 w
36 pkt. ISBN 9781575060200. JSTOR 
10.5 3
25 j.ctv
1 w
36 pkt. Austin Peter K. ed. 2008. One Thousand Languages Living Endangered and Lost. Berkeley University of California Press. ISBN 9780520255609. Baasten Martin F. J. 2003. A Note on the History of Semitic. In Baasten M. F. J. Van Peursen W. Th. eds.. Hamlet on a Hill Semitic and Greek Studies Presented to Professor T. Muraoka on the Occasion of His Sixtyfifth Birthday. Peeters. pp. 5773. ISBN 9042912154. Bennett Patrick R. 1998. Comparative Semitic Linguistics A Manual. Winona Lake Indiana Eisenbrauns. ISBN 1575060213. Blau Joshua 2010. Phonology and Morphology of Biblical Hebrew. Winona Lake Indiana Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9781575061290. Coghill Eleanor 2016. The Rise and Fall of Ergativity in Aramaic Cycles of Alignment Change. Oxford Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198723806. Davies John 1854. On the Semitic Languages and their relations with the IndoEuropean Class. Pt I. On the Nature and Development of Semitic Roots. Transactions of the Philological Society 10. Davies John 1854. On the Semitic Languages and their relations with the IndoEuropean Class. Pt II. On the Connection of Semitic Roots with corresponding forms in the IndoEuropean Class of Languages. Transactions of the Philological Society 13. Dolgopolsky Aron 1999. From ProtoSemitic to Hebrew. Milan Centro Studi CamitoSemitici di Milano. Eichhorn Johann Gottfried 1794. Allgemeine Bibliothek der biblischen Literatur General Library of Biblical Literature in German. Vol. 6. Brock Sebastian 1998. Syriac Culture 337425. In Cameron Averil Garnsey Peter eds.. The Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. 13 The Late Empire A.D. 337425. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. pp. 708719. ISBN 0521850738. Greenberg Joseph H. 1999. The Diachronic Typological Approach to Language. In Shibatani Masayoshi Bynon Theodora eds.. Approaches to Language Typology. Oxford Oxford University Press. pp. 145166. ISBN 0198238665. Bergstrsser Gotthelf 1995. Introduction to the Semitic Languages Text Specimens and Grammatical Sketches. Translated by Daniels Peter T. Winona Lake Indiana Eisenbrauns. ISBN 0931464102. Garbini Giovanni 1984. Le lingue semitiche studi di storia linguistica Semitic languages studies of linguistic history in Italian. Naples Istituto Orientale. Garbini Giovanni Durand Olivier 1994. Introduzione alle lingue semitiche Introduction to Semitic languages in Italian. Brescia Paideia. Goldenberg Gideon 2013. Semitic Languages Features Structures Relations Processes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199644919. Hackett Jo Ann 2006. Semitic Languages. In Keith Brown Sarah Ogilvie eds.. Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World. Elsevier. pp. 929935. ISBN 9780080877754  via Google Books. Harrak Amir 1992. The ancient name of Edessa. Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 51 3 209214. doi
10.1 086373553. JSTOR 545546. S
2 CID 162190342. Hetzron Robert 1997. The Semitic Languages. Routledge. ISBN 9780415057677. Hetzron Robert Kaye Alan S. Zuckermann Ghilad 2018. Semitic Languages. In Comrie Bernard ed.. The Worlds Major Languages 
3 rd ed.. London Routledge. pp. 568576. doi
10.4 3249781315644936. ISBN 9781315644936. Hudson Grover Kogan Leonid E. 1997. Amharic and Argobba. In Hetzron Robert ed.. The Semitic Languages. New York Routledge. pp. 457485. ISBN 0415057671. Izreel Shlomo 19
87 c CanaanoAkkadian PDF Kiraz George Anton 2001. Computational Nonlinear Morphology With Emphasis on Semitic Languages. Cambridge University Press. p. 25. ISBN 9780521631969. The term Semitic is borrowed from the Bible Gene. x.21 and xi.1026. It was first used by the Orientalist A. L. Schlzer in 1781 to designate the languages spoken by the Aramans Hebrews Arabs and other peoples of the Near East Moscati et al. 1969 Sect. 
1.2 . Before Schlzer these languages and dialects were known as Oriental languages. Kitchen A. Ehret C. Assefa S. 2009. Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of Semitic languages identifies an Early Bronze Age origin of Semitic in the Near East. Proceedings. Biological Sciences. 276 1668 270310. doi
10.1 0
98 rspb.20
09.0 408. PMC 2839953. PMID 19403539. Kitto John 1845. A Cyclopdia of Biblical Literature. London W. Clowes and Sons. That important family of languages of which the Arabic is the most cultivated and most widelyextended branch has long wanted an appropriate common name. The term Oriental languages which was exclusively applied to it from the time of Jerome down to the end of the last century and which is even now not entirely abandoned must always have been an unscientific one inasmuch as the countries in which these languages prevailed are only the east in respect to Europe and when Sanskrit Chinese and other idioms of the remoter East were brought within the reach of our research it became palpably incorrect. Under a sense of this impropriety Eichhorn was the first as he says himself Allg. Bibl. Biblioth. vi. 772 to introduce the name Semitic languages which was soon generally adopted and which is the most usual one at the present day. ... In modern times however the very appropriate designation SyroArabian languages has been proposed by Dr. Prichard in his Physical History of Man. This term ... has the advantage of forming an exact counterpart to the name by which the only other great family of languages with which we are likely to bring the SyroArabian into relations of contrast or accordance is now universally knownthe IndoGermanic. Like it by taking up only the two extreme members of a whole sisterhood according to their geographical position when in their native seats it embraces all the intermediate branches under a common band and like it it constitutes a name which is not only at once intelligible but one which in itself conveys a notion of that affinity between the sister dialects which it is one of the objects of comparative philology to demonstrate and to apply. Kogan Leonid 2012. ProtoSemitic Phonology and Phonetics. In Weninger Stefan ed.. The Semitic Languages An International Handbook. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 9783110251586. Kuntz Marion Leathers 1981. Guillaume Postel Prophet of the Restitution of All Things His Life and Thought. The Hague Nijhoff. ISBN 9024725232. Kogan Leonid 2011. ProtoSemitic Phonology and Phonetics. In Weninger Stefan ed.. The Semitic Languages An International Handbook. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 9783110251586. Levine Donald N. 2000. Greater Ethiopia The Evolution of a Multiethnic Society 2. ed.. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226229676. Lipiski Edward 2001. Semitic Languages Outline of a Comparative Grammar 
2 nd ed.. Leuven Peeters. ISBN 9042908157. Mustafa Arafa Hussein. 1974. Analytical study of phrases and sentences in epic texts of Ugarit. German title Untersuchungen zu Satztypen in den epischen Texten von Ugarit. Dissertation. HalleWittenberg MartinLutherUniversity. Moscati Sabatino 1969. An Introduction to the Comparative Grammar of the Semitic Languages Phonology and Morphology. Wiesbaden Harrassowitz. Moscati Sabatino 1958. On Semitic CaseEndings. Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 17 2 142144. doi
10.1 086371454. S
2 CID 161828505. Mller HansPeter 1995. Ergative Constructions In Early Semitic Languages. Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 54 4 261271. doi
10.1 086373769. JSTOR 545846. S
2 CID 161626451. Nebes Norbert 2005. Epigraphic South Arabian. In Uhlig Siegbert ed.. Encyclopaedia Aethiopica. Wiesbaden Harrassowitz. ISBN 9783447052382. Ullendorff Edward 1955. The Semitic Languages of Ethiopia A Comparative Phonology. London Taylors Foreign Press. Owens Jonathan 2013. The Oxford Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199344093. Phillipson David 2012. Foundations of an African Civilization Aksum and the Northern Horn 1000 BCAD 1300. Boydell  Brewer. ISBN 9781846158735. Retrieved 6 May 2021. The former belief that this arrival of SouthSemiticspeakers took place in about the second quarter of the first millennium BC can no longer be accepted in view of linguistic indications that these languages were spoken in the northern Horn at a much earlier date. Ruhlen Merritt 1991. A Guide to the Worlds Languages Classification. Stanford California Stanford University Press. ISBN 0804718946. The other linguistic group to be recognized in the eighteenth century was the Semitic family. The German scholar Ludwig von Schlozer is often credited with having recognized and named the Semitic family in 1781. But the affinity of Hebrew Arabic and Aramaic had been recognized for centuries by Jewish Christian and Islamic scholars and this knowledge was published in Western Europe as early as 1538 see Postel 1538. Around 1700 Hiob Ludolf who had written grammars of Geez and Amharic both Ethiopic Semitic languages in the seventeenth century recognized the extension of the Semitic family into East Africa. Thus when von Schlozer named the family in 1781 he was merely recognizing genetic relationships that had been known for centuries. Three Semitic languages Aramaic Arabic and Hebrew were long familiar to Europeans both because of their geographic proximity and because the Bible was written in Hebrew and Aramaic. Snchez Francisco del Ro 2013. MonferrerSala Juan Pedro Watson Wilfred G. E. eds.. Archaism and Innovation in the Semitic Languages. Selected Papers. Crdoba Oriens Academic. ISBN 9788469578292. Smart J. R. 2013. Tradition and modernity in Arabic language and literature. Smart J. R. Shaban Memorial Conference 
2 nd  1994  University of Exeter. Richmond Surrey U.K. Taylor  Francis. ISBN 9781136788123. Versteegh Kees 1997. The Arabic Language. New York Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231111522. Waltke Bruce K. OConnor Michael Patrick 1990. An Introduction to Biblical Hebrew Syntax. Vol. 3. Winona Lake Indiana Eisenbrauns. ISBN 0931464315. Watson Janet C. E. 2002. The Phonology and Morphology of Arabic PDF. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198241372. Archived from the original PDF on 1 March 2016  via Wayback Machine. Woodard Roger D. ed. 2008. The Ancient Languages of SyrioPalestine and Arabia PDF. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. Wright William Smith William Robertson 1890. Lectures on the Comparative Grammar of the Semitic Languages. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. 2002 edition ISBN 1931956
12 X External linksedit Semitic languages at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Semitic genealogical tree as well as the Afroasiatic one presented by Alexander Militarev at his talk Genealogical classification of AfroAsiatic languages according to the latest data at the conference on the 
70 th anniversary of Vladislav IllichSvitych Moscow 2004 short annotations of the talks given there in Russian Patternandroot inflectional morphology the Arabic broken plural Ancient snake spell in Egyptian pyramid may be oldest Semitic inscription Alexis Neme and Sbastien Paumier 2019 Restoring Arabic vowels through omissiontolerant dictionary lookup Lang Resources  Evaluation Vol 53 165 pages Swadesh vocabulary lists of Semitic languages from Wiktionarys Swadeshlist appendix v t e Afroasiatic languages Reconstructed ProtoAfroasiatic ProtoBerber ProtoSemitic Berber Eastern Northern Atlas Zenati East Zenati MzabWargla Tuareg Western Chadic BiuMandara East Masa West Angas Bade BoleTangale HausaGwandara North Bauchi Ron South Bauchi Cushitic Agaw Dullay Highland East Lowland East OmoTana MacroSomali RendilleBoni Somali languages Western Oromoid SahoAfar South Omotic Aroid Dizoid Mao North Gonga Ometo Semitic East West Central Northwest South Others Egyptian Coptic Ongota unclassified possibly NiloSaharan transitional or a language isolate Italics indicate extinct languages Authority control databases National Spain France BnF data Germany Israel United States Japan Czech Republic Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSemiticlanguagesoldid1221689725 Categories Semitic languages Afroasiatic languages Aramaic languages Arabic language Hebrew language Amharic language Geez language Phoenician language Akkadian language Hidden categories All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Pages with plain IPA Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Harv and Sfn notarget errors Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2021 CS1 Arabiclanguage sources ar CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2015 Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 CS1 long volume value CS1 Italianlanguage sources it Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Russianlanguage sources ru Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Use dmy dates from April 2017 This page was last edited on 1 May 2024 at 1225 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width