File:Hotepkare cylinder Petrie.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileHotepkare cylinder Petrie.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. HotepkarecylinderPetrie.png 155  294 pixels file size 32 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionHotepkare cylinder Petrie.png English Cylinder bearing the cartouche of pharaoh Hotepkare probably Sehotepkare Intef IV ref Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 1999 p. 94. 
13 th dynasty second intermediate period. Date 21 January 2014 195408 Source Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XVIII n. 13.DE. Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic    Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 21 January 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1947 21 January 2014 155  294 32 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Sehetepkare Intef Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Intef IV Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Sehotepkar Antef Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org IV. Antef Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Sehetepkara Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 4 Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras XIII dinastia egpcia Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Trinajsta egipanska dinastija Intef IV. Usage on th.wikipedia.org    4 Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  IV Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Sehetepkare Intef Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc File change date and time 1845 21 January 2014 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileHotepkarecylinderPetrie.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width