Sobekhotep IV - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Royal court 
3 Royal activities 
4 Sobekhotep IVs rule over a divided Egypt 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sobekhotep IV 27 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian king Sobekhotep IV Statue of Sobekhotep IV Louvre Pharaoh Reign About 10 years Predecessor Neferhotep I and his coregent Sihathor Successor Merhotepre Sobekhotep Royal titulary Horus name Ankhibtawy njbt.wj Horus may the heart of the two lands live Nebty name Wadjkhaw Ww He whose apparitions are flourishing Golden Horus Weserbaw Wsrbw He whose Bas are powerful Turin King List Khaneferre Sobekhotep nfrR sbktp The perfect apparition of Ra Sobek is satisfied Prenomen Praenomen Khaneferre nfrR The perfect apparition of Ra Nomen Sobekhotep Sbktp Sobek is satisfied Consort Tjan Children SobekhotepMiw  SobekhotepDjaDja  HaankhefIykherneferet  Amenhotep  Nebetiunet 1 Father Haankhef Mother Kemi Burial Possibly tomb S10 at Abydos Dynasty 
13 th Dynasty Khaneferre Sobekhotep IV was one of the more powerful Egyptian kings of the 
13 th Dynasty c. 1803 BC to c. 1649 BC who reigned at least eight years. His brothers Neferhotep I and Sihathor were his predecessors on the throne the latter having only ruled as coregent for a few months. Sobekhotep states on a stela found in the Amun temple at Karnak that he was born in Thebes. The king is believed to have reigned for around 10 years. He is known by a relatively high number of monuments including stelae statues many seals and other minor objects. There are attestations for building works at Abydos and Karnak. Familyedit Sobekhotep was the son of the gods father Haankhef and of the kings mother Kemi. His grandfather was the soldier of the towns regiment Nehy. His grandmother was called Senebtysy. Sobekhotep might have had several wives only one of which is known for certain the kings wife Tjan. Several children are known. These are Amenhotep and Nebetiunet both with Tjan as mother. There are three further kings sons Sobekhotep Miu Sobekhotep Djadja and Haankhef Iykhernofret. Their mother is not recorded in extant sources.2 Royal courtedit The royal court is also well known from sources contemporaneous with Neferhotep I providing evidence that Sobekhotep IV continued the politics of his brother in the administration. The Vizier was Neferkare Iymeru. The treasurer was Senebi and the high steward a certain Nebankh. Royal activitiesedit A stela of the king found at Karnak reports donations to the AmunRa temple.3 A pair of door jambs with the name of the king was found at Karnak attesting some building work. There is also a restoration inscription on a statue of king Mentuhotep II also coming from Karnak. From Abydos are known several inscribed blocks attesting some building activities at the local temple4 The vizier Neferkare Iymeru reports on one of his statues found at Karnak Paris Louvre A 125 that he built a canal and a house of millions of years for the king. The statue of the vizier was found at Karnak and might indicate that these buildings were erected there.5 For year 6 is attested an expedition to the amethyst mines at Wadi elHudi in southernmost Egypt. The expedition is attested via four stelae set up at Wadi elHudi.6 From the Wadi Hammamat comes a stela dated to the ninth regnal year of the king. He was perhaps buried at Abydos where a huge tomb compare S10 naming a pharaoh Sobekhotep was found by Josef W. Wegner of the University of Pennsylvania just next to the funerary complex of Senusret III of the 
12 th Dynasty. Although initially attributed to pharaoh Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep I the style of the burial suggests a date of the tomb under Sobekhotep IV.7 Sobekhotep IVs rule over a divided Egyptedit Cartouche of Sobekhotep IV. While Sobekhotep IV was one of the most powerful 
13 th dynasty rulers and his control over Memphis Middle Egypt and Thebes is well attested by historical records it is believed that he did not rule over a united Egypt. According to the egyptologist Kim Ryholt the 
14 th Dynasty was already in control of the eastern Nile Delta at the time.8 Alternatively N. Moeller and G. Marouard argue that the eastern Delta was ruled by the 
15 th Dynasty Hyksos king Khyan at the time of Sobekhotep IV. Their argument presented in a recently published article9 relies on the discovery of an important early 
12 th dynasty Middle Kingdom administrative building in Tell Edfu Upper Egypt which was continuously in use from the early Second Intermediate Period until it fell out of use during the 
17 th dynasty when its remains were sealed up by a large silo court. Fieldwork by Egyptologists in 2010 and 2011 into the remains of the former 
12 th Dynasty building which was still in use at the time of the 
13 th dynasty led to the discovery of a large adjoining hall which proved to contain 41 sealings showing the cartouche of the Hyksos ruler Khyan together with nine sealings naming the 
13 th dynasty king Sobekhotep IV.10 As Moeller Marouard and Ayers write These finds come from a secure and sealed archaeological context and open up new questions about the cultural and chronological evolution of the late Middle Kingdom and early Second Intermediate Period.11 They conclude first that Khyan was actually one of the earlier Hyksos kings and may not have been succeeded by Apophiswho was the second last king of the Hyksos kingdomand second that the 
15 th Hyksos Dynasty was already in existence by the mid
13 th Dynasty period since Khyan controlled a part of northern Egypt at the same time as Sobekhotep IV ruled the rest of Egypt as a pharaoh of the 
13 th dynasty. This analysis and the conclusions drawn from it are questioned by Robert Porter however who argues that Khyan ruled much later than Sobekhotep IV. Porter notes that the seals of a pharaoh were used even long after his death but also wonders whether Sobekhotep IV reigned much later and whether the early Thirteenth Dynasty was much longer than previously thought.12 In Ryholts chronology of the Second Intermediate Period Khyan and Sobekhotep IV are separated by c. 100 years.8 A similar figure is obtained by Nicolas Grimal.13 Alexander IlinTomich had a further close look at the pottery associated with the finds of seal impressions and draws parallels to Elephantine where one of the pottery forms of the find appears in a rather late Second Intermediate Period context. IlinTomich concludes that there is no reason to believe that Khyan and Sobekhotep IV reigned at the same time. The level in which the seal impressions were found is later than Sobekhotep IV.14 Regardless of which theory is true either the 
14 th dynasty or the 
15 th dynasty already controlled the Delta by the time of Sobekhotep IV.15 Referencesedit  Julien Siesse An unpublished Scarab of Queen Tjan Thirteenth Dynasty from the Louvre Museum AF 6755 in Gianluca Miniaci Wolfram Grajetzki eds. The World of Middle Kingdom Egypt 20001550 BC Vol. ii London 2016 ISBN 9781906137489 p. 247  K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 231  Wolfgang Helck Eine Stele Sebekhoteps IV. aus Karnak in MDAIK 24 1969 194200  Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 349  Elisabeth Delange Catalogue des statues gyptinnes du Moyen Empire 20601560 avant j.c. Paris 1987 ISBN 2711821617 6668  Ashraf I. Sadek The Amethyst Mining Inscriptions of Wadi elHudi Part I Text Warminster 1980 ISBN 0856681628 4652 nos. 2225 Ashraf I. Sadek The Amethyst Mining Inscriptions of Wadi elHudi Part II Additional Texts Plates Warminster 1980 ISBN 0856682640 57 no. 155  J. Wegner A Royal Necropolis at Abydos in Near Eastern Archaeology 78 2 2015 p. 70 J. Wegner K. Cahail Royal Funerary Equipment of a King Sobekhotep at South Abydos Evidence for the Tombs of Sobekhotep IV and Neferhotep I in JARCE 15 2015 123146  a b K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997.  Nadine Moeller Gregory Marouard  N. Ayers Discussion of Late Middle Kingdom and Early Second Intermediate Period History and Chronology in Relation to the Khayan Sealings from Tell Edfu in Egypt and the Levant 21 2011 pp.87121 online PDF  Moeller Marouard  Ayers Egypt and the Levant 21 2011 pp.87108  Moeller Marouard  Ayers Egypt and the Levant 21 2011 p.87  Robert M. Porter The Second Intermediate Period according to Edfu Goettinger Mizsellen 239 2013 p. 7580  N. Grimal Histoire de lgypte ancienne 1988  Alexander IlinTomich The Theban Kingdom of Dynasty 16 Its Rise Administration and Politics in Journal of Egyptian History 7 2014 149150  Thomas Schneider Auslnder in gypten whrend des Mittleren Reiches und der Hyksoszeit I 1998 pp.15859 Bibliographyedit K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sebekhotep Khaneferre. Sobekhotep IV Preceded by Neferhotep I Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Sobekhotep V v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSobekhotepIVoldid1181563783 Categories 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt People from Thebes Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 October 2023 at 2048 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width