File:Merhotepre Ini.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileMerhotepre Ini.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. MerhotepreIni.png 202  274 pixels file size 72 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionMerhotepre Ini.png English Drawing of a scarab seal of the 
13 th dynasty pharaoh Merhotepre Ini by Flinders Petrie now in the Petrie Museum. Date 20 August 2013 134202 Source 1897 book by Flinders Petrie available copyright free here Author 1897 drawing by Flinders Petrie Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse Public domain This media file is in the public domain in the United States. This applies to U.S. works where the copyright has expired often because its first publication occurred prior to January 1 1929 and if not then due to lack of notice or renewal. See this page for further explanation. United States This image might not be in the public domain outside of the United States this especially applies in the countries and areas that do not apply the rule of the shorter term for US works such as Canada Mainland China not Hong Kong or Macao Germany Mexico and Switzerland. The creator and year of publication are essential information and must be provided. See WikipediaPublic domain and WikipediaCopyrights for more details. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic           Items portrayed in this file depicts File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1245 20 August 2013 202  274 72 KB IryHor User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Merhotepre Ini UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org   Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Merhotepre Ini Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Merhotepr Ini Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Merhotepr Ini Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras XIII dinastia egpcia Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Trinajsta egipanska dinastija Ini I. Usage on th.wikipedia.org  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  I Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Merhotepre Ini Usage on www.wikidata.org Q1277728 Usage on zh.wikipedia.org   Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileMerhotepreIni.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width