File:Merkawre Sobekhotep.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileMerkawre Sobekhotep.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 80  596 pixels. Other resolution 99  737 pixels. Original file 99  737 pixels file size 31 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionMerkawre Sobekhotep.png English Inscription found on both sides of the legs of a pink granite statue representing king Merkawre Sobekhotep also Merkaure Sobekhotep seated. The bust and feet of the statue are missing height 
68 cm. Discovered in Karnak drawing by Auguste Mariette 1875. Date 20 January 2017 Source MARIETTEBEY A. Karnak. tude topographique et archologique. Planches Karnak. tude topographique et archologique. Planches Leipzig 1875. See here p. 10 illustration l Author Auguste Mariette Karnak. tude topographique et archologique. Planches Karnak. tude topographique et archologique. Planches Leipzig 1875. See here p. 10 illustration l Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1457 20 January 2017 99  737 31 KB IryHor User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Merkawre Sobekhotep Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org 7  Usage on arz.wikipedia.org    Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Sobekhotep VII Usage on es.wikipedia.org Sebekhotep VII Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Sebekhotep VII.a Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Merkaour Sobekhotep Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org VII. Szobekhotep Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Sobekhotep VII Lista dei faraoni Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras XIII dinastia egpcia Sebecotepe VII Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Trinajsta egipanska dinastija Sobekhotep VII. Usage on th.wikipedia.org   7 Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Merkawre Sobekhotep Usage on www.wikidata.org Q649566 TalkQ37110 Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Image height 1600 px Image width 2560 px Horizontal resolution 
56.6 9 dpc Vertical resolution 
56.6 9 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileMerkawreSobekhotep.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width