File:Sewadjare Mentuhotep.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileSewadjare Mentuhotep.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. SewadjareMentuhotep.png 199  376 pixels file size 117 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionSewadjare Mentuhotep.png English Photography of a relief showing the cartouches of Sewadjare Mentuhotep V of the late 
13 th dynasty during the second intermediate period. This is the only contemporary attestation safely attributed to Mentuhotep V. The relief was found in the mortuary temple of Mentuhotep II at Deir elBarhi. Date 1 February 2014 214007 Source 1907 Photography by Edouard Naville The XI Dynasty Temple at Deir elBahri Part I available copyrightfree online see p. 68 and pl. XII i Author 1907 Photography by Edouard Naville The XI Dynasty Temple at Deir elBahri Part I available copyrightfree online see p. 68 and pl. XII i Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse Public domain This media file is in the public domain in the United States. This applies to U.S. works where the copyright has expired often because its first publication occurred prior to January 1 1929 and if not then due to lack of notice or renewal. See this page for further explanation. United States This image might not be in the public domain outside of the United States this especially applies in the countries and areas that do not apply the rule of the shorter term for US works such as Canada Mainland China not Hong Kong or Macao Germany Mexico and Switzerland. The creator and year of publication are essential information and must be provided. See WikipediaPublic domain and WikipediaCopyrights for more details. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1 February 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2143 1 February 2014 199  376 117 KB IryHor User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Sewadjare Mentuhotep Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep VI Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Sewadjare Mentuhotep Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Soudjr Montouhotep Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org V. Montuhotep Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep VI Lista dei faraoni Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  V Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Trinajsta egipanska dinastija Mentuhotep V. Usage on th.wikipedia.org   5 Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Sewadjare Mentuhotep Usage on www.wikidata.org Q1194918 TalkQ37110 Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileSewadjareMentuhotep.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width