Portal:Current events - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk PortalCurrent events 117 languages nglisc      Banjar   Bnlmg    Bikol Central Catal  Cebuano etina Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch    Espaol Esperanto Estremeu Euskara Eegbe  Froyskt Franais Gaeilge Gaelg   Hakkng    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua  IsiZulu slenska  Kapampangan   Kurd Ladino Latina Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Li Niha Limburgs Magyar      Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau   Nhuatl Nederlands     Napulitano  Occitan Ozbekcha       Piemontis Polski Portugus Qaraqalpaqsha Romn   Scots Shqip Sicilianu   Slovenina Slovenina Soomaaliga    srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara      Vepsn kel Ting Vit Volapk Walon    Yorb  Zeuws  Edit links Portal Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Portal maintenance status October 2020 This portals subpages have been checked by an editor and are needed. Please take care when editing especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Wikimedia portal Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Entry views by week list Wikimedia portal Topics in the news Flooding in Porto Alegre Flooding pictured in Rio Grande do Sul Brazil leaves more than 100 people dead and at least 130 others missing. Kyren Wilson wins the World Snooker Championship. In horse racing Mystik Dan wins the Kentucky Derby. Following the Solomon Islands general election Jeremiah Manele becomes the prime minister. Acting prime minister of Haiti Ariel Henry resigns and the Transitional Presidential Council is sworn in. Ongoing IsraelHamas war Myanmar civil war Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline War in Sudan timeline Recent deaths Obi Ezeh Steve Albini Hootie Ingram Frank Stella Kristin Hallenga Frank Shrontz Nominate an article May 9 2024 20240509 Thursday edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks IsraelHamas war Rafah offensive Israeli tanks and warplanes strike eastern Rafah killing more than 65 civilians and causing 80000 people to flee. Reuters United States support for Israel in the IsraelHamas war President Joe Biden vows to withhold weapons from Israel if it launches a major invasion of Rafah. Reuters Humanitarian aid during the IsraelHamas war A USflagged ship carrying aid to the United Statesbuilt floating pier in Gaza sets sail from Cyprus. Reuters Spillover of the IsraelHamas war Red Sea crisis The Houthis claim responsibility for attacks on two container ships in the Gulf of Aden and one in the Indian Ocean. Al Jazeera Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action IranIsrael relations Iran warns it will build a nuclear weapon if Israel continues to target its nuclear facilities. Al Jazeera Business and economy Air India Express cancels 85 flights due to staff calling in sick last minute linked to a protest against working conditions imposed by the new owner Tata Group. Al Jazeera Disasters and accidents Eight people are killed 29 others are injured and 44 others are missing after a building collapses in George South Africa. Reuters Two Boeing 737 planes are involved in accidents involving takeoff and landing in Senegal and Turkey. Al Jazeera International relations AustraliaTuvalu relations Australia and Tuvalu sign a new security agreement where Australia vows to protect Tuvalu in cases of natural disasters pandemic or military aggression. AP Law and crime Former Fijian prime minister Frank Bainimarama is sentenced to one year in prison for perverting the course of justice. Australian Broadcasting Corporation A class action lawsuit is filed against New York City for allegedly discriminating against gay male city employees by only covering the costs of IVF treatments for women and heterosexual couples. Reuters Politics and elections IsraelHamas war protests Thousands of proPalestinian protesters march in Malm Sweden against Israels participation in the Eurovision Song Contest and the contests ban of proPalestinian content and imagery. Among the protesters is Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg. AP Argentine unions launch a general strike against President Javier Mileis planned reforms and budget cuts. Reuters May 8 2024 20240508 Wednesday edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks IsraelHamas war Humanitarian aid during the IsraelHamas war Israel reopens the Kerem Shalom border crossing allowing humanitarian aid into Gaza. However the UN states that no aid has entered. AP Rafah offensive Israeli troops reach the outskirts of Rafah with Hamas saying that heavy fighting is underway. The Israeli military says that it has uncovered terrorist infrastructure and killed a number of Hamas militants as it advances. BBC News AlShifa Hospital siege Al Jazeera reports that a third mass grave holding at least 49 bodies was discovered in Gaza Citys alShifa Hospital. Al Jazeera The Hill Russian invasion of Ukraine Kharkiv strikes At least seven people including four children are injured in a Russian airstrike on Kharkiv. Reuters Russian strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure Russia launches missile and drone strikes across Ukraine injuring three people and damaging critical infrastructure. Ukraine says that it shot down 39 of 55 missiles and 20 of 21 drones. AP Bloomberg News Islamic StateTaliban conflict A motorcycle bombing kills three Taliban security personnel in Badakhshan Province Afghanistan. The Islamic State  Khorasan Province claims responsibility for the attack. Reuters Arts and culture A statue of the late African American civil rights leader Daisy Bates is unveiled at the U.S. Capitols National Statuary Hall Collection in Washington D.C. representing the state of Arkansas. Reuters Business and economy Siemens Energy brings in a new CEO for its troubled wind turbine division Vinod Philip. Reuters Disasters and accidents Tornadoes of 2024 Tornado outbreak of May 68 2024 Dozens of tornadoes strike the United States killing five people and leaving multiple others injured. The New York Times 2024 Rio Grande do Sul floods The death toll from the ongoing heavy flooding in southern Brazil increases to 100 with 128 people still missing and 163000 people displaced. Reuters Rolling blackouts occur in several cities in Mexico amid an ongoing heatwave in the country. The New York Times Health and environment COVID19 vaccine AstraZeneca withdraws its marketing authorizations in Europe and withdraws its COVID19 vaccines worldwide due to low demand after finding that the vaccines can very rarely lead to blood clots. Reuters Law and crime Human trafficking in India The Indian Central Bureau of Investigation arrests four people linked to a network of human traffickers who have been luring young men to go to Russia with the promise of jobs or university admission then to force them to fight in the war in Ukraine. The Ministry of External Affairs is working with Russia to secure discharges for 20 Indian nationals in the Russian Army. Al Jazeera Politics and elections Elected British politicians who have changed party affiliation British Conservative MP Natalie Elphicke defects to the opposition Labour Party citing the Sunak governments failure to stop the English Channel migrant crisis. Reuters The United States House of Representatives vote 35943 to keep Mike Johnson as House Speaker defeating an initiative by Marjorie Taylor Greene to have him removed. Al Jazeera Science and technology Researchers at Google DeepMind announce the development of AlphaFold 3 an AI model that can predict the structures of almost all biological molecules and model the interactions between them. Time Nature Sports 2024 Summer Olympics torch relay The ship Belem arrives in Marseille France with the Olympic flame. AP May 7 2024 20240507 Tuesday edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks IsraelHamas war Rafah offensive Israeli forces enter Rafah in a limited operation taking control of the Rafah Border Crossing on the EgyptGaza border. Haaretz AP Reuters At least 27 people are killed by Israeli airstrikes in Rafah. Al Jazeera AP Russian invasion of Ukraine Assassination attempts on Volodymyr Zelenskyy The Security Service of Ukraine says that it detained two Ukrainian government protection unit colonels recruited by Russias Federal Security Service who were planning an assassination of President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and other top Ukrainian officials. Reuters Ukrainian forces launch a missile strike on an oil terminal in Luhansk causing a large fire and injuring at least five workers. Reuters M23 offensive The death toll from rocket strikes on an IDP camp in Goma Democratic Republic of the Congo increases to 18. Reuters Arts and culture The Boy Scouts of America announces the renaming of the organization to Scouting America on February 8 2025 in an effort to make girls feel more welcome. AP Disasters and accidents 2024 Rio Grande do Sul floods The death toll from ongoing heavy flooding in southern Brazil increases to 90 with more than 150000 people left homeless. Reuters Reuters 2 Tornadoes of 2024 Tornado outbreak of May 68 2024 A FedEx warehouse in Portage Michigan United States is destroyed by a tornado. Detroit Free Press International relations International recognition of the State of Palestine The Bahamas formally recognizes Palestine as an independent nation. Eyewitness News Bahamas Law and crime Russian undesirable organizations law Russia declares American nonprofit organization Freedom House an undesirable organization effectively outlawing the group after accusing the group of discrediting the Russian Army and advocating sanctions against Russia. Reuters Two people are killed and 21 others are injured in a mass stabbing at a hospital in Zhenxiong County Yunnan China. A suspect has been detained. AP TikTok and its parent company ByteDance sue the United States government over the Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act alleging that the law is unconstitutional. AP Politics and elections IsraelHamas war protests 2024 proPalestinian protests on university campuses Dutch police end a proPalestinian occupation at the University of Amsterdam. Reuters Fifth inauguration of Vladimir Putin Russian President Vladimir Putin is inaugurated for a fifth sixyear term. Reuters Premiership of John Swinney The Scottish Parliament votes to elect John Swinney as First Minister of Scotland with 64 votes in favour and seven abstentions from the Scottish Greens. BBC News May 6 2024 20240506 Monday edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks IsraelHamas war Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip Israel tells civilians to evacuate parts of eastern Rafah ahead of a planned ground invasion. BBC News The Guardian Hamas states that it has accepted a ceasefire proposal negotiated by Egypt and Qatar. Israel rejects the proposal claiming that the deal does not meet its core demands but confirms that it will continue negotiations in Cairo Egypt. Reuters AP Russian invasion of Ukraine Attacks in Russia during the Russian invasion of Ukraine Six people are killed and 35 others are injured in Ukrainian drone attacks in Belgorod Oblast Russia. The Moscow Times KurdishTurkish conflict Kurdistan Workers Party insurgency The Turkish Air Force carries out airstrikes on Iraqi Kurdistan reportedly killing 16 PKK insurgents. Reuters Arts and culture The 2024 Met Gala takes place at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City with the theme The Garden of Time celebrating the Mets exhibit Sleeping Beauties Reawakening Fashion. Vanity Fair The 2024 Pulitzer Prize ceremony is held with 16 awards in Journalism and 10 in Letters Drama  Music. NPR Business and economy Steward Health Care a forprofit hospital chain in the United States files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. CBS News Disasters and accidents 2024 Rio Grande do Sul floods The death toll from the ongoing heavy flooding in southern Brazil increases to 85. Reuters An under construction apartment complex collapses in George South Africa killing seven people and leaving dozens more missing. AP Five workers are killed and another is critically injured while carrying out maintenance work on a wastewater lifting tank in Palermo Italy. Palermo Today Tornado outbreak of May 68 2024 The U.S. Storm Prediction Center issues a rare high risk convective outlook ahead of an expected significant tornado outbreak in parts of Oklahoma and Kansas. Storm Prediction Center Law and crime An American soldier is arrested in Russia on charges of criminal misconduct. According to US officials the soldier was based in South Korea and had been accused of stealing from a woman. Reuters Politics and elections IsraelHamas war protests 2024 proPalestinian protests on university campuses Japanese students at the University of Tokyo Sophia University Tama Art University International Christian University and Hiroshima University hold solidarity encampments. Arab News Japan Belgian and Dutch students hold solidarity encampments and occupy parts of the Ghent University the University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. Reuters 2024 Chadian presidential election Chad holds presidential elections under its junta contested between incumbent Mahamat Dby and Prime Minister Succs Masra. Reuters Al Jazeera 2024 Scottish National Party leadership election John Swinney is elected leader of the Scottish National Party following the resignation of First Minister Humza Yousaf. The Guardian May 5 2024 20240505 Sunday edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks IsraelHamas war IsraelHezbollah conflict Israeli air raids in Meiss Ej Jabal Lebanon cause massive destruction according to a Lebanese staterun agency killing four civilians and injuring three others. In response Hezbollah fires dozens of Katyusha and Falaq rockets towards Kiryat Shmona Israel. Reuters Three Israeli soldiers are killed and ten civilians are injured when Hamas launches a rocket barrage at the Kerem Shalom border crossing. Times of Israel Reuters Jerusalem Post Hamas announces the end of ceasefire talks held in Cairo Egypt while Israel vows to continue its military operations. AP Russian invasion of Ukraine A woman is killed and 17 other people are injured in Russian attacks on Kharkiv Ukraine. Reuters Terrorism in Australia A man is injured in a stabbing at a car park in Perth Australia. The 
16 yearold perpetrator is killed by police officers and is described as a religious radicalized individual. A possible Islamist motive is behind the attack. DW Arts and culture With the closing performance of the Celebration Tour at Copacabana Beach Rio de Janeiro Brazil American singer Madonna attracts 
1.6  million people in a free concert and breaks the record for the most attended standalone concert by any artist and the alltime highest attended concert by a female artist. Billboard Disasters and accidents 2024 Kenya floods The death toll from the ongoing flooding in Kenya increases to 228. Reuters 2024 Rio Grande do Sul floods The death toll from the ongoing heavy flooding in southern Brazil increases to 78 with more than 100 people still missing. Reuters Politics and elections IsraelHamas war protests 2024 proPalestinian protests on university campuses Virginia State Police dismantle a proPalestine encampment on the University of Virginia campus in Charlottesville and arrest more than 15 students. The Daily Progress 2024 Panamanian general election Panamanians elect their President and members of the National Assembly. Reuters Jos Ral Mulino the standin for former president Ricardo Martinelli wins the presidential election with more than 35 of the vote after his three nearest opponents conceded. He will assume office in July. AP 2024 Togolese parliamentary election The ruling Union for the Republic party wins 108 out of 113 seats in the National Assembly. AP Censorship in Israel The Israeli Cabinet votes to close all Al Jazeera offices in Israel with Israeli authorities later raiding these offices. AP Reuters Thousands of Hungarians protest in Debrecen Hungary against Prime Minister Viktor Orbns rule and policies. Reuters Sports 2024 Formula One World Championship 2024 Miami Grand Prix In auto racing McLaren driver Lando Norris wins his first Formula One race at the Miami Grand Prix. DW 2024 NASCAR Cup Series 2024 AdventHealth 400 Kyle Larson edges out Chris Buescher in the closest finish in NASCAR Cup Series history winning a photo finish by onethousandth 
0.0 01 of a second. AP May 4 2024 20240504 Saturday edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Russian invasion of Ukraine Two people are killed and six others are injured in Russian overnight drone strikes on the Kharkiv and Dnipro regions of Ukraine. Reuters VOA Terrorism in Germany German MEP Matthias Ecke is seriously injured in Dresden Germany in what is suspected to be a politicallymotivated attack against the Social Democratic Party of Germany. Reuters Disasters and accidents 2024 Rio Grande do Sul floods The death toll from ongoing heavy rains in Rio Grande do Sul Brazil increases to 56 with 67 people still missing and nearly 25000 displaced. The airport in Porto Alegre the capital of Rio Grande do Sul suspends all flights until further notice. Reuters At least 14 people are killed by floods and landslides in South Sulawesi Indonesia. Reuters International relations GreeceIsrael relations Israeli police forcibly removes and arrests a guard of the Greek consulate inside the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in East Jerusalem during Holy Saturday. Al Jazeera Anadolu Ajans IndiaUnited States relations Indian Minister of External Affairs S. Jaishankar rejects comments made by US President Joe Biden saying that Indias economic growth was being held back by xenophobia. Reuters International reactions to the IsraelHamas war Palestinian doctor and rector at the University of Glasgow Ghassan AbuSittah is denied entry into France after landing at Charles de Gaulle airport on his way to speak at the French Senate. Last month he was denied entry into Germany. Al Jazeera Law and crime Russian state media reports that a number of officials from Ukraine and NATO countries have been placed on Russias wanted list including Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy former president Petro Poroshenko Ukrainian Ground Forces commander Oleksandr Pavlyuk and Estonian prime minister Kaja Kallas. The Ministry of Internal Affairs neither states what crimes the wanted individuals are being charged with nor clarifies the allegations that are being brought against them. AP Politics and elections 2024 London mayoral election Sadiq Khan wins reelection as mayor of London England with 
43.8  of the vote becoming the first London mayor to be elected to a third term. BBC News Sports 202324 La Liga Real Madrid are crowned champions of La Liga after Barcelonas 42 defeat at Girona. BBC News 202324 Liga F Barcelona are crowned champions of Liga F after winning 14 at Granada. Mundo Deportivo 2024 Kentucky Derby The 1
50 th edition of the Kentucky Derby is held with American thoroughbred racehorse Mystik Dan winning in a photo finish. AP The International Olympics Committee IOC bans Kuwaits Sheikh Ahmad AlFahad AlAhmed AlSabah from all positions within the committee for 15 years over ethics breaches. Sheik Ahmad was previously banned by the IOC for three years in 2023 over his alleged interference in the Olympic Council of Asia elections as well as for forgery and a fake arbitration procedure. Reuters May 3 2024 20240503 Friday edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Kivu conflict M23 offensive The mining town of Rubaya Democratic Republic of the Congo is seized by the March 23 Movement. AP Twelve people are killed and more than 20 others are injured during explosions caused by bombs at two camps for displaced people in Lac Vert and Mugunga in North Kivu Democratic Republic of the Congo. AP Russian invasion of Ukraine Two people are killed and two others are injured by Russian shelling in the city of Kurakhove in the Donetsk oblast. The Moscow Times British Foreign Secretary David Cameron promises 3 billion of annual military aid to Ukraine for as long as it takes. Reuters IsraelHamas war The United States tells Qatar to evict Hamas if the latter obstructs an Israeli hostage deal. The Washington Post Arts and culture US President Joe Biden gives Presidential Medals of Freedom to 19 people. Reuters Business and economy The U.S. Federal Trade Commission gives ExxonMobil approval in the acquisition of Pioneer Natural Resources for 60 billion. CNBC Panama bans First Quantum Minerals from extracting copper following the closure of its Cobre Panam mine last year. Reuters The Globe and Mail Disasters and accidents 2024 Rio Grande do Sul floods The death toll from the heavy rains in southern Brazil increases to 39 people with more than 70 others missing. Reuters A bus plunges into a ravine in Diamer District Pakistan killing 15 people and seriously injuring more than 20 others. AP Thirteen people are killed and 2000 homes are flooded during heavy rains in Haiti mainly in the city of CapHaitien. Rains occurs also in Puerto Rico where planes are landed in San Juan to reroute. AP Mexican authorities locate the bodies of three tourists one American and two Australians in Baja California where they were reported missing in April. Three people have been arrested and are being questioned in relation to the case. Reuters BBC News Law and crime CanadaIndia diplomatic row Three Indian men are arrested in Canada and charged with the murder of Sikh separatist leader Hardeep Singh Nijjar last year. The Canadian government is investigating whether the men had ties to the Indian government. Reuters Toronto Star Capital punishment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo A military court in the Democratic Republic of the Congo sentences eight soldiers to death for cowardice and other crimes. AP U.S. Representative Henry Cuellar is indicted for accepting nearly 600000 worth of bribes from an Azerbaijancontrolled company and a Mexican bank. AP The International Criminal Court warns against outside interference saying that efforts to undermine the courts work must cease immediately. The Washington Post Politics and elections IsraelHamas war protests 2024 proPalestinian protests on university campuses 2024 Sciences Po proPalestinian occupation protest French police evacuate Sciences Po University in Paris and close the university in response to proPalestine protests and building occupations by students. Reuters Le Monde The Houthis offer American students who have been suspended in proPalestine protests education at Sanaa University in Yemen. Reuters Students at the National Autonomous University of Mexico hold proPalestine solidarity encampments and protests. France24 Science and technology Chinese space program The China National Space Administration launches the Change 6 spacecraft from the Wenchang Space Launch Site on a twomonth mission to collect lunar rock and soil samples from the far side of the moon. Reuters AP More May 2024 events... Time 1837 UTCDay 9 May May 2024 S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 More May 2024 events... Wikimedia portal About this page Report a dispute  News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Gaza humanitarian crisis H
5 N1 outbreak Haitian crisis Iceland volcanic eruptions Sudanese refugee crisis United States opioid epidemic Economics Argentine monetary crisis Chinese property sector crisis South African energy crisis United Kingdom costofliving crisis Video game industry layoffs Politics Nigerien crisis South China Sea territorial disputes Texas border and immigration enforcement efforts Protests and strikes Georgian protests IsraelHamas war protests University campus protests United Kingdom industrial disputes and strikes edit section Elections and referendums Recent April 24 North Macedonia President 
1 st round 26 India Lok Sabha 
2 nd phase 29 DR Congo Senate indirect 29 Togo National Assembly May 05 Panama President National Assembly 06 Chad President 07 India Lok Sabha 
3 rd phase 08 North Macedonia President runoff Assembly Upcoming 10 Iran Majlis 
2 nd round 12 Lithuania President Constitutional referendum 13 India Lok Sabha 
4 th phase 19 Dominican Republic President Senate  Chamber of Deputies 20 India Lok Sabha 
5 th phase edit section Trials Recently concluded Vietnam
0 Trng M Lan Ongoing Hong Kong
0 Jimmy Lai Israel
0 Benjamin Netanyahu Kosovo
0 Specialist Chambers Sudan
0 Omar alBashir Sweden
0 Mohammed Hamo United States
0 Donald Trump NY ICC
0 Ali Kushayb Upcoming United States
0 Bob Menendez edit section Sports Athletics 2024 Diamond League Association football 202324 UEFA Champions League 202324 UEFA Europa League 202324 UEFA Europa Conference League 2024 Copa Libertadores 2024 Copa Sudamericana 2024 CONCACAF Champions Cup 202324 Premier League 202324 La Liga 202324 Serie A 202324 Bundesliga 202324 Ligue 1 2024 Major League Soccer season 202324 Womens Super League 2024 Campeonato Brasileiro Srie A Baseball 2024 MLB season Basketball 2024 NBA playoffs International cricket 202325 ICC World Test Championship 2024 IPL season Golf 2024 PGA Tour 2024 LPGA Tour Ice hockey 2024 Stanley Cup playoffs 202324 PWHL season Motorsport 2024 Formula One World Championship 2024 MotoGP World Championship 2024 NASCAR Cup Series 2024 IndyCar Series Rugby union 202324 Premiership Rugby 202324 United Rugby Championship Tennis 2024 ATP Tour 2024 WTA Tour Other sports seasons 202324 curling season 202324 snooker season More details  current sports events edit section Recent deaths May 08 Chris Cannon 08 Ramn Fonseca Mora 08 Pete McCloskey 07 Steve Albini 06 Kristin Hallenga 06 Bernard Pivot 06 Brian Wenzel 05 Jeannie Epper 05 Obi Ezeh 05 Bernard Hill 05 Csar Luis Menotti 04 Frank Stella 03 Dick Rutan 02 Sjoukje Dijkstra 02 Darius Morris 02 Peter Oosterhuis 01 Richard Tandy April 30 Paul Auster 30 Duane Eddy 28 Brian McCardie 28 Vincent OSullivan 27 C. J. Sansom 25 Marla Adams 25 Laurent Cantet 24 Bob Cole 24 Terry Hill 24 Donald Payne Jr. 24 Mike Pinder 23 Terry Carter 23 Ray Chan 23 Frank Field 23 Helen Vendler 21 Terry A. Anderson 20 Andrew Davis 20 Roman Gabriel 20 Lourdes Portillo 19 Daniel Dennett 18 Mandisa 18 Dickey Betts 16 Carl Erskine 16 Bob Graham 15 Whitey Herzog 15 Josip Manoli 15 Derek Underwood 14 Ken Holtzman 14 Beverly LaHaye 13 Faith Ringgold 12 Roberto Cavalli 12 Eleanor Coppola 12 Olga Fikotov 12 Robert MacNeil 11 Fritz Peterson 11 Akebono Tar 11 Park Boram 10 Mister Cee 10 Trina Robbins 10 O. J. Simpson 08 Peter Higgs 08 Ralph Puckett edit section Ongoing conflicts Global War against the Islamic State Africa Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil war Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Ethiopia Amhara conflict Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency Sahel insurgency Mali War Burkina Faso Niger Somalia Civil war Sudan Civil war Americas Ecuador Ecuadorian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war AsiaPacific Afghanistan Islamic StateTaliban conflict Republican insurgency India NaxaliteMaoist insurgency Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Civil war Pakistan Insurgency in Balochistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Philippines NPA rebellion Europe Russia and Ukraine Russian invasion of Ukraine Middle East Iraqi conflict Islamic State insurgency IsraelHamas war Regional spillover IsraelHezbollah conflict Red Sea crisis Syrian civil war IranIsrael conflict Turkish intervention U.S.led intervention Turkey PKK insurgency Yemeni civil war Saudiled intervention See also  List of ongoing proxy wars edit section 2024 events and developments by topic Arts Animation Anime Architecture Comics Film Horror Science fiction Literature Poetry Music Classical Country Hip hop Jazz Latin Metal Rock UK US Korea Radio Television Australia Canada Ireland UK Scotland US Video games Politics and government Elections International leaders Sovereign states Sovereign state leaders Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology Biotechnology Computing Palaeontology Quantum computing and communication Senescence research SpaceAstronomy Spaceflight Sustainable energy research Environment Climate change Weather Heat waves Tornadoes Wildfires Transportation Aviation Rail transport Transportation technology By place Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh The Bahamas Bahrain Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Comoros Congo DR Congo Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Eswatini Equatorial Guinea Fiji Finland France Gabon The Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea GuineaBissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Liechtenstein Libya Lithuania Luxembourg Macau Madagascar Marshall Islands Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Nauru Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino So Tom and Prncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Somalia South Africa Solomon Islands South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works Introductions Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2024. ...more edit section v t e Current events by month 2024 January February March April May 2023 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2022 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December PortalCurrent events Calendars Discover Wikipedia using portals List of all portals The arts portal Biography portal Current events portal Geography portal History portal Mathematics portal Science portal Society portal Technology portal Random portal WikiProject Portals Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePortalCurrenteventsoldid1159745788 Categories All portals 2024 by day Current events portal 2024 Current events WikiProject Current events History portals Hidden categories Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer This page was last edited on 12 June 2023 at 0826 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width