File:Scarab Sekhaenre EA30511 Hall.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileScarab Sekhaenre EA30511 Hall.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. ScarabSekhaenreEA305
11 Hall.jpg 103  154 pixels file size 3 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionScarab Sekhaenre EA30511 Hall.jpg English Light blueglazed steatite scarab faded to brown of type F2 flat inscribed Good god Sekhaenre. Unknown provenience Reign of Sekhaenre Yaqbim 
14 th dynasty Second intermediate period. London British Museum EA 30511. Date 1917 Source Catalogue of Egyptian scarabs etc. in the British Museum vol 1 1913 available notincopyright here. Author Harry Reginald Hall 18731930 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1930 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1917 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2302 8 December 2014 103  154 3 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org XVI dinastia egizia Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileScarabSekhaenreEA305
11 Hall.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width