Nehesy - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Attestation 
3 Reign 
4 See also 
5 References Toggle the table of contents Nehesy 18 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano  Magyar  Portugus Slovenina   Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Nehesy Nehesi Nehsy Nehasi Four sides of the obelisk of pharaoh Nehesy from Raahu. Pharaoh Reign less than a year c. 1705 BC1 Predecessor uncertain Sheshi Ryholt Successor uncertain Khakherewre Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Aasehre 
3 sR The Hall of Council of Ra is great Nomen Nehesy Nsj The Nubian Turin canon Nsj The Nubian Father uncertain Sheshi Ryholt Mother uncertain Tati Ryholt Dynasty 
14 th dynasty Nehesy Aasehre Nehesi was a ruler of Lower Egypt during the fragmented Second Intermediate Period. He is placed by most scholars into the early 
14 th Dynasty as either the second or the sixth pharaoh of this dynasty. As such he is considered to have reigned for a short time c. 1705 BC1 and would have ruled from Avaris over the eastern Nile Delta. Recent evidence makes it possible that a second person with this name a son of a Hyksos king lived at a slightly later time during the late 
15 th Dynasty c. 1580 BC. It is possible that most of the artefacts attributed to the king Nehesy mentioned in the Turin canon in fact belong to this Hyksos prince. Familyedit In his review of the Second Intermediate Period egyptologist Kim Ryholt proposed that Nehesy was the son and direct successor of the pharaoh Sheshi with a Nubian Queen named Tati.1 Egyptologist Darrell Baker who also shares this opinion posits that Tati must have been Nubian or of Nubian descent hence Nehesys name meaning The Nubian.23 The 
14 th dynasty being of Canaanite origin Nehesy is also believed to be of Canaanite descent.2 Four scarabs found including one from Semna in Nubia and three of unknown provenance point to a temporary coregency with his father. Furthermore one scarab mentions Nehesy as Kings son and a further 22 as Eldest king son. Ryholt and Baker thus hold the view that Nehesy became the heir to the throne after the death of his elder brother Prince Ipqu.12 Manfred Bietak and Jrgen von Beckerath believe that Nehesy was the second ruler of the 
14 th dynasty. Bietak further posits that his father was an Egyptian military officer or administrator who funded an independent kingdom centered on Avaris. The kingdom controlled the northeastern Nile Delta at the expense of the concurrent 
13 th dynasty. Attestationedit Scarab of Nehesy now in the Petrie Museum. In spite of a very short reign of around a year Nehesy is the best attested ruler of the 
14 th dynasty. According to Ryholts latest reading of the Turin canon Nehesy is attested there on the 
1 st entry of the 
9 th column Gardiner entry 
8.1  and is the first king of the 
14 th dynasty whose name is preserved on this king list. Nehesy is also attested by numerous contemporary artefacts foremost among which are scarab seals. In addition a fragmentary obelisk from the Temple of Seth in Raahu bears his name together with the inscription kings eldest son. A seated statue later usurped by Merneptah is believed to have originally belonged to Nehesy. It is inscribed with Seth Lord of Avaris and was found in Tell el Muqdam. Nehesy is also attested by two relief fragments inscribed with the names of the king which were unearthed in Tell elDaba in the mid 19
80 s.4 Finally two further stelae are known from TellHabuwa ancient Tjaru one bearing Nehesys birth name the other one the throne of the king Aahsere.5 Thanks to these stelae it was possible to connect the name Nehesy with the throne name Aahsere 
3 sR. Before this discovery Aasehre was regarded as a Hyksos king. In 2005 a further stele of Nehesy was discovered in the fortress city of Tjaru once the starting point of the Way of Horus the major road leading out of Egypt into Canaan. The stele shows a kings son Nehesy offering oil to the god Banebdjedet and also bears an inscription mentioning the kings sister Tany.6 A woman with this name and title is known from other sources around the time of the Hyksos king Apophis who ruled at the end of the Second Intermediate Period c. 1580 BC.7 Daphna BenTor who studied the scarabs of Nehesy concludes that those referring to the kings son Nehesy are different in style from those referring to Nehesy as a king. She thus wonders whether the kings son Nehesy might be a different person from the better known king of the same name. In this situation king Nehesy would still be an early 
14 th Dynasty ruler but some of the attestations attributed to him would in fact belong to a Hyksos prince.8 Reignedit According to the Austrian Egyptologist Manfred Bietak Nehesys 
14 th Dynasty kingdom started during the late 
13 th Dynasty around or just after 1710 BC as a result of the slow disintegration of the 
13 th Dynasty. After this event no single ruler was able to control the whole of Egypt until Ahmose I captured Avaris.9 Alternatively Ryholt believes that the 
14 th dynasty started a century before Nehesys reign c. 1805 BC during Sobekneferus reign. Since the 
13 th dynasty was the direct continuation of the 
12 th he proposes that the birth of the 
14 th is the origin of the distinction between the 
12 th and the 
13 th in the Egyptian tradition.1 Nehesys authority may have encompassed the eastern Delta from Tell elMuqdam to Tel Habuwa where his name occurs but the universal practise of usurpation and quarrying of earlier monuments complicates the picture. Given that the only examples that were certainly found at the sites where they once stood are those from Tell elHabua and Tell elDaba his kingdom may actually have been much smaller.10 After Nehesys death the 
14 th dynasty continued to rule in the Delta region of Lower Egypt with a number of ephemeral or shortlived rulers until 1650 BC when the Hyksos 
15 th Dynasty conquered the Delta.11 Nehesy seems to have been remembered long after his death as several locations in the eastern Delta bore names such as The mansion of Pinehsy and The Place of the Asiatic Pinehsy Pinehsy being a late Egyptian rendering of Nehesy. See alsoedit List of pharaohs Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nehesy.  a b c d e K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 excerpts available online here.  a b c Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 277  Rice Michael 1999. Whos Who in Ancient Egypt. London and New York Routledge. ISBN 0203751523. p. 136  Manfred Bietak Zum Knigreich des 
3 sR in Studien zur altgyptischen Kultur 11 1984 pp. 5975  M. Abd elMaqsoud Un monument du roi 
3 sR Nehsy  TellHabua Sina Nord ASAE 69 1983 35  News of the discovery together with a photograph of the stele here Archived 20100731 at the Wayback Machine.  Mohamed Abd ElMaksoud Dominique Valbelle Tell HbouaTjarou. Lapport de lpigraphie in Revue dgyptologie 56 2005 2005 p. 144  Daphna BenTor Scarabs Chronology and Interconnections Egypt and Palestine in the Second Intermediate Period OBO Series Archaeologica 27 Fribourg Gttingen 2007 ISBN 9783727815935 p. 110  Janine Bourriau The Second Intermediate Period c.16501550 BC in Ian Shaw ed. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt Oxford University Press 2000. pp.190 192  194  Bourriau in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.191  Bourriau in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.194 Preceded by Sheshi Pharaoh of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Khakherewre v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNehesyoldid1216476476 Categories 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Egyptian people of Nubian descent People from Avaris Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 March 2024 at 0658 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width