File:Yakareb scarab.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileYakareb scarab.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. Yakarebscarab.png 127  153 pixels file size 36 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionYakareb scarab.png English Scarab seal of Yakareb YekebBaal second intermediate period possibly 
14 th dynasty or vassal of the Hyksos Date 23 August 2014 203241 Source Flinders Petrie Scarabs and cylinders with names by W. M. Flinders Petrie illustrated by the Egyptian collection in University College London by W. M. Flinders Petrie. available online copyrightfree see pl. xxii 16.H.1 Author Flinders Petrie Scarabs and cylinders with names by W. M. Flinders Petrie illustrated by the Egyptian collection in University College London by W. M. Flinders Petrie. available online copyrightfree see pl. xxii 16.H.1 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 23 August 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1934 23 August 2014 127  153 36 KB IryHor User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt List of pharaohs Yakareb UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Jakareb Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Jakareb Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Yakareb Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileYakarebscarab.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width