Pierre Toussaint Marcel de Serres de Mesplès - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 References 
3 External links Toggle the table of contents Pierre Toussaint Marcel de Serres de Mespls 4 languages Franais Italiano Portugus  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French. April 2012 Click show for important translation instructions. View a machinetranslated version of the French article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate rather than simply copypasting machinetranslated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template there are already 6170 articles in the main category and specifyingtopic will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or lowquality. If possible verify the text with references provided in the foreignlanguage article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at frPierre Toussaint Marcel de Serres de Mespls see its history for attribution. You may also add the template TranslatedfrPierre Toussaint Marcel de Serres de Mespls to the talk page. For more guidance see WikipediaTranslation. Pierre Toussaint Marcel de Serres de Mespls 3 November 1780  22 July 1862 in Montpellier also known as Marcel de Serres was a French caver geologist and naturalist.1 Biographyedit Professor of mineralogy and geology in the faculty of science at Montpellier University from 1809. He occupied this university chair for 53 years. His professional interests included the human and animal fossils of the caves of the south of France. At his end he contributed to the French state a large number of fossils of the region Languedoc.12 He was contemporary with Cuvier either Frdric or Georges .3 The standard author abbreviation M.Serres is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.4 Referencesedit  a b Jean Gouillard 2004. Histoire des entomologistes franais 17501950. dition entirement revue et augmente. Paris Boube.  Montpellier University 2  Tela Botanica et Rseau Ecole et Nature  200420
06 permanent dead link. Retrieved 20120105.  MEMOIR ON THE QUESTION  WHETHER ANY LAND MAMMALS HAVE CEASED TO EXIST SINCE MANS FORMATION  AND WHETHER MAN HAS BEEN CONTEMPORAOUS WITH SPECIES NOW LOST OR APPEARING NO LONGER TO HAVE REPRESENTATIVES ON THE EARTH  pp. 160175 and 285289 of Robert Jameson Royal Society of Edinburgh Wernerian Natural History Society  The Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal exhibiting a view of the progressive discoveries and improvements in the sciences and the arts Volume 16 A. and C. Black 1834. Retrieved 20120105.  International Plant Names Index. M.Serres. External linksedit University of Michigan sound recording 2006 Miami Beach FL  Sony BMG Music A punto de estallar  1843 in French Gognosie des terrains tertiaires ou Tableau des principaux animaux invertbrs des terrains marins tertiaires du midi de la France Knowledge from the earth in the tertiary environment or Tableau of the principle invertebrate animals of the marine landscape of the middle of France.  276 pages Chez PomathioDurville 1829 in French Works by or about Pierre Toussaint Marcel de Serres de Mespls at Internet Archive Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Belgium United States Australia Greece Netherlands Poland Academics International Plant Names Index People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other SNAC IdRef This article about a French scientist is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePierreToussaintMarceldeSerresdeMesplsoldid1144806349 Categories 1780 births 1862 deaths French cavers French geologists French naturalists Sportspeople from Montpellier French scientist stubs Hidden categories All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Botanists with author abbreviations Articles with Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with Botanist identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SNACID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers All stub articles This page was last edited on 15 March 2023 at 1741 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width