File:Aperanati scarab Petrie.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileAperanati scarab Petrie.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. AperanatiscarabPetrie.png 169  165 pixels file size 20 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionAperanati scarab Petrie.png English Picture of a scarab of the Hyksos ruler Aperanati now in the Petrie Museum UC 11655 Second intermediate period. refhttpwww.digitalegypt.ucl.ac.ukchronology
2 interkingsaperanati.html  Heqakhasut Aperanati foreign ruler Aperanati Date 9 January 2014 154759 Source Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XXI n. 
15.1  Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 9 January 2014 media type imagepng checksum 
4 b
8 d
8 ff
04 ed
9 d
6 a
64 c
5 d76
35 f9
63 ee7
55 ecde
11 c determination method SHA1 data size 20844 byte height 165 pixel width 169 pixel File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1522 9 January 2014 169  165 20 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Aperanat Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt List of pharaohs Second Intermediate Period of Egypt UserArchaeobufsandboxhyksos UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org  Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on az.wikipedia.org On beinci slal Misir Usage on ca.wikipedia.org AperAnati Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Aperanat Usage on fr.wikipedia.org AperAnat Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Aperanat Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org XVI dinastia egizia Aperanat Lista dei faraoni Usage on mk.wikipedia.org    Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Aperanat Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Ikalabinglimang dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q561946 TalkQ37110 Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileAperanatiscarabPetrie.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width