Sakir-Har - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestation 
2 Theories 
3 References 
4 Bibliography 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents SakirHar 20 languages   Catal Deutsch Franais  Italiano   Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Tagalog  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh SakirHar Pharaoh HeqaKhasut Predecessor Salitis Successor Khyan Royal titulary Nebty name Tjespedjut zpwt He who subdues the bow people Golden Horus Iritashef Jrjt3.f He who establishes his boundary Nomen HeqaKhasut SakirHar1 q3 
3 swt Skr Hr Ruler of foreign countries Hyksos Reward of Har Monuments A doorjamb from Tell elDaba Dynasty 
15 th Dynasty SakirHar also SekerHar and SkrHr was a Hyksos king of the Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt ruling over some part of Lower Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period possibly in the early 
16 th century BC.2 Attestationedit SakirHar is attested by a single inscription on a doorjamb excavated at Tell elDabaancient Avarisby Manfred Bietak in the 19
90 s.3 Cairo TD8316 The doorjamb now in Cairo under the catalog number Cairo TD8316 bears his partial royal titulary in the manner of the Ancient Egyptian showing his Nebti and Golden Falcon names as well as his nomen.4 The doorjamb reads Horus who... ... The possessor of the Wadjet and Nekhbet diadems who subdues the bow people. The Golden Falcon who establishes his boundary. The hekakhawaset SakirHar.56 Theoriesedit The doorjamb confirms the identity of SakirHar as one of the kings of the Hyksos Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt. His immediate successor could have been the powerful Hyksos ruler Khyan if he was the third Hyksos king of this dynasty although SakirHars precise position within this dynasty has not yet been established firmly. The name SakirHar may translate as Reward of Har7 or may alternatively derive from the Amorite SikruHaddu meaning The memory of Hadad8 in which case SakirHar may have reigned after Khyan and Yanassi and immeditely before Apophis. The fact that SakirHar bears an Egyptian titulary as well as the title of hekakhawaset Hyksos suggests that the line of kings to which SakirHar belongs may have deliberately taken this title for themselves as had been proposed earlier by scholars including Donald Redford.9 Bietak shared this opinion writing that although this new term hekakhawaset perhaps was originally applied by the Egyptians in a disparaging way to the new rulers of the land the rulers themselves employed Hyksos as an official rulers title.10 Research has since then refuted the idea that the Egyptians originated the term further proving that the title of hekakhawaset Ruler of Foreign Lands was invented by the Hyksos rulers2 possibly to emphasize their origins or more explicitly their Amorite affiliation.11 Referencesedit  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen  Mnchner gyptologische Studien vol 46 Mainz am Rhein Verlag Philipp von Zabern 1999. ISBN 3805323107 pp.11617.  a b Candelora 2017 p. 204.  Bietak  Hein 1994 pp. 151152 see also fig. no. 126.  Ryholt 1997 p. 120.  Ryholt 1997 p. 123.  Booth 2005 p. 31.  Ryholt 1997 pp. 127128.  Bietak 2007 p. 753.  Redford 1970 p. 13.  Bietak 1996 p. 113.  Candelora 2017 p. 216. Bibliographyedit Booth Charlotte 2005. The Hyksos period in Egypt. Shire Egyptology. Vol. 27. Shire Princes Risborough. ISBN 9780747806387. Bietak Manfred 2007. O est le palais des Hykss   propos des fouilles  Tell elDabca et Ezbet Helmi. Comptes rendus des sances de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et BellesLettres in French 749780. Candelora Danielle 2017. Defining the Hyksos A Reevaluation of the Title HqA xAswt and Its Implications for Hyksos Identity. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 53 203221. doi
10.5 9
13 jarce.
53.2 017.a010. Bietak Manfred Hein I. eds. 1994. Pharaonen und Fremde  Dynastien im Dunkel Sonderaustellung des Historischen Museums der Stadt Wien in Zusammenarbeit mit dem gyptologischen Institut der Universitt Wien und dem sterreichischen Archologischen Institut Kairo Rathaus Wien Volkshalle 8. Sept.  23. Okt. 1994. Vienna.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link Bietak Manfred 1996. Avaris the Capital of the Hyksos. Recent Excavations at Tell elDaba. Raymond and Beverly Sackler Foundation distinguished lecture in Egyptology. Vol. 1. London British Museum Press for the Trustees of the British Museum. ISBN 0714109681. Redford D. 1970. The Hyksos Invasion in History and Tradition. Orientalia. 39 1. Ryholt Kim 1997. The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c. 18001550 B.C. CNI publications 20. Carsten Niebuhr Institute of Near Eastern Studies University of Copenhagen  Museum Tusculanum Press. ISBN 9788772894218. External linksedit The SakirHar doorjamb inscription slide 12 Preceded by Salitis Pharaoh of Egypt Fifteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Khyan v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSakirHaroldid1142410493 Categories 
17 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr CS1 maint location missing publisher Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 2 March 2023 at 0638 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width