Apepi - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Praenomina 
2 Reign 
3 Family 
4 See also 
5 References Toggle References subsection 
5.1 Sources 
6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Apepi 31 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Apepi pharaoh Ruler of Lower Egypt during the Fifteenth Dynasty Apepi Ipepi Apophis Scarab bearing the final praenomen of the Hyksos pharaoh Apepi Pharaoh Reign 3540 years ca. 1575 BC  1540 BC1 Predecessor Khyan Successor Khamudi Royal titulary Horus name Seheteptawy S.tp t
3 wj He who pacifies the two lands Prenomen Praenomen Nebkhepeshre NbpR Ra is the lord of strength Second prenomen Aaqenenre 
3 qnjnR Great is the force of Ra Third prenomen Aauserre 
3 wsrR Great is the power of Ra Nomen Ipepi Consort Tani possibly2 Children prince Apepi Herit Dynasty 
15 th Dynasty For the Fourteenth Dynasty ruler see Apepi. For the deity sometimes called Apepi or Apophis see Apep. Apepi also Ipepi Egyptian language ippi Apophis Greek  regnal names Nebkhepeshre Aaqenenre and Aauserre was a Hyksos ruler of Lower Egypt during the Fifteenth Dynasty and the end of the Second Intermediate Period. According to the Turin Canon of Kings he reigned over the northern portion of Egypt for forty years during the early half of the 
16 th century BCE.3 Although officially only in control of the Lower Kingdom Apepi in practice dominated the majority of Egypt during the early portion of his reign. He outlived his southern rival Kamose but not Ahmose I.4 While Apepi exerted suzerainty over and maintained peaceful trade relations with the native Theban Seventeenth Dynasty to the south the other kingdom eventually regained control.4 The Hyksos were driven out of Egypt no more than fifteen years after his death.5 Kamose the last king of the Seventeenth Dynasty refers to Apepi as a Chieftain of Retjenu in a stela that implies a Canaanite background for this Hyksos king.6 Praenominaedit NebkhepeshRe nb p r AaqenenRe 3 n n r and AauserRe 3 wsr r are three praenomina throne names used by this same ruler during various parts of his reign.7 While some Egyptologists once believed that there were two separate kings who bore the name Apepi namely Aauserre Apepi and Aaqenenre Apepi it is now recognized that Khamudi succeeded Apepi at Avaris and that there was only one king named Apepi or Apophis.89 Nebkhepeshre Re is the Lord of Strength was Apepis first prenomen towards the middle of his reign this Hyksos ruler adopted a new prenomen Aaqenenre The strength of Re is great.10 In the final decade or so of his reign Apepi chose Aauserre as his last prenomen. While the prenomen was altered there is no difference in the translation of both Aaqenenre and Aauserre. His Horus name Sheteptawy is attested only twice once together with AqenenRe. It appears on an offering table11 and on blocks found at Bubastis.12 Reignedit Electrum dagger handle of a soldier of Hyksos Pharaoh Apepi illustrating the soldier hunting with a short bow and sword. Inscriptions The perfect god the lord of the two lands Nebkhepeshre Apepi and Follower of his lord Nehemen found at a burial at Saqqara.13 Now at the Luxor Museum.1415 Rather than building his own monuments Apepi generally usurped the monuments of previous pharaohs by inscribing his own name over two sphinxes of Amenemhat II and two statues of Imyremeshaw.16 Apepi is thought to have usurped the throne of northern Egypt after the death of his predecessor Khyan since the latter had designated his son Yanassi to be his successor on the throne as a foreign ruler.17 He was succeeded by Khamudi the last Hyksos ruler. Ahmose I who drove out the Hyksos kings from Egypt established the 
18 th Dynasty.16 In the Ramesside era Apepi is recorded as worshiping Seth in a monolatric way King Apophis chose for his Lord the god Seth. He didnt worship any other deity in the whole land except Seth.18 Jan Assmann argues that because the Ancient Egyptians could never conceive of a lonely god lacking personality Seth the desert god who was worshiped exclusively represented a manifestation of evil19 and scholars generally believe the account of Apepis alleged monotheism is a veiled condemnation of the more infamous attempt by the later pharaoh Akhenaten to elevate the status of his patron sun god Aten.20 There is some discussion in Egyptology concerning whether Apepi also ruled Upper Egypt. There are indeed several objects with the kings name most likely coming from Thebes and Upper Egypt. These include a dagger with the name of the king bought on the art market in Luxor. There is an axe of unknown provenance where the king is called beloved of Sobek lord of Sumenu. Sumenu is nowadays identified with Mahamid Qibli about 24 kilometers south of Thebes and there is a fragment of a stone vessel found in a Theban tomb. For all these objects it is arguable that they were traded to Upper Egypt.21 More problematic is a block with the kings name found at Gebelein. The block had been taken as evidence for building activity of the king in Upper Egypt and hence seen as proof that the Hyksos also ruled in Upper Egypt. However the block is not very big and many scholars argue today that it might have reached Gebelein after the looting of the Hyksos capital and is no proof of a Hyksos reign in Upper Egypt.21 The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus is dated to Year 33 of Apepi or Apophis while the Turin Kinglist assigns 40 years to a Hyksos ruler who is most likely Apophis22 although his name is lost in a lacuna. A scarab bearing the prenomen of this king was discovered in Tell elAjjul Gaza Strip and catalogued by Flinders Petrie in 19
33.2 3 Familyedit A Sphinx of Amenemhat III reinscribed in the name of Apepi one of the socalled Hyksos Sphinxes Offering table with the praenomen Aaqenenre Cairo CG23073 Two sisters are known Tani and Ziwat. Tani is mentioned on a door of a shrine in Avaris and on the stand of an offering table Berlin 22487. She was the sister of the king. Ziwat is mentioned on a bowl found in Spain.24 A Prince Apepi named on a seal now in Berlin is likely to have been his son. Apepi also had a daughter named Herit a vase belonging to her was found in a tomb at Thebes sometimes regarded as the one of king Amenhotep I25 which might indicate that at some point his daughter was married to a Theban king.4 The vase however could have been an item which was looted from Avaris after the eventual victory over the Hyksos by Ahmose I. See alsoedit List of pharaohs Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Apophis.  Thomas Schneider Ancient Egyptian Chronology  Edited by Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss and David A. Warburton available online see p. 492  Tyldesley Joyce 2006. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. United Kingdom Thames  Hudson. p. 79. ISBN 0500051453.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988 p.189.  a b c Grimal p.189  Grimal p.194  Ryholt K. S. B. BlowJacobsen Adam 1997. The Political Situation in Egypt During the Second Intermediate Period C. 18001550 B.C. Museum Tusculanum Press. p. 131. ISBN 9788772894218.  Apophis Titulary Archived June 2 2008 at the Wayback Machine  Kim Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 B.C. by Museum Tusculanum Press. 1997. p.125  Kings of the Second Intermediate Period University College London scroll down to the 
15 th dynasty  ApophisTitulary Archived June 2 2008 at the Wayback Machine  Cairo Catalogue Generale 23073 Kamal Tables doffrandes I 61  London BM 339  OConnor 2009 pp. 116117.  Wilkinson Toby 2013. Lives of the Ancient Egyptians. Thames and Hudson Limited. p. 96. ISBN 9780500771624.  Daressy George 1900. Annales du Service des antiquits de lEgypte. Le Caire  Impr. de lInstitut franais darchologie orientale. pp. 115 ff.  a b Grimal p.193  Ryholt p.256  Assmann 2008 pp. 48 151 n. 25 translating The Quarrel of Apophis and Seqenenre Papyrus Sallier I 
1.2 3 British Museum No. 10185. Gardiner Alan H. ed. 1932. The Quarrel of Apophis and Senentr. LateEgyptian Stories. Bibliotheca Aegptiaca. Vol. I. Bruxelles Fondation Egyptologique Reine Elisabeth. p. 85.  Assmann 2008 pp. 4748.  Manassa Colleen November 2013. Imagining the Past Historical Fiction in New Kingdom Egypt. Oxford University Press. pp. 49. ISBN 9780199982226.  a b D. Polz Die HyksosBlcke aus Gebeln zur Prsenz der Hyksos in Obergypten in E. Czerny I. Hein H. Hunger D. Melman A. Schwab editors Timelines Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak Leuven Paris dudley MA ISBN 9789042917309 p. 244245  Ryholt  Flinders Petrie 1933. Ancient Gaza Chapter III Scarabs Tell El Ajjul London 1933.cite book CS1 maint date and year link  Ryholt p.256267  H. Carter Report on the tomb of Zeserkara Amenhetep I discovered by the Earl of Carnavon in 1914 in Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 3 1916 pl. XXI.1 Sourcesedit Assmann Jan 2008. Of God and Gods Egypt Israel and the rise of monotheism. University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 9780299225506. OConnor David 2009. Egypt the Levant and the Aegean From the Hyksos Period to the Rise of the New Kingdom. In Aruz Joan Benzel Kim Evans Jean M. eds.. Beyond Babylon  art trade and diplomacy in the second millennium B.C. Yale University Press. pp. 108122. ISBN 9780300141436. Further readingedit Goedicke Hans 1986. The Quarrel of Apophis and Seqenenrec. San Antonio Van Siclen. pp. 1011 31. ISBN 0933175
06 X. Goldwasser Orly 2006. King Apophis of Avaris and the Emergence of Monotheism. In Czerny Ernst Hein Irmgard Hunger Hermann Melman Dagmar Schwab Angela eds.. Timelines Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak. Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta. Vol. 1
49 II. Leuven Peeters. pp. 129133. ISBN 9789042917309. Preceded by Khyan Pharaoh of Egypt Fifteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Khamudi v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleApepioldid1209212632 Categories 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint date and year Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Greeklanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 long volume value This page was last edited on 20 February 2024 at 2057 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width