File:Cylinder Khondy Petrie.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileCylinder Khondy Petrie.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. CylinderKhondyPetrie.jpg 378  252 pixels file size 18 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionCylinder Khondy Petrie.jpg English Impression of a Levantine cylinder seal bearing an ancient Egyptian royal name. Once tentatively read as Khondy and attributed to a Hyksos ruler of the Second Intermediate Period it was also attributed to Neferkare Khendu of the First Intermediate Period and in more recent times to the last of the Hyksos kings Khamudi. Today is likely that the cylinder cartouche contains some spacefiller hieroglyphs is datable to the late Middle Kingdom or early Hyksos period and that it comes from Byblos. Green jasper 
18 th
17 th century BCE now in the Petrie Museum UC 11616. More information here. Date 21 April 2014 104712 Source Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XIX Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic     Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 21 April 2014 media type imagejpeg checksum e25938
00 fd
00 f4
46 f
7 c
2 ea4
78 db
0 b9
80 ddf
6 e
2 e6 determination method SHA1 data size 18308 byte height 252 pixel width 378 pixel File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0913 21 April 2014 378  252 18 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Khamudi List of pharaohs Neferkare Khendu Second Intermediate Period of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on am.wikipedia.org  Usage on ar.wikipedia.org      Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on az.wikipedia.org On beinci slal Misir Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Khamudi Usage on el.wikipedia.org  Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Jamudy Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Khamudy Usage on fa.wikipedia.org  Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org   Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Noferkar Hendu Hamudi Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Khamudi Usage on it.wikipedia.org Manetone Khamudi Ahhotep I Antico Egitto Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  Usage on mk.wikipedia.org      Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Chamoedi Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Neferkare Chendu Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Hamudi Neferkare IV. Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  Usage on ta.wikipedia.org  Usage on th.wikipedia.org      Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Ikalabinglimang dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Khamudi View more global usage of this file. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileCylinderKhondyPetrie.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width