Sekhemre Sementawy Djehuty - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Chronological position 
2 Attestations 
3 References Toggle the table of contents Sekhemre Sementawy Djehuty 20 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Slovenina Tagalog   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Djehuti Egyptian Pharaoh For ancient Egyptians named Djehuty see Djehuty. Sekhemre Sementawy Djehuty Djehuty Djehuti Dhout Dhuti Tahuti Tehuti Thuty Djehuti on a block from Edfu1 Pharaoh Reign 3 years c. 1650 BC Predecessor uncertain name lost in a lacuna of the Turin canon Ryholt Sobekemsaf I von Beckerath Successor Sobekhotep VIII Ryholt Seankhenre Mentuhotepi von Beckerath Royal titulary Horus name Itjemnekhtu Jjmntw He who conquers with force Golden Horus Weserkhau Wsrw He whose apparitions are mighty Karnak king list Sekhemre Sementawy SmRsmnt3.wj The power of Ra who establishes the two lands Prenomen Praenomen Sekhemre Sementawy SmRsmnt3.wj The might of Ra which reestablishes the two lands2 Nomen Djehuty wtj Thoth Consort queen Mentuhotep Dynasty uncertain 
16 th Dynasty23 or 
17 th Dynasty Sekhemre Sementawy Djehuty was a minor king reigning over parts of Upper Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period. Djehuty is thought to be listed in the first entry of the 
11 th column of the Turin canon credited with a reign of 3 years. According to Egyptologists Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker he was succeeded by Sobekhotep VIII.23 He may have been the second king23 of the Theban 
16 th Dynasty Alternatively he may be a king of the late 
13 th Dynasty4 or the fourth king of the 
17 th Dynasty.5 Chronological positionedit Djehutis dynasty remains debated. Indeed on this point the Turin Canon is open to interpretations. There are several kings recorded with the name Sekhemre... and the damage to the original document does not preserve the complete name. As a result Djehuti named Sekhemre Sementawy may in principle correspond to any Sekhemre... preserved on the king list i.e. may be a ruler of the 
13 th 
16 th and even 
17 th Dynasty. The Egyptologists Darrell Baker and Kim Ryholt believe that he was part of the 
16 th Dynasty which controlled the Theban region after 1650 BC.3 Alternatively two studies by Claude Vandersleyen and Christina Geisen date Djehutis reign to the very end of the Memphite 
13 th Dynasty.46 Geisens datation relies on stylistic considerations of his queens coffin which however Stephen Quirke argues uses unproven assumptions.7 An older theory of Jrgen von Beckerath whose conclusions are shared by Hans Stock contends that Djehuti was a ruler of the early 
17 th Dynasty which arose in Upper Egypt after the collapse of 
16 th Dynasty following the shortlived Hyksos conquest of Thebes. This theory is supported by the discovery of the tomb of Djehutis queen Mentuhotep which is located in Dra Abu elNaga a necropolis usually associated with the 
17 th Dynasty. Scholars such as Chris Bennett however point out that this does not necessarily mean that Djehuti was buried in Dra Abu elNaga as well.4 Some Egyptologists proposed that Djehuti was married to a granddaughter of the vizier Ibiaw who served under the 
13 th Dynasty king Wahibre Ibiau c. 17121701 BC and was thus most likely two generations removed from this king.89 In more recent times however it was pointed out that the link between Ibiaw and Djehutis consort Mentuhotep is still unproven and that the proposed temporal correlation between Wahibre Ibiau and Djehuti remains conjectural.10 Attestationsedit Cosmetics box of queen Mentuhotep wife of Djehuti. The box may have been intended to be the kings canopic chest. Djehuti is attested on the Turin Royal Canon and the Karnak king list. All of Djehutis contemporary attestions come from a 145 kilometres 90 mi long stretch of the Nile valley from Deir elBallas in the north to Edfu in the south.2 This roughly corresponds to the territory in the sphere of influence of the rulers of the 
16 th dynasty.2 Djehutis nomen and prenomen are known from a single block discovered by Flinders Petrie in Deir elBallas. A painted block bearing Djehutis cartouche and showing him wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt  far beyond his sphere of influence  was uncovered in Edfu14 and otherwise Djehuti is only attested by objects from his wifes burial. Queen Mentuhoteps tomb was found intact in 1822 and her now lost coffin was inscribed with one of the earliest cases of the texts from the Book of the Dead. Mentuhoteps cosmetic box bears Djehutis nomen prenomen and cartouche together with funerary formulae and an inscription revealing that the box was a gift from the king.2 It has been suggested that the unattributed Southern South Saqqara pyramid may have been built for Djehuti. This hypothesis is based on a fragmentary inscription found within the pyramid and reading Weserkha... a possible reference to Weserkhau i.e. Djehutis Golden Horus name.11 Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Djehuti.  a b M. von Falck S. Klie A. Schulz Neufunde ergnzen Knigsnamen eines Herrschers der 2. Zwischenzeit. In Gttinger Miszellen 87 1985 p. 1523  a b c d e f g Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 pp. 9091  a b c d K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 excerpts available online here.  a b c d Christina Geisen Zur zeitlichen Einordnung des Knigs Djehuti an das Ende der 13. Dynastie Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur Bd. 32 2004 pp. 149157  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Mnchner gyptologische Studien Heft 49 Mainz  P. von Zabern 1999 ISBN 3805325916 see p. 126127.  Claude Vandersleyen Rahotep Sbekemsaf 
1 er et Djhouty Rois de la 
13 e Dynastie. In Revue de lgyptologie RdE 44 1993 p. 189191.  S. Quirke Review von Geisen Die Totentexte. In Journal of Ancient Near Eastern Religions. Nr. 5 2005 p. 228238.  Labib Habachi The Family of Vizier Ibi and His Place Among the Viziers of the Thirteenth Dynasty in Studien zur altgyptischen Kultur 11 1984 pp. 113126.  Ryholt Note 555 page 152  W. Grajetzki Court Officials of the Egyptian Middle Kingdom London 2009 p. 40.  Christoffer Theis Zum Eigentmer der Pyramide Lepsius XLVI  SAK S 6 im Sden von Sakkara Gttinger Miszellen 218 2008 pp. 101105 Preceded by Unknown Pharaoh of Egypt Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt Succeeded by Sobekhotep VIII v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSekhemreSementawyDjehutyoldid1216885998 Categories 
17 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Sbef before parameter includes the word unknown This page was last edited on 2 April 2024 at 1525 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width