File:Dagger Sewadjenre Petrie.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileDagger Sewadjenre Petrie.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 180  598 pixels. Other resolution 230  764 pixels. Original file 230  764 pixels file size 27 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionDagger Sewadjenre Petrie.png English Drawing of an ancient Egyptian dagger bearing the name of pharaoh Sewadjenre Nebiryraw I. Copper from Hu Diospolis Parva cemeteries tomb Y 237. Reign of Nebiryraw I 
16 th or 
17 th Dynasty Second Intermediate Period. Cairo JE 33702. Date 1901 Source Diospolis Parva the cemeteries of Abadiyeh and Hu 18989 pl. 32 n. 17 Author Flinders Petrie 1853  1942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1901 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1226 22 November 2015 230  764 27 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Nebiryraw I UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org 1  Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Nebiryraw I Usage on es.wikipedia.org Nebirau I Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Nebirau I.a Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Souadjenr Nebiryraou UtilisateurBaptisteGrandGrand Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org I. Nebirierau Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Nebiriau I Usage on it.wikipedia.org Nebirau I Lista dei faraoni Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   I Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Nebirirav I. Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Nebiryraw I Usage on www.wikidata.org Q888284 TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Nebiriau 
1 k Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.8  dpc Vertical resolution 
37.8  dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileDaggerSewadjenrePetrie.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width