File:Statuette Harpocrates Mariette.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStatuette Harpocrates Mariette.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. StatuetteHarpocratesMariette.jpg 297  445 pixels file size 16 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStatuette Harpocrates Mariette.jpg English Bronze statuette of Harpocrates. Inscriptions on the four sides of the base Binpu visible here a brother of the 
18 th Dynasty king Ahmose The good god Sewadjenre true of voice generally assumed to be the 
16 th Dynasty king Sewadjenre Nebiryraw I Ahmose The good god Neferkare true of voice sometimes referred as the 
16 th Dynasty king Nebiryraw II. Provenance unknown. The statuette was most likely made very much later of the time the aforementioned people had lived. Date 1872 Source Monuments divers recueillis en Egypte et en Nubie Tables  Paris 1872 pl. 48 Author Auguste Mariette  Gaston Maspero eds. Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1881 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1872 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2054 4 December 2015 297  445 16 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Nebiriau II Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Nebiryraw II Usage on es.wikipedia.org Nebirau II Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Nebirau II.a Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Nebiryraou II Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org II. Nebirierau Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Nebirau II Lista dei faraoni Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  II Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Nebirirav II. Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Nebiriau II Usage on www.wikidata.org Q3782189 TalkQ37110 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileStatuetteHarpocratesMariette.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width