File:Statuette Sobekemsaf Petrie b.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStatuette Sobekemsaf Petrie b.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. StatuetteSobekemsafPetrieb.png 210  557 pixels file size 151 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStatuette Sobekemsaf Petrie b.png English Statuette of pharaoh SekhemreShedtawy Sobekemsaf II. Fine grained dark green basalt purchased by Petrie in Thebes and probably originated from here. H. 115 inches to the neck. Reign of Sobekemsaf II 
17 th Dynasty Second Intermediate Period. Date 1897 Source A History of Egypt I p. 223. Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1897 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2219 8 January 2016 210  557 151 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Sobekemsaf II UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org 2  Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on arz.wikipedia.org    Usage on az.wikipedia.org On yeddinc slal Misir Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique SekhemrShedtaouy Sobekemsaf Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XVII dinasta exipcia Usage on hy.wikipedia.org       Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 1 Usage on mk.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Sedemnajsta egipanska dinastija Sobekemsaf II. Usage on ta.wikipedia.org    Usage on th.wikipedia.org   2  FrameHotep 212223  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi II. Sobekemzaf Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Sobekemsaf II Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.8  dpc Vertical resolution 
37.8  dpc File change date and time 2132 7 January 2016 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileStatuetteSobekemsafPetrieb.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width