File:Rahotep stele BM Budge.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileRahotep stele BM Budge.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 607  599 pixels. Other resolutions 243  240 pixels  486  480 pixels  774  764 pixels. Original file 774  764 pixels file size 612 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionRahotep stele BM Budge.png English Drawing of a limestone stele depicting the pharaoh the man with raised arms Sekhemrewahkhaw Rahotep offering to Osiris for two deceased an officer and a priest behind the pharaoh. The stela is dated to Year 1 of Rahotep early 
17 th dynasty Second intermediate period. British Museum 283 registr. no. 833. Date 17 January 2014 124512 Source Hieroglyphic texts from Egyptian stelae c. in the British Museum Part IV London Printed by order of the Trustees by Harrison and Sons 1913 available notincopyright here pl. 24. Author E. A. Wallis Budge 18571934 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1934 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1217 17 January 2014 774  764 612 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Sekhemre Wahkhau Rahotep Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org  Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on arz.wikipedia.org      Usage on az.wikipedia.org On yeddinc slal Misir Usage on de.wikipedia.org Rahotep Pharao Usage on es.wikipedia.org Rahotep Usage on fa.wikipedia.org    Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique SekhemrOuahkhou Rhotep Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Rahotep fra Usage on hy.wikipedia.org       Usage on it.wikipedia.org Rahotep Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  Usage on no.wikipedia.org Rahotep Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Rahotep Sedemnajsta egipanska dinastija Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Rahotep Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.8  dpc Vertical resolution 
37.8  dpc File change date and time 1143 17 January 2014 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileRahotepsteleBMBudge.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width