Sekhemre Wahkhau Rahotep - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
1.1 Petrie Museum UC 14327 
1.2 BM EA 833 
1.3 Bow of Kings Son Ameny 
2 NonContemporary Attestations 
3 Theories 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Sekhemre Wahkhau Rahotep 22 languages  Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano  Magyar   Norsk bokml  Slovenina Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Tagalog   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Rahotep Egyptian pharaoh For the prince of the 
4 th Dynasty see Prince Rahotep. Sekhemre Wahkhau Rahotep Rehotep Rahotpe Rehotpe Sekhemuahkhara Sekhemre Wakau1 Rahotep raising arms while offering to Osiris. Stele BM EA 833 drawn by Wallis Budge.2 Pharaoh Reign 1580 BC  1576 BC3 Successor Sobekemsaf I or Nebmaatre Royal titulary Horus name WahAnkh nw3 Enduring of life Nebty name UserRenput Wsrrnpwt Powerful in years Golden Horus Wadj... biknbww3... The Golden Falcon who regains strength ... Karnak king list Sekhemrewahkhau43 SmRw
3 w Mighty is Re enduring of apparitions Prenomen Praenomen SekhemreWahkhau smr w
3 aw Mighty is Re enduring of apparitions Nomen Rahotep R tp Ra is satisfied Dynasty 
17 th Dynasty Sekhemre Wahkhau Rahotep was an Egyptian pharaoh who reigned during the Second Intermediate Period when Egypt was ruled by multiple kings. The Egyptologists Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker believe that Rahotep was the first king of the 
17 th Dynasty.13 Attestationsedit Rahotep seem to be attested at Abydos and Coptos. Petrie Museum UC 143
27 edit Rahotep is known from a stele found at Coptos reporting the restoration of the temple of Min.56 The stele reads78 year ... under the Majesty of Horus Wahankh Two Ladies Weserrenput Horus of Gold Wad ... ... Son of Re Rahotep given life. His Majesty said to his nobles and the courtiers who were in his following ... the temple ... My Majesty found concerning my father Min who is at the head of all gods that his gates and doors had fallen into ruin They did obeisance  before his Majesty and said What your ka commands shall come to pass O king our lord. It is Hu indeed who is in your mouth and Sia who is in your heart. PtahSokar ... the gods fashioned you ... that you might act for them to found their temples ... You have united Upper and Lower Egypt. May your heart be joyful upon the Horusthrone of the living ... You are ruling what the sun encircles ... the god ... of the people the refuge of all...night ... in sleeping ... the gods in seeking what is beneficial to this land. Re has placed you as his image ... what is removed ... as it was in the time of your fathers the kings who followed Horus. Never was ... lost in my time ... which existed formerly. I made monuments for the gods ... wonders which were brought ... BM EA 8
33 edit A limestone stele which shows Rahotep making an offering to Osiris for two deceased an officer and a priest.910 The stela appears to have been made at a workshop at Abydos. Other stelae produced by this workshop belong to king Sekhemrekhutawy Pantjeny and king Wepwawetemsaf. All three kings reigned therefore quite close in time.11 Bow of Kings Son Amenyedit Rahotep is mentioned on a bow of a kings son Ameny dedicated to the service of Min in all his feasts at Coptos.312 NonContemporary Attestationsedit In the Thutmosid Period he is mentioned in the Karnak King List 48 as Sekhemre Wahkhaure smr ww between Khaankhre Sobekhotep and Sewahenre Senebmiu. In the Ramesside Period he is not mentioned in the Turin King List. In the late New Kingdom tale Khonsuemheb and the Ghost the protagonist encounters a ghost who claims to have been in life Overseer of the treasuries of king Rahotep. However the ghost also claims to have died in regnal Year 14 of a later king Mentuhotep. These statements seem to contradict each other since none of Rahoteps successors named Mentuhotep are known to have reigned for so long thus making the identification of both these kings problematic.13 Theoriesedit Two scarabs bearing the inscription Rahotep believed by Flinders Petrie to be referring to this king.14 While Ryholt and Baker propose that Rahotep was the first king of the 
17 th Dynasty Jrgen von Beckerath sees him as the second king of that dynasty.1516 Alternatively Claude Vandersleyen has tentatively dated Rahotep to the 
13 th Dynasty on the grounds that he believes Rahotep to be related to Sobekemsaf I which Vandersleyen also dates to the 
13 th Dynasty because of the quality and number of statues attributable to him.17 Baker deems these arguments slim and rejected by most scholars.1 If he was indeed a ruler of the early 
17 th Dynasty Rahotep would have controlled Upper Egypt as far north as Abydos.1 According to Ryholts reconstruction of the Second Intermediate Period Rahoteps reign would have taken place shortly after the collapse of the 
16 th Dynasty with the conquest of Thebes by the Hyksos and their subsequent withdrawal from the region. In the wake of the conflict the Hyksos would have looted and destroyed temples and palaces.1 Rahotep consequently boasts of restorations he performed in temples at Abydos and Coptos.18 In Abydos he had the enclosure walls of the temple of Osiris renewed and in Coptos he restored the temple of Min of which gates and doors have fallen into ruins.1 This chronology of events is debated and some scholars contest that Thebes was ever conquered by the Hyksos. Rather they believe the kings of Upper Egypt could have been vassals of the Hyksos. Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rahotep pharaoh.  a b c d e f Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 341342  Wallis Budge Hieroglyphic texts from Egyptian stelae c. in the British Museum Part IV London Printed by order of the Trustees by Harrison and Sons 1913 available notincopyright here pl. 24.  a b c d K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 excerpts available online here.  Number 54 on the Karnak king list  London Petrie Museum UC 14327  H.M. Stewart Egyptian Stelae Reliefs and Paintings from the Petrie Collection. Part Two Archaic to Second Intermediate Period Warminster 1979 1718 no. 78  Image of the stele with translation  Stele on the Petrie Museum catalogue  London British Museum EA 833  Stele on the British Museum catalogue  Marcel Mare A sculpture workshop at Abydos from the late Sixteenth or early Seventeenth Dynasty in Marcel Mare editor The Second Intermediate period ThirteenthSeventeenth Dynasties Current Research Future Prospects Leuven Paris Walpole MA. 2010 ISBN 9789042922280. p. 247 268  O. D. Berlev Un don du roi Rahotep OLP 67 19751976 p. 3141 pl II.  Simpson William K. 1973. The Literature of Ancient Egypt. New Haven and London Yale University Press. ISBN 0300017111. pp. 13940  Flinders Petrie Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XXIII  Jrgen von Beckerath Untersuchungen zur politischen Geschichte der Zweiten Zwischenzeit in gypten Glckstadt 1964  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des pharaonischen gyptens Mnchner gyptologische Studien 46. Mainz am Rhein 1997  Claude Vandersleyen Rahotep Sbekemsaf Ier et Djhouty rois de la 
13 e Dynastie Revue dgyptologie  Janine Bourriau Ian Shaw edit The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt Oxford University Press 2000. p.205 ISBN 9780192804587 Preceded by Unknown Pharaoh of Egypt Seventeenth Dynasty Succeeded by Sobekemsaf I v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSekhemreWahkhauRahotepoldid1194829739 Categories 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Sbef before parameter includes the word unknown This page was last edited on 10 January 2024 at 2321 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width