Nubkheperre Intef - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Rise to power 
2 Intefs father 
3 Building program 
4 Nubkheperre Intefs timeline 
5 Tomb Robbery and Rediscovery 
6 References 
7 Bibliography 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Nubkheperre Intef 25 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands   Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian king Nubkheperre Intef Intef VI Nebkheperre Intefs wooden Rishi coffin in the British Museum Pharaoh Reign c.1571 to mid15
60 s BC1 Predecessor SekhemreWepmaat Intef Successor SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Royal titulary Horus name Neferkheperu nfrprw Horus he whose apparitions are perfect Nebty name Heruhernesetef Hrwrnstf He who creates peace on his throne Golden Horus ...neteru ..nTrw ...gods Prenomen Praenomen Nebukhepere NbwprR The golden apparition of Ra Nomen Intef Jnj itf His father brought him Consort Sobekemsaf Father Sobekemsaf II Burial Pyramid at Dra Abu elNaga Dynasty 
17 th dynasty Nubkheperre Intef or Antef Inyotef sometimes referred to as Intef VI was an Egyptian king of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt at Thebes during the Second Intermediate Period when Egypt was divided by rival dynasties including the Hyksos in Lower Egypt. Rise to poweredit He is known to be the brother of SekhemreWepmaat Intefand this kings immediate successorsince he donated Louvre Coffin E3019 for this kings burial which bears an inscription that it was donated for king Sekhemre Wepmaat Intef as that which his brother king Antef Nubkheperre Intef here gives notes Kim Ryholt.2 As the German scholar Thomas Schneider writes in the 2006 book Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies From the legend on the coffin Louvre E 3019 SekhemreWepmaats coffin it follows that Inyotef Nebukheperre...arranged the burial of his brother Inyotef Sekhemreupimaat...and must have therefore have followed him on the throne. In his Untersuchungen Beckerath had viewed Inyotef Sekhemreupimaat VI and Inyotef Sekhemreherhermaat VII as brothers whereas he had separated Inyotef Nebukheperre VI coffin BM 6652 from them as a king he considered not necessarily related to them placing him at the beginning of the dynasty. Ryholt equally bases his arguments upon a consistent paleographic peculiarity the Pleneschreibung of j in the case of the coffin of Inyotef Sekhemreherhermaat.3 where only Nubkheperre Intefs nomen contained a reedleaf of all the three Intef kings.4 Intefs fatheredit Nubkheperre Intef and by implication his brother Sekhemre Wepmaat Intef were probably the sons of Sekhemre Shedtawy Sobekemsaf Sobekemsaf II today on the basis of inscriptions found on a doorjamb discovered in the remains of a 
17 th Dynasty temple at GebelAntef on the LuxorFarshut road.5 The British Egyptologist Aidan Dodson also endorses Ryholts interpretation of the doorjambs text and writes Ryholt does...introduce the new Desert Roads evidence from the Darnells survey to show that Nubkheperrre Inyotef dubbed by Ryholt Inyotef N was a son of Sekhemreshedtawi Sobekemsaf thus providing a key genealogical link within the 
17 th dynasty.6 The German Egyptologist Daniel Polz who discovered this kings tomb in 2001 also studied the same doorjamb and reached a similar conclusion in a 2007 German language book.7 An association between Nubkheperre Intef and a king Sobekemsaf is also indicated by the discovery of a doorframe fragment by John and Deborah Darnell in the early 19
90 s which preserved part of an inscription naming a king Intef ahead of a king Sobekemsaf the hieroglyphic spelling of the king Intef here was that used only by Nubkheperre.8 Unfortunately not enough of the inscription was uncovered to reveal the nature of the relationship with any certainty hereor which king Sobekemsaf was intended.9 Nubkheperre Intef is sometimes referred to as Intef VII10 in other sources as Intef VI11 and even as Intef V.12 Nubkheperre Intef ruled from Thebes and was buried in a tomb in the necropolis of Dra Abu elNaga. The grave was originally covered with a small pyramid approximately 11 m at the base rising to a height of approx. 13 m. Auguste Mariette found two broken obelisks with complete Fivefold Titulary which was then subsequently lost when being transported to the Cairo Museum. King Intefs wife was Sobekemsaf who perhaps came from a local family based at Edfu. On an Abydos stela mentioning a building of the king are the words kings son head of the bowmen Nakht. Building programedit The stela depicting Nubkheperre and Nakht from Abydos.13 Nubkheperre Intef is one of the best attested kings of the 
17 th dynasty who restored numerous damaged temples in Upper Egypt as well as constructing a new temple at Gebel Antef. The best preserved building from his reign is the remains of a small chapel at Koptos. Four walls that have been reconstructed show the king in front of Min and show him crowned by Horus and by another god. The reliefs are executed in raised and sunken relief.14 At Koptos the Coptos Decree was found on a stela which referred to the actions of Nubkheperre Intef against Teti son of Minhotep.15 At Abydos several stone fragments were found including columns which attest to some kind of restoration work.16 On a stela found at Abydos a mention is made of a House of Intef. This most likely refers to a building belonging to Nubkheperre Intef.13 Therefore while Nubkheperre Intefs highestand only knownyear date is his Year 3 on the Koptos stela17 this must be considered an underestimate since he must have ruled much longer to accomplish his ambitious building program and also complete his royal tomb.18 Indeed Nubkheperre Intef is alone mentioned on over twenty contemporary monuments from his reign19 which demonstrates his position as one of the most powerful rulers of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt. Nubkheperre Intefs timelineedit Both Kim Ryholt and the German Egyptologist Daniel Polz concur that this pharaoh did not rule at or near the start of the 
17 th dynasty but rather late into the 
17 th dynasty just prior to the final three known kings of this dynasty Senakhtenre Seqenenre and Kamose.20 Ryholt however in his 1997 reconstruction of the sequence of 
17 th dynasty rulers felt that a king Sobekemsaf intervened between the last Intef king and Senakhtenre.21 whereas in more contemporary literature Detlef Franke rejects this view below and argues that there is no space for a king Sobekemsaf to intervene in the space after Nubkheperre Intef. Contrary to Ryholt I see no place for a king Sobekemsaf who ruled after Nubkheperra Antef. Nubkheperra Antef c.1560 BC is the best attested from Abydos to Edfu e.g. BM 631 EA 1645 coffin 6652 and the most important of the three Antefs.22 Polz in his 2007 book places SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef as a shortlived king between the reigns of Nubkheperre Intef and Senakhtenre Ahmosethe first ruler of the Ahmoside family of kings.23 Tomb Robbery and Rediscoveryedit A royal crown believed to have originated from Nubkheperre Intefs Dra Abu elNaga tomb now located in the Rijksmuseum van Oudheden of the Netherlands. Nubkheperre Intefs tomb is mentioned in the Abbott Papyrus which records an investigation into tomb robberies during the reign of Ramesses IX about 450 years after Intefs interment. Although the authorities found a tunnel that was carved into the pyramid by tomb robbers his tomb was mentioned as being uninjured as the tomb robbers were unable to locate and enter the burial chamber.24 Nubkheperre Intefs tomb was originally penetrated by tomb robbers in 1827 but some of its treasures made it into the hands of Western collectors his unique rishi style coffin was purchased by the British Museum from the Henry Salt collection where its catalogue number is EA 66
52.2 5 His tomb was later found by early Egyptologists around 1881 but knowledge of its location was lost again until it was rediscovered by German scholars under Daniel Polz the deputy director of the German Archaeological Institute in 2001 at Dra Abu elNaga.26 The coffin of Nubkheperre Intef was reportedly found in his tomb complete with a diadem or crown some bows and arrows and the heartscarab of a king Sobekemsaf.27 Referencesedit  Kim Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period CNI Publications Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 p.204  PM I 2 1964 603  Kim S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 p.270  Thomas Schneider The Relative Chronology of the Middle Kingdom and the Hyksos Period Dyns. 1217 in Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006. p.187  Ryholt pp.267  270  Ryholt p.270  Aidan Dodson University of Bristol November 1998 book review of K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications with an Appendix by Adam BulowJacobsen vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 in Bibliotheca Orientalis LVII No 12 JanuaryApril 2000 p.51  Daniel Polz Der Beginn des Neuen Reiches. Zur Vorgeschichte einer Zeitenwende. Sonderschriften des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 31. BerlinNew York Walter de Gruyter 2007. pp.3438  J.C.  D. Darnell in The Oriental Annual Report 19921993 Chicago 1994 p.48  Darnell p.48  Alexander J. Peden 2001. The Graffiti of Pharaonic Egypt Scope and Roles of Informal Writings c. 3100332 B.C.. BRILL. p. 52. ISBN 9004121129.  Lehner Mark 2008. The Complete Pyramids Solving the Ancient Mysteries. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 9780500285473.  Chris Bennett A Genealogical Chronology of the Seventeenth Dynasty Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt Vol. 39 2002 pp. 123155 JSTOR Bennett mentions that Beckerath also refers to Nubkheperre as Intef V  a b W.M.F. Petrie Abydos I. EEF Memoir 22. London 1902 pp. 28 412 pl. LVII  Reconstruction of the walls on Digital Egypt  W. M. Petrie Flinders Koptos London 1896 Pl.8  W.M.F. Petrie Abydos I. EEF Memoir 22. London 1902 pp. 28 412 pl. LV 35 8 LVI W.M.F. Petrie. with a chapter by F.Ll. Grifftith M.A. F.S.A. Abydos II. EEF Memoir 24. London 1903 pp. 35 pl. XXXII 34  The Coptos decree of NebkheperureIntef. Archived from the original on 20121110. Retrieved 20120507.  Ryholt p.204  Janine Bourriau The Second Intermediate Period c.16501550 BC in Ian Shaw ed. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt Oxford University Press 2000. p.204  Thomas Schneider The Relative Chronology of the Middle Kingdom... p.187  Ryholt pp.170171  272  Detlef Franke The Late Middle Kingdom Thirteenth to Seventeenth Dynasties The Chronological Framework Journal of Egyptian History Vol.1 No.2 2008 Koninklijke Brill p.279  Polz Der Beginn des Neuen Reichs p.50  The Abbott Papyrus. reshafim.org.il. Retrieved 20070104.  Coffin of King Nubkheperra Intef  Dra Abu elNagaWestern Thebes. www.dainst.org. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2022.  I.E.S. Edwards in P. PosenerKriger ed. Mlanges Gamal Eddin Mokhtar I Cairo 1985 p.239 Bibliographyedit Kim S. B. Ryholt Adam BlowJacobsen 1997. The Political Situation in Egypt During the Second Intermediate Period C. 18001550 B.C. Museum Tusculanum. ISBN 9788772894218. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nubkheperre Intef. Article on Excavation in German Digital Egypt link Polz Daniel Rediscovered The PyramidTomb of King NubKheperRe Intef The Ostracon 
13.1  Spring 2002 1820. Preceded by SekhemreWepmaat Intef Pharaoh of Egypt Seventeenth Dynasty Succeeded by SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNubkheperreIntefoldid1221786147 Categories 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 1 May 2024 at 2356 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width