Senakhtenre Ahmose - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Attestations 
3 Senakhtenres nomen Toggle Senakhtenres nomen subsection 
3.1 Pre2012 hypotheses 
3.2 Senakhtenres nomen discovered 
4 References 
5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Senakhtenre Ahmose 31 languages    Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia 
7 th king of the 
17 th dynasty of Egypt Senakhtenre Ahmose Lintel bearing Senakhtenres cartouches from Karnak Pharaoh Reign c.1 year1 Predecessor SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Successor Seqenenre Tao Royal titulary Horus name Merymaat2 MryM
3 t Beloved of Maat Karnak king list Senakhtenre Snt.nR Perpetuated like Ra3 Prenomen Praenomen Senakhtenre Snt.nR Perpetuated like Ra Nomen Ahmose Jms Iah bore him Consort Tetisheri Children Seqenenre Tao Ahhotep I Ahmose Inhapi Sitdjehuty Kamose  Father Possibly Nubkheperre Intef Died 1558 BC Possibly Dynasty 
17 th Dynasty Senakhtenre Ahmose was a king of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period.4 Senakhtenre reigned for a short period over the Theban region in Upper Egypt at a time where the Hyksos 
15 th Dynasty ruled Lower Egypt. Senakhtenre died c.1560 or 1558 BC at the latest. Familyedit See also Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree He may or may not have been the son of Nubkheperre Intef the most prominent of the Intef kings. The Danish Egyptologist Kim Ryholt observes that since Senaktenre was remembered as one of the Lords of the West alongside Seqenenre and Kamose he is generally believed to have been a member of the family of Ahmose and as such identified with the otherwise unidentified spouse of Queen Tetisheri Ahmoses grandmother.5 He was succeeded by his son Seqenenre Tao. King Senakhtenre would also be the husband of Tetisheri who is called the great kings wife and the mother of my mother in a stela at Abydos by pharaoh Ahmose I.6 Senakhtenre was therefore the grandfather of Ahmose I. Attestationsedit Unlike his two successors Tao and Kamose Senakhtenre is a relatively obscure king and until 2012 was not attested by any contemporary sources by his prenomen but exclusively by sources dating from the New Kingdom the Karnak king list of Tuthmose III and in two Theban tombs.7 Donald Redfords book mentions these 2 Theban tombs.8 The archaeological evidence prior to 2012 suggests that his reign was brief and lasted several months or 1 year at the most. However in 2012 two important contemporary monuments of this king were uncovered at Karnak a doorway found carved with his royal name as well as a fragmentary limestone lintel.9 The doorway or gate is carved with other hieroglyphic inscriptions which state that Senaktenre had this monument which is carved from limestone blocks transported from Tura modern Helwan south of Cairo which was under Hyksos rule during his reign.10 Senakhtenres nomenedit Pre2012 hypothesesedit From a reference in the Abbott Papyrus Column III 
1.1 0 it was for a long time believed that Senakhtenres nomen was Tao The Elder. Indeed the papyrus mentions two kings with the name Tao. The second king Tao was identified with Senakhtenre because the first mention of a Tao refers to Seqenenre Tao for which the complete name is written. Consequently the hypothesis that Senakhtenres nomen was Tao was dominant in egyptology until 2012 and was shared for example by Darrell Baker4 although it also remained controversial. For example the Egyptologist Claude Vandersleyen rejected this view as early as 19
83.1 1 Furthermore in his 1997 study of the second intermediate period the egyptologist Kim Ryholt proposed that Senakhtenres nomen may have been Siamun rather than Tao12 This nomen is inscribed on one of two stampseals found together in a tomb at Dra Abu elNaga the other being inscribed with the prenomen Seqenenre whose nomen was Tao. It has been suggested that Siamun here was used as an epithet. In that case it would stand in the place of a nomen since it follows immediately upon the title Son of Re. However apart from the fact that Kamose sometimes replaced his with the epithet the mighty ruler...for political reasons during the war with Apophis the title Son of Re is always followed by a proper nomen during the Second Intermediate Period. Since Siamun was a popular name during this period and the New Kingdom it seems more likely that we are dealing with a name than an epithet. The fact that the two seals were found together and are virtually identical in workmanship suggests that they were produced at about the same time and given to the official from whose tomb they come. Siamun must therefore be more or less contemporary with Seqenenre and since it is not possible to identify Siamun with his successor this being Kamose it may be suggested that Siamun was the nomen of his predecessor Senakhtenre. Senakhtenres nomen discoverededit The situation completely changed in March 2012 when the French Egyptologist Sbastien BistonMoulin of the CFEETK Centre Francogyptien dtude des Temples de Karnak published hieroglyphic inscriptions discovered on a large 
17 th dynasty limestone doorjamb built for a granary of a temple of Amun at Karnak. The doorjamb bears Senakhtenres full royal name and reveals his nomen to have been Ahmose. This is the same name as that of his grandson Nebpehtyre Ahmose I who founded the 
18 th Dynasty by defeating the Hyksos and ousting them from Egypt.2 Inscriptions on the door indicate that it was built following the orders of Senakhtenre himself. The door was subsequently reused and discovered in the foundations of a later building adjoining the temple of Ptah at Karnak. Senakhtenres royal titulary as revealed by the door is Hr mrymAa.t nswt bjty snxtnra sA ra jaHms which translates as The Horus Merymaat the king of Upper and Lower Egypt Senakhtenre the Son of Re Ahmes.2 The inscription on the reused door proceeds to state that Senakhtenre made a monument for his father AmunRe i.e. the door itself...from the beautiful white stone of Anu.2 Anu is the modern Tura located near Cairo which could mean that Senakhtenre imported the limestone from the then Hyksos controlled area of Tura in Lower Egypt.2 However BistonMoulin cautions that beautiful white stone of Anu was sometimes used as a generic term for stones which were actually taken from local quarries.13 Meanwhile a fragmentary lintel uncovered by the same team of French scholars bore this inscription which mentioned Senakhtenres nomen Behdety the great god Long live the god made by SenakhtenRe given life like Re forever Cheers the son of Re Ahmes given life like Re forever2 These two separate inscriptions on the granary door and fragmentary lintel found in JanuaryFebruary 2012 at Karnak demonstrate that king Senakhtenres nomen or birth name was Ahmose Ahmes in Ancient Egyptian and not Tao as previously thought. BistonMoulin writes in the summary of his article2 Publication of two elements of a granary door bearing the name of king Senakhtenre Ahmose recently discovered near the temple of Ptah at Karnak. The inscriptions allow this king of the seventeenth dynasty previously only known through the coronation name in later kinglists to be identified more precisely. They also finally resolve uncertainties about his birth name Ahmose. The designations of Senakhtenre Tao I or Senakhtenre Siamun for this king must be abandoned. Suggestions for identifying the kings tomb in the Ramesside report of investigations in the Theban necropolis recorded in Papyrus Abbott must also be rejected. Only one king bears the birth name Tao Seqenenre. That Ahmose is the son of Re name of Senakhtenre leads to the conclusion that this king must be a member of the Ahmoside royal family of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth dynasties of which he is to date the oldest known representative. Finally documents that bear only the son of Re name Ahmose can now be attributed to either Senakhtenre Ahmose or Nebpehtyre Ahmose. Referencesedit  Senakhtenre is now attested by two contemporary objects. In January to February 2012 a 
17 th dynasty granary doorway and a fragmentary lintel made of limestone found buried at Karnak was discovered by French Egyptologists. They proved to bear hieroglyphic inscriptions which recorded this kings royal titulary. All other references to him are posthumous and date to the New Kingdom period.  a b c d e f g Sbastien BistonMoulin Le roi SnakhtenR Ahms de la XVIIe dynastie ENiM 5 2012 p. 6171 available online.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs. Thames and Hudson Ltd. 2006. p.94  a b Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 380  Kim Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications Museum Tusculanum Press 1997. pp.27879  stela CG 34002 now in the Egyptian Museum  Ryholt p.278  Redford 43 48 12  A Pharaoh Of The Seventeenth Dynasty Identified At Karnak Archived 20120311 at the Wayback Machine CFEETK  Gate found in Karnak Temple adds new name to ancient kings list AlAhram March 4 2012  Claude Vandersleyen Un Seul Roi Taa sous la 
17 e Dynastie. In Gttinger Miszellen Bd. 63 Gttingen 1983 ISSN 03443
85 X S. 6770.  Ryholt pp.27980  Sbastien BistonMoulin Le roi SnakhtenR Ahms de la XVIIe dynastie ENiM 5 2012 p. 6171 available online at 63 n.10. Bibliographyedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Senakhtenre. Clayton Peter 2006. Chronicle of the Pharaohs. Thames and Hudson Ltd. ISBN 0500050740. Redford Donald 1986. Pharaonic KingLists Annals and DayBooks A Contribution to the Study of the Egyptian Sense of History. SSEA Publication IV ed.. Mississauga Ontario Benben Publications. Ryholt Kim 1997. The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications. ISBN 8772894210. Preceded by SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Pharaoh of Egypt Seventeenth Dynasty Succeeded by Seqenenre Tao v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSenakhtenreAhmoseoldid1220414684 Categories 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt 
16 thcentury BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 1701 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width