Kamose - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Campaigns Toggle Campaigns subsection 
1.1 Casus Belli 
1.2 Northern Campaign 
1.3 First Nubian Campaign 
2 Length of reign 
3 Mummy 
4 Stelae Toggle Stelae subsection 
4.1 Identification 
4.2 Other discoveries 
5 References 
6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Kamose 36 languages    Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Final Pharaoh of Theban seventeenth dynasty of Egypt Kamose Sarcophagus of Kamose Cairo Egyptian Museum Pharaoh Reign c. 15551550 BC1 Predecessor Seqenenre Tao Successor Ahmose I Royal titulary Horus name Khahernesetef jrnstf He who appears on his throne Sedjefatawy Sf
3 t
3 wj He who nourishes the two lands2 Neferkhabtawi Nfr
3 bt
3 wj The perfect horus who tames the two lands 3 Nebty name Wehemmenu Wmmnw He who renews the fortifications Golden Horus Bik Nebu SeheruTawi bjk nbw shrwt
3 wj The Golden Falcon who satisfies the two lands Prenomen Praenomen Wadjkheperre W
3 prR Flourishing is the Manifestation of Re4 Nomen Kamose4 K msw He who is born of the bull Consort Ahhotep II  Children AhmoseSitkamose  Father Seqenenre Tao Mother Ahhotep I Died 1550 BC Burial Dra Abu elNaga Dynasty 
17 th Dynasty Kamose was the last Pharaoh of the Theban Seventeenth Dynasty. He was possibly the son of Seqenenre Tao and Ahhotep I and the brother of Ahmose I founder of the Eighteenth Dynasty. His reign fell at the very end of the Second Intermediate Period. Kamose is usually ascribed a reign of three years his highest attested regnal year although some scholars now favor giving him a longer reign of approximately five years.5 His reign is important for the decisive military initiatives he took against the Hyksos who had come to rule much of Ancient Egypt.6 His father had begun the initiatives and lost his life in battle with the Hyksos. It is thought that his mother as regent continued the campaigns after the death of Kamose and that his full brother made the final conquest of them and united all of Egypt. Campaignsedit Casus Belliedit Drawing of a scarab of Kamose by Flinders Petrie.7 Kamose was the final king in a succession of native Egyptian kings at Thebes. Originally the Theban Seventeenth dynasty rulers were at peace with the Hyksos kingdom to their north prior to the reign of Seqenenre Tao.8 They controlled Upper Egypt up to Elephantine and ruled Middle Egypt as far north as Cusae.9 Kamose sought to extend his rule northward over all of Lower Egypt. This apparently was met with much opposition by his courtiers. It appears that at some point these princes in Thebes had achieved a practical modus vivendi with the later Hyksos rulers which included transit rights through Hyksoscontrolled Middle and Lower Egypt and pasturage rights in the fertile Delta.10 Kamoses records on the Carnarvon Tablet in the text also parallelled in the Thebes stelae of Kamose relate the misgivings of this kings council to the prospect of a war against the Hyksos See all are loyal as far as Cusae. We are tranquil in our part of Egypt. Elephantine at the First Cataract is strong and the middle part of the land is with us as far as Cusae. Men till for us the finest of their lands. Our cattle pasture in the Papyrus marshes. Corn is sent for our swine. Our cattle are not taken away... He holds the land of the Asiatics we hold Egypt...11 However Kamoses presentation here may be propaganda designed to embellish his reputation since his predecessor Seqenenre Tao had already been engaged in conflict with the Hyksos for unknown reasons only to fall in battle. Kamose sought to regain by force what he thought was his by right namely the kingship of Lower and Upper Egypt.10 The king thus responds to his council I should like to know what serves this strength of mine when a chieftain in Avaris and another in Kush and I sit united with an Asiatic and a Nubian each in possession of his slice of Egypt and I cannot pass by him as far as Memphis... No man can settle down when despoiled by the taxes of the Asiatics. I will grapple with him that I may rip open his belly My wish is to save Egypt and to smite the Asiatic11 There is no evidence to support Pierre Montets assertion that Kamoses move against the Hyksos was sponsored by the priesthood of Amun as an attack against the Sethworshippers in the north i.e. a religious motive for the war of liberation. The Carnarvon Tablet does state that Kamose went north to attack the Hyksos by the command of Amun but this is common to virtually all royal inscriptions of Egyptian history and should not be understood as the specific command from this deity.citation needed Kamose states his reasons for an attack on the Hyksos was nationalistic pride. Northern Campaignedit In Kamoses third year he embarked on his military campaign against the Hyksos by sailing north out of Thebes on the Nile. He first reached Nefrusy which was just north of Cusae and was manned by an Egyptian garrison loyal to the Hyksos.12 A detachment of Medjay troops attacked the garrison and overran it.12 The Carnarvon Tablet recounted this much of the campaign but breaks off there. Nonetheless Kamoses military strategy probably can be inferred. As Kamose moved north he could easily take small villages and wipe out small Hyksos garrisons but if a city resisted he could cut it off from the rest of the Hyksos kingdom simply by taking over the city directly to the north. This kind of tactic probably allowed him to travel very quickly up the Nile.13 The second stele of Kamose found in Thebes continues Kamoses narrative with an attack on Avaris. Because it does not mention Memphis or other major cities to the north it has long been suspected that Kamose never did attack Avaris but instead recorded what he intended to do.12 Kim Ryholt recently has argued that Kamose probably never advanced farther than the Anpu or Cynopolis Nome in Middle Egypt around the Faiyum and the city of Saka and did not enter either the Nile Delta nor Lower Egypt proper.14 Kamoses second stela which records his victory against the Hyksos Luxor Museum. According to the second stele after moving north of Nefrusy Kamoses soldiers captured a courier bearing a message from the Hyksos king Awoserre Apopi at Avaris to his ally the ruler of Kush requesting the latters urgent support against Kamose. Kamose promptly ordered a detachment of his troops to occupy and destroy the Bahariya Oasis in the western desert which controlled the northsouth desert route. Kamose called the Strong in this text ordered this action to protect his rearguard. Kamose then sailed southward back up the Nile to Thebes for a joyous victory celebration after his military success against the Hyksos in pushing the boundaries of his kingdom northward from Cusae past Hermopolis through to Sako which now formed the new frontier between the seventeenth dynasty of Thebes and the fifteenth dynasty Hyksos state.15 Ryholt notes that Kamose never claims in his second stela to attack anything in Avaris itself only anything belonging to Avaris nkt hwtwrt direct genitive i.e. the spoil of war which his army has carried off as lines 78 and 15 of Kamoses stelathe only references to Avaris heredemonstrate Line 78 I placed the brave guardflotilla to patrol as far as the desertedge with the remainder of the fleet behind it as if a kite were preying upon the territory of Avaris. Line 15 I have not overlooked anything belonging to Avaris because it the area which Kamose was plundering is empty.16 The Second Stela of Kamose is well known for recounting that a Hyksos messenger was captured with a letter from Apophisappealing for aid from the king of Kush against Kamosewhile travelling through the western desert roads to Nubia. The final evidence that this kings military activities affected only the Cynopolite nome and not the city of Avaris itself is the fact that when Kamose returned the letter to Apophis he dispatched it to Atfih which is about a hundred miles south of Avaris. Atfih hence formed either the new border or a nomans land between the now shrunken Hyksos kingdom and Kamoses expanding seventeenth dynasty state. Furthermore Kamose states in his second stele that his intention in returning the letter was for the Hyksos messenger to inform Apophis of the Theban kings victories in the area of Cynopolis which used to be in his possession.17 This information confirms that Kamose confined his activities to this Egyptian nome and never approached the city of Avaris itself in his Year 3. First Nubian Campaignedit Kamose is known to have campaigned against the Kushites prior to his third year since the Hyksos king directly appeals to his Kushite counterpart to attack his Theban rival and avenge the damage which Kamose had inflicted upon both their states. It is unlikely that Kamose had the resources to simultaneously defeat the Kushites to the south and then inflict a serious setback on the Hyksos to the north in just one year over a frontline that extended over several hundred kilometres.18 Length of reignedit Illustration of a votive barque attributed to Kamose. His Year 3 is the only attested date for Kamose and was once thought to signal the end of his reign. However it now appears certain that Kamose reigned for one or two more years beyond this date because he initiated a second campaign against the Nubians. Evidence that Kamose had started a first campaign against the Kushites is affirmed by the contents of Apophis captured letter where the Hyksos kings plea for aid from the king of Kush is recounted in Kamoses Year 3 Second stela Do you see what Egypt has done to me The ruler who is in it KamosetheBrave given life is attacking me on my soil although I have not attacked him in the manner of all he has done against you. He is choosing these two lands to bring affliction upon them my land and yours and he has ravaged them.19 Two separate rockinscriptions found at Arminna and Toshka deep in Nubia give the prenomen and nomen of Kamose and Ahmose side by side and were inscribed at the same timelikely by the same draughtsmanaccording to the epigraphic data.6 In both inscriptions the names of Ahmose follow directly below those of Kamose and each king is given the epithet din Given Life which was normally used only of ruling kings. This indicates that both Kamose and Ahmose were ruling when the inscriptions were cut and consequently that they were coregents.6 Since Kamoses name was recorded first he would have been the senior coregent. However no mention or reference to Ahmose as king appears in Kamoses Year 3 stela which indirectly records Kamoses first campaign against the Nubians this can only mean that Kamose appointed the young Ahmose as his junior coregent sometime after his third year prior to launching a second military campaign against the Nubians.20 As a result Kamoses second Nubian campaign must have occurred in his Year 4 or 5. The target of Kamoses second Nubian campaign may have been the fortress at Buhen which the Nubians had recaptured from Kamoses forces since a stela bearing his cartouche was deliberately erased and there is fire damage in the fort itself.21 A slightly longer reign of five years for Kamose has now been estimated by Ryholt and this rulers timeline has been dated from 1554 BC to 1549 BC to take into account a one year period of coregency between Ahmose and Kamose.22 Donald Redford notes that Kamose was buried very modestly in an ungilded stock coffin which lacked even a royal uraeus.23 This may imply that the king died before he had enough time to complete his burial equipment presumably because he was engaged in warfare with his Kushite and Hyksos neighbours. Mummyedit The mummy of Kamose is mentioned in the Abbott Papyrus which records an investigation into tomb robberies during the reign of Ramesses IX about 400 years after Ahmoses interment. While his tomb was mentioned as being in a good state24 it is clear that his mummy was moved at some point afterward as it was discovered in 1857 at Dra Abu elNaga seemingly deliberately hidden in a pile of debris. The painted and stuccoed coffin was uncovered by early Egyptologists Auguste Mariette and Heinrich Brugsch who noted that the mummy was in very poor shape. Buried with the mummy was a gold and silver dagger amulets a scarab a bronze mirror and a pectoral in the shape of a cartouche bearing the name of his successor and brother Ahmose.25 The coffin remains in Egypt while the dagger is in Brussels and the pectoral and mirror are in the Louvre Paris. The name of the pharaoh inscribed on the coffin was only recognized fifty years after the original discovery by which time the mummy which had been left with the pile of debris on which it was found was almost certainly long lost.25 Stelaeedit Kamose erected two stelae in Thebes that seem to tell a consecutive narrative of his defeat of the Hyksos. The first stele is missing its last part. The Carnarvon Tablet also preserves some of the text of the stelae.26 Identificationedit As early as 1916 Sir Alan Gardiner assumed that the First Carnarvon Tablet must be a copy of some commemorative stela of pharaoh Kamose. This was later confirmed when French Egyptologists Lacau and Chvrier were working in Karnak and made an important discovery of two stela fragments. The smallest of them was found in 1932. And in 1935 the larger fragment appeared. Thus it emerged that the Carnarvon Tablet text was copied from Kamoses stelas.27 These newer texts were published in 19
39.2 728 Other discoveriesedit More recently some other inscriptions of Kamose were found. Only two stelae of Kamose were known until recently 2016 one of them was also copied to a Dynasty 18 writing table Carnarvon Tablet Redford 1997 nos. 6869. In 2004 a fragmented inscription with the Two Ladies name of Kamose was found in Karnak and labeled the third stela of Kamose Van Siclen 2010 and in 2008 a further inscription of Kamose was found in Armant Thiers 20
09.2 9 Referencesedit  Shaw Ian ed. 2000. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. p. 481. ISBN 0198150342.  Friedrich Wilhelm von Bissing Ein thebanischer Grabfund aus dem Anfang des Neuen Reiches. Tafel 4 8  Claude Vandersleyen LEgypte et la valle du Nil. Tome 2 De la fin de lAncien Empire  la fin du Nouvel Empire.Paris 1995 S. 195  a b Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson Ltd paperback 2006. p.94  Kim SB Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 p.273. ISBN 8772894210  a b c Ryholt p.273  Flinders Petrie Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XXIII  Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. p.189. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988.  James T.G.H. Egypt From the Expulsion of the Hyksos to Amenophis I. in The Cambridge Ancient History vol. 2 part 1 ed. Edwards I.E.S et al. p. 290. Cambridge University Press 1965.  a b Cambridge 21 290  a b Gardiner Sir Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs 1961 reprint Oxford University Press 1979 p.166  a b c James T.G.H. Egypt From the Expulsion of the Hyksos to Amenophis I. in The Cambridge Ancient History vol. 2 part 1 ed. Edwards I.E.S et al. p.291. Cambridge University Press 1965.  Spalinger Anthony J. War in Ancient Egypt.  Blackwell Publishing 2005 p.3.  Ryholt pp.172175  Ryholt pp.173175  Ryholt pp.173174  Ryholt p.172  Ryholt pp.18283  Ryholt p.181  Ryholt p.274  Ryholt pp.181182  Ryholt p.204  Redford Donald B. History and Chronology of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Seven Studies. Toronto 1967  The Abbott Papyrus. reshafim.org.il. Retrieved 20070104.  a b Brier Bob. Egyptian Mummies. p.259260. William Morrow and Company Inc. 1994. ISBN 0688102727  James B. Pritchard ed. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament. Third Edition Princeton Princeton University Press 1969 p. 232.  a b James B. Pritchard Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament. Third Edition Princeton Princeton University Press 1969 p. 232.  P. Lacau ASAE xxxix 1939  IlinTomich Alexander 2016 Second Intermediate Period. In Wolfram Grajetzki and Willeke Wendrich eds. UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology Los Angeles Bibliographyedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kamose. Gardiner Sir Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. Oxford University Press 1964 1961. Montet Pierre. Eternal Egypt translated from the French by Doreen Weightman. London 1964 Pritchard James B. Editor. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament 
3 rd edition. Princeton 1969. Redford Donald B. History and Chronology of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Seven Studies. Toronto 1967. Ryholt Kim SB The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press1997 ISBN 8772894210 Simpson William Kelly Editor. The Literature of Ancient Egypt An Anthology of Stories Instructions Stelae Autobiographies and Poetry 
3 rd edition. New Haven 2003 pp. 34550 translation of the Kamose texts. Preceded by Seqenenre Tao Pharaoh of Egypt Seventeenth Dynasty Succeeded by Ahmose I v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKamoseoldid1220414757 Categories 1549 BC deaths 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Egyptian rebels Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 1702 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width