File:Coffin Seqenenre Petrie.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileCoffin Seqenenre Petrie.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. CoffinSeqenenrePetrie.png 282  319 pixels file size 104 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionCoffin Seqenenre Petrie.png English Rishi coffin of pharaoh Seqenenre of the 
17 th Dynasty Second Intermediate Period. Found in Deir el Bahari cachette DB320. Franais  Cercueil rishi du pharaon Seqenenr Ta XVIIe dynastie Deuxime priode intermdiaire. Dcouvert  Deir el Bahari tombe BD320. Date 1896 Source A History of Egypt II p. 8 Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1896 media type imagepng checksum 4
08 e3
49 cde95
76 aca925
20 d
0 d
3 d
8 f
1 fe
8 dd
65 cbe determination method SHA1 data size 106109 byte height 319 pixel width 282 pixel File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2152 7 January 2016 282  319 104 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Seqenenre Tao Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org   Usage on bcl.wikipedia.org Seqenenre Tao Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  II Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Tao II Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Sekenenre Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Taa II.a Usage on it.wikipedia.org Seqenenra Tao Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Taa II Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Sekenenre Tao Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Tao II Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   II Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Tao II. Usage on ta.wikipedia.org      Usage on th.wikipedia.org   FrameHotep 212223  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org    Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Seqenenre Tao Usage on www.wikidata.org Q31526 TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Seqenenre Tao 
2 k Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.8  dpc Vertical resolution 
37.8  dpc File change date and time 2130 7 January 2016 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileCoffinSeqenenrePetrie.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width