Muwatalli II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 Move to Tarhuntassa 
3 Sirkeli relief 
4 Battle of Kadesh Toggle Battle of Kadesh subsection 
4.1 Overview 

4.1.1 Egyptian account 
5 See also 
6 Notes 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Muwatalli II 31 languages  Catal Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Galego   Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Trke   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Hittite king See also Muwatalli I Muwatalli II Depiction of Muwatalli II on a relief at Sirkeli Hyk Other names Muwatallis II Title King of the Hittites Predecessor Mursili II Successor Mursili III Spouse Tanuepa Children Mursili III UlmiTeshup Parents Mursili II Queen Gassulawiya Relatives Hattusili III brother Tudhaliya IV nephew Muwatalli II also Muwatallis or Muwatallish was a king of the New Kingdom of the Hittite empire c. 12951282 middle chronology1 and 12951272 BC in the short chronology. Biographyedit He was the eldest son of Mursili II and Queen Gassulawiya and he had several siblings. He is best known for relocating the Hittite capital to Tarhuntassa2 appointing his brother Hattusili as governor in Hattusa and fighting Ramesses II in the Battle of Kadesh. A copy of a treaty has been recovered between him and Alaksandu ruler of Wilusa Troy one of the Arzawa lands. Egyptologistscitation needed suspect that some time prior to Ramesses IIs accession to the Egyptian throne Muwattalli had reached an informal peace treaty or understanding with Seti I over Kadesh to avoid a clash between the two powers over control of Syria. In it Seti effectively ceded Kadesh to the Hittite king in order to focus on domestic issues in Egypt. Muwatalli had a wife named Tanuepa and at least two children. One was UrhiTeshup who became king as Mursili III until his uncle Hattusili III deposed him. Another was Kurunta who became the vassal ruler of Tarhuntassa during the reign of Hattusili III. Another person named UlmiTeshup is suggested to be a third son3 of Muwatalli II but it is quite likely that UlmiTeshup and Kurunta are the same person.4 Tudhaliya IV and Egyptian Queen Maathorneferure were the nephew and niece of Muwatalli. Muwatallis namesake Muwatalli I was a preEmpire king of the early 
14 th century the predecessor of Tudhaliya I. Move to Tarhuntassaedit At the start of Muwatalli IIs reign the capital of Hatti was Hattusa located in the northern region of Anatolia. Not long after he came into power he made the decision to move the capital to a new location which he named Tarhuntassa. There is no documentation stating the reason why the capital was moved but scholars based on later texts written by his brother Hattusili III and the campaigns Muwatalli II fought have come up with two possible reasons. The first theory is that Muwatlli II moved the capital because of the border skirmishes between the Hittites and the Kaska and later the rebellion by Piyamaradu.5 These disputes were on the northern border and the capital of Hattusa is located near the northern border. After stabilizing the northern border he moved the capital farther south to the new location of Tarhuntassa. This new location was not only farther away from the troublesome northern border but it was also strategically better for the upcoming fight against Egypt over Syria.6 The second theory of why Muwatalli II moved his capital south is for religious reasons. Itamar Singer in his essay The Failed Reforms of Akhenaten and Muwatalli states that the reason for the move had deeper roots in a religious reform although he does acknowledge the political advantages of the move.7 The main evidence for this is how the depiction of the Storm God on his royal seals changes significantly after the expulsion of Danuhepa. Muwatalli II introduces a new motif for seals that is followed by all the Hittite kings that rule after him the Umarmungsszene German the protective embrace of the deity. This style is identifiable because it shows the king being embraced by one or more gods. In Muwatalli IIs seals he is being embraced by the Storm God of Lightning Pihassassa instead of the traditional Storm God of Heaven Teshub. Sirkeli reliefedit On the west bank of the Ceyhan river near the village of Sirkeli Sirkeli Hyk a late Hittite rock relief reminds of the presence of the Hittites in the ukurova Cilician Plain. It shows the Hittite Great King Muwatalli II 12901272 BC The relief of Muwatalli II is located near Sirkeli Hyk which is one of the largest settlement mounds in Plain Cilicia. The settlement is situated on the left bank of the Ceyhan River known in ancient times as Puruna or Pyramos.8 The inscription of the king mentions also the name of his father Mursili II Muwattalli Great King the Hero son of Mursili Great King the Hero. He wears a long robe and in his left hand he holds the kalmus lituus. The appearance of King Muwattalli is consistent with the way the Sun God of Heaven Nepisas Istanu or Simige was portrayed in Hittite iconography so this indicates deification.8 A second very similar relief is a few meters away but it was partially destroyed in antiquity. The nature of the damage indicates a deliberate destruction so that the name of this figure could not be read. This figure is probably UriTeup whose throne name was Murili III. He became the king of Hatti after the death of his father Muwatalli II but was overthrown 7 years later by his uncle Hattuili III.8 These reliefs were probably directly visible to the people entering the ancient town and dominated the landscape. But because the course of the river kept changing over the centuries currently the reliefs are not so easily visible to visitors. During the Hittite period Sirkeli Hyk may have been the cult town of Kummanni.8 Battle of Kadeshedit Overviewedit The Aleppo Treaty treaty between Muwattalli II king of Hatti and TalmiSharruma king of Aleppo written in Akkadian. Found in Bogazkoy ancient Hattusa dated c. 1300 BC. British Museum Muwatalli II is best known as the Hittite ruler who fought Ramesses II to a standstill at the Battle of Kadesh. Among his allies was TalmiSharruma grandson of Suppiluliumas I who was the king of Aleppo. Although both sides claimed victory in this war scholars generally believe that the battle ended badly for both sides especially Ramesses II. This is because both sides suffered heavy losses and their military strength was reduced.6 What makes this battle unique is not how it ended but that out of all the battles that Ramses II fought during his reign he gave special attention to this battle. This is evident by the fact that he produced two official versions of the battle the Literary Record sometimes referred to as the Poem and the Pictorial Record which includes the Bulletin a short record of the battle and carved images. These two depictions of the battle are found inscribed in five different Egyptian temples including the Ramesseum.9 The second thing that makes this battle noteworthy is the tactics that Muwatalli II used against the Egyptian Army. The general outline of the battle is this Muwatlli II gathered his troops in northern Syria and sent out scouts and spies to ascertain the location of Ramesses II army. The spies reached Ramesses II and the division of Amun when he was first approaching Kadesh. The spies pretending to be deserters gained the ear of Ramses II. They used this to convince him that the Hittite army was over hundred miles away in Aleppo.9 Sometime later other Hittite scouts were caught and Ramesses II discovered the ruse Muwatalli II was right outside of Kadesh with his forces. The battle began when the Hittite forces attacked the Egyptian army that was marching towards Kadesh. Ramses II at his camp in Kadesh had gone ahead of his other divisions and only had one division of his army with him. While the division to the south of Ramses II was being attacked by one attachment of Hittite charioteers Muwatalli II had sent a second division of charioteers to attack Ramses II camp. Ramses II forces managed to fend off the Hittite attack and win the battle on the following day. One of the carvings showing Ramesses II at the Battle of Kadesh. Egyptian accountedit The two accounts that Ramses II created of the battle depict it as an epic struggle against the Hittite army where Ramses II shows off his prowess as a brilliant military leader. In the shorter Bulletin Muwatalli II is frequently described as the vile Chief of Khatti. 10 Ramses II admits to having heard the false reports of Muwatalli IIs whereabouts but when he discovers where Muwatalli IIs forces really are he claims that His majesty slaughtered them in their places they sprawled before his horses and his majesty was alone no other was with him.10 In the longer Poem Ramesses II again calls Muwatalli II the vile foe of Khatti but in this version he also depicts Muwatalli II as being afraid of him saying the vile Chief of Khattii stood in the midst of the army that was with him and did not come out to fight for fear of his majesty and the wretched Chief of Khatti stood among his troops and chariots stood turning shrinking afraid.11 The Poem and Bulletin both end with Ramesses II winning a stunning victory over Muwatalli II and the Poem ends with Muwatalli signing a peace treaty with Ramesses II out of fear. Despite the enthusiastic depiction of the battle by Ramesses II scholars have concluded that the battle was a disaster for Ramesses II. This is because after the battle Muwatalli II continued to expand into Syria and the Egyptian expansion was stopped in the area of Palestine.12 v t e Hittite New Kingdom royal family tree Himuilia Tudhaliya IIIb Nikkalmatic Arnuwanda Ic Asmunikalc Hattusili IId Tudhaliya IIIe Daduhepaf Zidag Tudhaliya the Youngh Hentig 1 uppiluliuma Ih 2 Tawanannai Arnuwanda IIg Telipinuj SarriKusuhkl Zannanzam Gassulawiyan 1 Mursili IIg 2 Tanuhepao TalmiSarrumap Sahurunuwakq Muwatalli IIo Halpasulupir Massanauzzis Hattusili IIIt Puduhepau IniTesubkv UrhiTesubo Kuruntaw Nerikkailix numerous daughtersy and sonsz Tudhaliya IVaa TalmiTesubkab Arnuwanda IIIac Suppiluliuma IIacad KuziTesubae 1  
1 st spouse 2  
2 nd spouse Small caps indicates a Great King LUGAL.GAL of the Land of Hatti italic small caps indicates a Great Queen or Tawananna. Dashed lines indicate adoption. Solid lines indicate marriage if horizontal or parentage if vertical. References Trevor Bryce 1997. The Kingdom of the Hittites. Oxford England Clarendon Press. Trevor Bryce 2012. The World of the NeoHittite Kingdoms. Oxford England Oxford University Press. Volkert Haas 2006. Die hethitische Literatur. Berlin Germany de Gruyter. Notes  Scholars have suggested that Tudhaliya III was the son of Himuili and thus a grandson of the Hittite king Huzziya II Bryce 1997 p. 131.  Bryce 1997 does not consider it clear whether Tudhaliya III was one king or two p. 133.  a b c Bryce 1997 p. 139.  The existence of Hattusili II is doubtful Bryce 1997 pp. 153154.  Bryce 1997 p. 158.  Bryce 1997 p. 172.  a b c d Bryce 1997 p. 174.  a b Bryce 1997 p. 168.  Also known as Malnigal daughter of Burnaburias II of Babylonia Bryce 1997 p. 173.  Great priest in Kizzuwadna and king  lugal of Aleppo Bryce 1997 p. 174.  a b c d King  lugal of Carchemish.  Bryce 1997 pp. 174 203204.  Zannanza died on his way to Egypt to marry a pharaohs widow probably Ankhesenpaaten the widow of Tutankhamun Bryce 1997 pp. 196198.  Bryce 1997 p. 227.  a b c Bryce 1997 p. 230.  Bryce 1997 p. 220.  Bryce 1997 p. 222.  Haas 2006 p. 91.  Massanauzzi married Masturi king of the Seha River Land Bryce 1997 p. 313.  Bryce 1997 p. 296.  Puduhepa was the daughter of the Kizzuwadnan priest Pentipsarri Bryce 1997 p. 273.  Bryce 1997 pp. 346 363.  King  lugal of Tarhuntassa Bryce 1997 p. 296 apparently later Great King of Hatti Bryce 1997 p. 354.  Nerikkaili married a daughter of Bentesina king of Amurru Bryce 1997 p. 294.  Two daughters of Hattusili III were married to the pharaoh Ramesses II one was given the Egyptian name Mahornefrure. Another Gassuwaliya married into the royal house of Amurru. Kilushepa was married to a king of Isuwa. A daughter married into the royal family of Babylon. A sister of Tudhaliya IV married Sausgamuwa king of Amurru after his father Bentesina. From Bryce 1997 pp. 294 and 312.  Bryce 1997 p. 332.  Bryce 1997 p. 363. Tudhaliya IV probably married a Babylonian princess known by her title of Great Princess  dumu.sal gal Bryce 1997 pp. 294 331.  Bryce 1997 p. 363.  a b Bryce 1997 p. 361.  Last documented Great King of the Land of Hatti.  King and then Great King of Carchemish Bryce 1997 pp. 384385. See alsoedit Asia portal History of the Hittites Notesedit  Kuhrt Amlie 2020. The Ancient Near East c.3000330 BC Volume One. Routledge. p. 230. ISBN 9781136755484.  cf. The Shift of the royal seat to Tarhuntassa by Trevor Bryce The Kingdom of the Hittites new edition Oxford University Press 2005. p.230  Houwink ten Cate Ph. H. J. 1994 UrhiTessup revisited Bibliotheca Orientalis 51 pp. 23359  Gurney O. R. UlmiTeup Treaty Anatolian Studies 43 p. 1328 Bryce T. 2005 Kingdom of the Hittites pp. 27071  Bryce Trevor. The Kingdom of the Hittites. New ed. New York Oxford University Press 2005 pg. 224227.  a b Bryce Trevor. The Kingdom of the Hittites. New ed. New York Oxford University Press 2005 pg. 230233.  Singer Itamar. The Failed Reforms of Akhenaten and Muwatalli. BMSAES 6 October 2006 3758  a b c d Kozal Ekin Novk Mirko 2017 Facing Muwattalli Some Thoughts on the Visibility and Function of the Rock Reliefs at Sirkeli Hyk Cilicia UgaritVerlag doi
10.7 8
92 BORIS.106777 retrieved 20220617  a b Miriam Lichtheim Ancient Egyptian Literature The New Kingdom Berkeley University of California Press 2006 43  a b Translation of the Battle of Kadesh Egyptian texts taken from Miriam Lichtheim Ancient Egyptian Literature The New Kingdom Berkeley University of California Press 2006 44.  Translation of the Battle of Kadesh Egyptian texts taken from Miriam Lichtheim Ancient Egyptian Literature The New Kingdom Berkeley University of California Press 2006 48 50.  Marc Van De Mieroop A History of the Ancient Near East. ca. 3000323 BC 
3 rd ed. West Sussex Wiley Blackwell 2016 169. External linksedit Reign of Muwatalli II The failed reforms of Akhenaten and Muwatalli by Itamar Singer in British Museum Studies in Ancient Egypt and Sudan BMSAES 62006 pp. 3758 Regnal titles Preceded by Mursili II Hittite king c. 12951282 BC Succeeded by Mursili III v t e Hittite kings Hattic kings c. 
23 rd
18 th centuries BC Pamba Pithana Piyusti Anitta Tudhaliya PUSarruma Old Kingdom c.
16 th
15 th centuries BC Labarna I Hattusili I Mursili I Hantili I Zidanta I Ammuna Huzziya I Telipinu Middle Kingdom c. midtolate 
15 th century BC Alluwamna Tahurwaili Hantili II Zidanta II Huzziya II Muwatalli I New Kingdom c.
14 th
12 th centuries BC Tudhaliya I Arnuwanda I Hattusili II Tudhaliya II Tudhaliya III uppiluliuma I Arnuwanda II Mursili II Muwatalli II Mursili III Hattusili III Tudhaliya IV Arnuwanda III Suppiluliuma II Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMuwatalliIIoldid1157264201 Categories 12
70 s BC deaths Hittite kings 
13 thcentury BC monarchs Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox person with multiple parents Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008 Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 27 May 2023 at 1304 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width