Thutmose I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
2.1 Dates and length of reign 
2.2 Military achievements 

2.2.1 Campaign in the Levant and Syria 

2.2.2 Rebellions in the south 
2.3 Building projects 
3 Death Toggle Death subsection 
3.1 Burial 
3.2 Mummy 
4 See also 
5 Notes and references 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Thutmose I 54 languages Afrikaans   Azrbaycanca   Brezhoneg Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Gaeilge   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn   Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh For the name Thutmose Thutmosis see Thutmose. Thutmose I Thutmosis Tuthmosis Thothmes in Latinized Greek A stone head most likely depicting Thutmose I at the British Museum Pharaoh Reign 12 yrs 15061493 BC low chronology 1526 BC to 1513 BC high chronology Predecessor Amenhotep I Successor Thutmose II Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Merymaat K
3 ntmrjm
3 t Strong bull beloved of Maat Nebty name Khaemneseret Aapehty mnsrt
3 ptj He who appears with the uraeus great of strength Golden Horus Neferrenput Sankhibu Nfrrnpwtsnjb.w He whose years are perfectbeautiful he who causes hearts to live Prenomen Praenomen Aakheperkare 
3 prk
3 R Great is the manifestation of the Ka of Ra1 Nomen Djehutymes wtjmsjw Born of Thoth Djehutymes Khamyre wtymsjwmjr Born of Thoth appearing like Ra Consort Ahmose Mutnofret Children Thutmose II Hatshepsut Amenmose Wadjmose Nefrubity Father Unknown possibly Amenhotep I or Ahmose Sapair Mother Senseneb Died 1493 BC Burial KV20 later KV38 Mummy found in the Deir elBahri royal cache Theban Necropolis Monuments Pylons IV and V two obelisks and a hypostyle hall at Karnak Dynasty 
18 th Dynasty Thutmose I sometimes read as Thutmosis or Tuthmosis I Thothmes in older history works in Latinized Greek meaning Thoth is born was the third pharaoh of the 
18 th Dynasty of Egypt. He received the throne after the death of the previous king Amenhotep I. During his reign he campaigned deep into the Levant and Nubia pushing the borders of Egypt farther than ever before in each region. He also built many temples in Egypt and a tomb for himself in the Valley of the Kings he is the first king confirmed to have done this though Amenhotep I may have preceded him. Thutmose Is reign is generally dated to 15061493 BC but a minority of scholarswho think that astrological observations used to calculate the timeline of ancient Egyptian records and thus the reign of Thutmose I were taken from the city of Memphis rather than from Thebeswould date his reign to 15261513 BC.23 He was succeeded by his son Thutmose II who in turn was succeeded by Thutmose IIs sister Hatshepsut. Familyedit See also Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree It has been speculated that Thutmoses father was Amenhotep I. His mother Senseneb was of nonroyal parentage and may have been a lesser wife or concubine.4 Queen Ahmose who held the title of Great Royal Wife of Thutmose was probably the daughter of Ahmose I and the sister of Amenhotep I5 however she was never called kings daughter so there is some doubt about this and some historians believe that she was Thutmoses own sister.6 Assuming she was related to Amenhotep it could be thought that she was married to Thutmose in order to guarantee succession. However this is known not to be the case for two reasons. Firstly Amenhoteps alabaster bark built at Karnak associates Amenhoteps name with Thutmoses name well before Amenhoteps death.7 Secondly Thutmoses firstborn son with Ahmose Amenmose was apparently born long before Thutmoses coronation. He can be seen on a stela from Thutmoses fourth regnal year hunting near Memphis and he became the great armycommander of his father sometime before his death which was no later than Thutmoses own death in his 
12 th regnal year.8 Thutmose had another son Wadjmose and two daughters Hatshepsut and Nefrubity by Ahmose. Wadjmose died before his father and Nefrubity died as an infant.9 Thutmose had one son by another wife Mutnofret. This son succeeded him as Thutmose II whom Thutmose I married to his daughter Hatshepsut.9 It was later recorded by Hatshepsut that Thutmose willed the kingship to both Thutmose II and Hatshepsut. However this is considered to be propaganda by Hatshepsuts supporters to legitimise her claim to the throne when she later assumed power.10 Reignedit Dates and length of reignedit A heliacal rising of Sothis was recorded in the reign of Thutmoses predecessor Amenhotep I which has been dated to 1517 BC assuming the observation was made at Thebes.11 The year of Amenhoteps death and Thutmoses subsequent coronation can be accordingly derived and is dated to 1506 BC by most modern scholars. However if the observation were made at either Heliopolis or Memphis as a minority of scholars promote Thutmose would have been crowned in 1526 BC.12 Manetho records that Thutmose Is reign lasted 12 Years and 9 Months or 13 Years as a certain Mephres in his Epitome.13 This data is supported by two dated inscriptions from Years 8 and 9 of his reign bearing his cartouche found inscribed on a stone block in Karnak.14 Accordingly Thutmose is usually given a reign from 1506 BC to 1493 BC low chronology but a minority of scholars would date him from 1526 BC to 1513 BC high chronology.11 Military achievementsedit Map Of Egypt 
15 th century BC Upon Thutmoses coronation Nubia rebelled against Egyptian rule. According to the tomb autobiography of Ahmose son of Ebana Thutmose traveled up the Nile and fought in the battle personally killing the Nubian king.15 Upon victory he had the Nubian kings body hung from the prow of his ship before he returned to Thebes.15 After that campaign he led a second expedition against Nubia in his third year in the course of which he ordered the canal at the first cataractwhich had been built under Sesostris III of the 
12 th Dynastyto be dredged in order to facilitate easier travel upstream from Egypt to Nubia. This helped integrate Nubia into the Egyptian empire.9 This expedition is mentioned in two separate inscriptions by the kings son Thure16 Year 3 first month of the third season day 22 under the majesty of the King of Upper and Lower Egypt Aakheperre who is given life. His Majesty commanded to dig this canal after he found it stopped up with stones so that no ship sailed upon it Year 3 first month of the third season day 22. His Majesty sailed this canal in victory and in the power of his return from overthrowing the wretched Kush.17 In the second year of Thutmoses reign the king cut a stele at Tombos which records that he built a fortress at Tombos near the third cataract thus permanently extending the Egyptian military presence which had previously stopped at Buhen at the second cataract.18 Campaign in the Levant and Syriaedit Thutmoses Tombos stele indicates that he had already fought a campaign in Syria hence his Syrian campaign may be placed at the beginning of his second regnal year.19 This second campaign was the farthest north any Egyptian ruler had ever campaigned. Although it has not been found in modern times he apparently set up a stele when he crossed the Euphrates River.20 During this campaign the Syrian princes declared allegiance to Thutmose. However after he returned they discontinued tribute and began fortifying against future incursions.9 Thutmose celebrated his victories with an elephant hunt in the area of Niy near Apamea in Syria8 and returned to Egypt with strange tales of the Euphrates that inverted water which flows upstream when it ought to be flowing downstream.9 The Euphrates was the first major river which the Egyptians had ever encountered which flowed from the north which was downstream on the Nile to the south which was upstream on the Nile. Thus the river became known in Egypt as simply inverted water.9 Textual sources from the time of Thutmose I include references to Retenu Naharin and the land of Mitanni. The last is believed to be the first historical reference to that kingdom.21 Many Levantine sites were destroyed in the middle of the 
16 th century B.C. and these destructions have often been attributed to the military campaigns of Thutmose I or of his predecessor Amenhotep I. Initially these campaigns may have aimed at defeating the power of the Hyksos who were strong in this area previously.21 As many as 20 sites in the Levant suffered destruction at this time. For example the fiery destruction of Stratum XVIII at Gezer has been assigned to the second half of 
16 th century the time of Amenhotep I and Thutmose I. This is based on the pottery and scarabs discovered in the destruction debris.21 It does not appear that the aim of the Egyptians at this stage was to control the area permanently because they did not establish any permanent presence in the area. This was to come later on during 
18 th dynasty.21 Rebellions in the southedit Thutmose had to face one more military threat another rebellion by Nubia in his fourth year.19 His influence accordingly expanded even farther south as an inscription dated to his reign has been found as far south as Kurgus which was south of the fourth cataract.20 He inscribed a large tableau on the Hagar elMerwa a quartz outcrop c. 
40 m long and 
50 m wide located 12
00 m from the Nile on top of several local inscriptions.22 This is the furthest south the Egyptian presence is attested.22 During his reign he initiated a number of projects which effectively ended Nubian independence for the next 500 years. He enlarged a temple to Sesostris III and Khnum opposite the Nile from Semna.23 There are also records of specific religious rites which the viceroy of ElKab was to have performed in the temples in Nubia in proxy for the king.24 He also appointed a man called Turi to the position of viceroy of Kush also known as the Kings Son of Cush.25 With a civilian representative of the king permanently established in Nubia itself Nubia did not dare to revolt as often as it had and was easily controlled by future Egyptian kings.19 Building projectsedit Court of the 
4 th pylon obelisk of Thutmose I at Karnak Thutmose I organized great building projects during his reign including many temples and tombs but his greatest projects were at the Temple of Karnak under the supervision of the architect Ineni.26 Previous to Thutmose Karnak probably consisted only of a long road to a central platform with a number of shrines for the solar bark along the side of the road.27 Thutmose was the first king to drastically enlarge the temple. He had the fifth pylon built along the temples main road along with a wall to run around the inner sanctuary and two flagpoles to flank the gateway.27 Outside of this he built a fourth pylon and another enclosure wall.27 Between pylons four and five he had a hypostyle hall constructed with columns made of cedar wood. This type of structure was common in ancient Egyptian temples and supposedly represents a papyrus marsh an Egyptian symbol of creation.28 Along the edge of this room he built colossal statues each one alternating wearing the crown of Upper Egypt and the crown of Lower Egypt.27 Finally outside of the fourth pylon he erected four more flagpoles27 and two obelisks although one of them which now has fallen was not inscribed until Thutmose III inscribed it about 50 years later.26 The cedar columns in Thutmose Is hypostyle hall were replaced with stone columns by Thutmose III however at least the northernmost two were replaced by Thutmose I himself.26 Hatshepsut also erected two of her own obelisks inside of Thutmose Is hypostyle hall.27 Stela of Thutmose I in the Cairo Museum In addition to Karnak Thutmose I also built statues of the Ennead at Abydos buildings at Armant Ombos elHiba Memphis and Edfu as well as minor expansions to buildings in Nubia at Semna Buhen Aniba and Quban.citation needed Thutmose I was the first king who definitely was buried in the Valley of the Kings.20 Ineni was commissioned to dig this tomb and presumably to build his mortuary temple.8 His mortuary temple has not been found quite possibly because it was incorporated into or demolished by the construction of Hatshepsuts mortuary temple at Deir elBahri.29 His tomb however has been identified as KV38. In it was found a yellow quartzite sarcophagus bearing the name of Thutmose I.5 His body however may have been moved by Thutmose III into the tomb of Hatshepsut KV20 which also contains a sarcophagus with the name of Thutmose I on it.20 Thutmose the First painted Deathedit Burialedit Thutmose I was originally buried and then reburied in KV20 in a double burial with his daughter Hatshepsut rather than KV38 which could only have been built for Thutmose I during the reign of his grandson Thutmose III based on a recent reexamination of the architecture and contents of KV
38.3 0 The location of KV20 if not its original owner had long been known since the Napoleonic expedition of 1799 and in 1844 the Prussian scholar Karl Richard Lepsius had partially explored its upper passage.31 However all its passageways had become blocked by a solidified mass of rubble small stones and rubbish which had been carried into the tomb by floodwaters and it was not until the 19031904 excavation season that Howard Carter after two previous seasons of strenuous work was able to clear its corridors and enter its double burial chamber.31 Here among the debris of broken pottery and shattered stone vessels from the burial chamber and lower passages were the remnants of two vases made for Queen Ahmose Nefertari which formed part of the original funerary equipment of Thutmose I one of the vases contained a secondary inscription which states that Thutmose II made it as his monument to his father.32 Other vessels which bore the names and titles of Thutmose I had also been inscribed by his son and successor Thutmose II as well as fragments of stone vessels made for Hatshepsut before she herself became king as well as other vessels which bore her royal name of Maatkare which would have been made only after she took the throne in her own right.33 Hatshepsut donated this quartzite sarcophagus which was made in her reign for the reburial of her father Thutmose I in KV20 Museum of Fine Arts Boston Carter however also discovered 2 separate coffins in the burial chamber. The beautifully carved sarcophagus of Hatshepsut was discovered open with no sign of a body and with the lid lying discarded on the floor it is now housed in the Cairo Museum along with a matching yellow quartzite canopic chest.33 A second sarcophagus was found lying on its side with its almost undamaged lid propped against the wall nearby it was eventually presented to Theodore M. Davis the excavations financial sponsor as a gesture of appreciation for his generous financial support.33 Davis would in turn present it to the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston. The second quartzite sarcophagus had originally been engraved with the name of the King of Upper and Lower Egypt Maatkare Hatshepsut.33 However when the sarcophagus was complete Hatshepsut decided to commission an entirely new sarcophagus for herself while she donated the existing finished sarcophagus to her father Thutmose I.33 The stonemasons then attempted to erase the original carvings by restoring the surface of the quartzite so that it could be recarved with the name and titles of Tuthmose I instead. This quartzite sarcophagus measures 7 feet long by 3 feet wide with walls 5 inches thick and bears a dedication text which records Hatshepsuts generosity towards her father ...long live the Female Horus...The king of Upper and Lower Egypt Maatkare the son of Re HatshepsutKhnemetAmun May she live forever She made it as her monument to her father whom she loved the Good God Lord of the Two Lands Aakheperkare the son of Re Thutmosis the justified.34 Thutmose I was however not destined to lie alongside his daughter after Hatshepsuts death. Thutmose III Hatshepsuts successor decided to reinter his grandfather in an even more magnificent tomb KV38 which featured another yellow sarcophagus dedicated to Thutmose I and inscribed with texts which proclaimed this pharaohs love for his deceased grandfather.35 Unfortunately however Thutmose Is remains would be disturbed late during the 
20 th dynasty when KV38 was plundered the sarcophagus lid was broken and all this kings valuable precious jewelry and grave goods were stolen.35 Scene of a statue of Thutmose I he is depicted in the symbolic black color of deification the black color also symbolizes rebirth and regeneration MET Museum NYC.36 The statue is being dragged showing a deified depiction of the king in the symbolic black color of deification ca. 12941279 B.C. more than two centuries after his death with offerings and rites honoring him. Mummyedit Alleged mummy of Thutmose I Thutmose Is mummy was ultimately discovered in the Deir elBahri Cache above the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut revealed in 1881. He had been interred along with those of other 
18 th and 
19 th dynasty leaders Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose II Thutmose III Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II and Ramesses IX as well as the 
21 st dynasty pharaohs Pinedjem I Pinedjem II and Siamun. The original coffin of Thutmose I was taken over and reused by a later pharaoh of the 
21 st dynasty. The mummy of Thutmose I was thought to be lost but Egyptologist Gaston Maspero largely on the strength of familial resemblance to the mummies of Thutmose II and Thutmose III believed he had found his mummy in the otherwise unlabelled mummy 52
83.3 7 This identification has been supported by subsequent examinations revealing that the embalming techniques used came from the appropriate period of time almost certainly after that of Ahmose I and made during the course of the Eighteenth dynasty.38 Gaston Maspero described the mummy in the following manner The king was already advanced in age at the time of his death being over fifty years old to judge by the incisor teeth which are worn and corroded by the impurities of which the Egyptian bread was full. The body though small and emaciated shows evidence of unusual muscular strength the head is bald the features are refined and the mouth still bears an expression characteristic of shrewdness and cunning.37 James Harris and Fawzia Hussien 1991 conducted an Xray survey on New Kingdom royal mummies and examined the mummified remains of Thutmose I. The results of the study determined that the mummy of Thutmose I had all the craniofacial characteristics common among Nubian populations and a typical Nubian morphology.39 A 2020 genetic study performed by a team under Zahi Hawass on the Amarna royal mummies also featured the unidentified royal mummy previously thought to be Thutmose I in the control samples. The results of the study indicated that the mummy belonged to the haplogroup L which is mainly observed in southern western and central Asia highest in the Indian subcontinent.40 What was thought to be his mummy could be viewed in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. However in 2007 Dr. Zahi Hawass announced that the mummy which was previously thought to be Thutmose I is that of a thirtyyearold man who had died as a result of an arrow wound to the chest. Because of the young age of the mummy and the cause of death it was determined that the mummy was probably not that of King Thutmose I himself.41 The mummy has the inventory number CG 610
65.4 2 In April 2021 the mummy was moved to National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.43 See alsoedit History of Ancient Egypt Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt Family Tree Notes and referencesedit  Clayton Peter. Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson Ltd paperback 2006 p.100  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988 p. 202.  Ancient Egyptian Chronology chapter 10 Egyptian SiriusSothic Dates and the Question of the SiriusBased Lunar Calendar Rolf Kraus 2006 pp. 43957.  Bart Anneke February 2007. Ancient Egypt. euler.slu.edu. Archived from the original on February 6 2009. Retrieved 16 May 2023.  a b Gardiner 1964 p. 176  Bleiberg 2000 p.400  Grimal 1988 p.203  a b c Gardiner 1964 p.179  a b c d e f Steindorff 1942 p.36  Erman 1894 p.43  a b Grimal 1988 p.202  Helk 1983 pp.479  Manethos Kings. Archived from the original on 20030128. Retrieved 20170620.  Jrgen von Beckerath 1997 p.120  a b Steindorff and Seele 1942 p.34  Lorna Oakes Pyramids Temples and Tombs of Ancient Egypt Hermes House 2003. p.207  Oakes op. cit. p.207  Breasted 1906 p.28  a b c Steindorff and Seele 1942 p.35  a b c d Shaw and Nicholson 1995 p.289  a b c d Weinstein James M. 1981. The Egyptian Empire in Palestine A Reassessment. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 241 128. doi
10.2 3071356708. JSTOR 1356708. S
2 CID 164015977.  a b Davies Vivian 2017. Nubia in the New Kingdom the Egyptians at Kurgus. Nubia in the New Kingdom. Lived Experience Pharaonic Control and Indigenous Traditions. British Museum Publications on Egypt and Sudan. 3 65106.  Erman 1894 p.503  Breasted 1906 p.25  Breasted 1906 p.27  a b c Breasted 1906 p.41  a b c d e f Grimal 1988 p.300  Shaw 2003 p.168  Gardiner 1964 p.170  Joyce Tyldesley Hatchepsut The Female Pharaoh Penguin Books hardback 1996. pp.12125  a b Tyldesley p.122  Tyldesley pp.12324  a b c d e Tyldesley p.124  Tyldesley p.125  a b Tyldesley p.126  Dragging a Statue of Thutmose I. www.metmuseum.org. Retrieved 20211116.  a b Maspero Gaston. History Of Egypt Chaldaea Syria Babylonia and Assyria Volume 4 of 12 Project Gutenberg Ebook Release Date December 16 2005. EBook 17324. httpswww.gutenberg.orgdirs173217324173
24 hv
4 c.htmimage0047 Archived 20110917 at the Wayback Machine  Smith 2000 p.2528  Harris James E. Hussien Fawzia September 1991. The identification of the Eighteenth Dynasty royal mummies a biological perspective. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. 1 34 235239. doi
10.1 0
02 oa.1390010317.  Maternal and Paternal Lineages in King Tutankhamuns Family Guardian of Ancient Egypt Studies in Honor of Zahi Hawass. Volume I pp.497518 2020 1 Archived 9 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine  Anderson Lisa 14 July 2007. Mummy awakens new era in Egypt. Chicago Tribune.  Habicht M.E Bouwman A.S Rhli F.J 25 January 2016. Identifications of ancient Egyptian royal mummies from the 
18 th Dynasty reconsidered. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology. 159 S61 216231. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.22909. PMID 26808107.  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Bibliographyedit Jrgen von Beckerath 1997. Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten. Verlag Philipp von Zabern. Bleiberg Edward 2001. Thutmose I The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Ed. Donald Redford. Vol. 3. Oxford University Press. Breasted James Henry 1906. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II. University of Chicago Press Chicago. Erman Adolf 1894. Life in Ancient Egypt. Macmilian and Company London. Gardiner Alan 1964. Egypt of the Pharaohs. Oxford University Press. Grimal Nicolas 1988. A History of Ancient Egypt. Librairie Arthme Fayard. Helk Wolfgang 1983. Schwachstellen der ChronologieDiskussion. Gttinger Miszellen Gttingen. Maspero Gaston. History Of Egypt Chaldaea Syria Babylonia and Assyria Volume 4 of 12 Project Gutenberg EBook Release Date December 16 2005. EBook 17324. Shaw Ian  Nicholson Paul 1995. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. The British Museum Press. Shaw Ian 2003. Exploring Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195116786. Smith G Elliot 2000. The Royal Mummies reprint. Duckworth. When Egypt Ruled the Est George Steindorff and Keith C. Seele 1942 University of Chicago Press Scanned version University of Chicago website External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thutmosis I. Hatshepsut from Queen to Pharaoh an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art fully available online as PDF which contains material on Thutmose I see index v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleThutmoseIoldid1221544388 Categories Thutmose I 
16 thcentury BC births 1493 BC deaths 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
15 thcentury BC Pharaohs Ancient Egyptian mummies Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Egyptian Museum Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Good articles This page was last edited on 30 April 2024 at 1509 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width