Deir el-Bahari - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Mortuary temple of Nebhepetre Mentuhotep 
2 Mortuary temple of Hatshepsut Toggle Mortuary temple of Hatshepsut subsection 
2.1 Architecture 
3 Mortuary Temple of Thutmose III 
4 Royal and nonroyal tombs 
5 Stone chest 
6 Terrorism 
7 Gallery 
8 See also 
9 Sources 
10 References 
11 Publications 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Deir elBahari 41 languages Afrikaans    Catal Cebuano etina Cymraeg Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais   Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands Norsk bokml Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 2544
15 N 3236
27 E  
25.7 37
50 N 
32.6 07
50 E  
25.7 3750 
32.6 0750 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Part of the Theban Necropolis in Luxor Egypt This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Deir elBahari  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR November 2023 Learn how and when to remove this message Deir elBahari UNESCO World Heritage Site Location Luxor Governorate Egypt Part of Theban Necropolis Includes Mortuary temple of Hatshepsut Mortuary temple of Mentuhotep II Temple of Thutmose III Criteria Cultural i iii vi Reference 087003 Inscription 1979 
3 rd Session Coordinates 2544
15 N 3236
27 E  
25.7 37
50 N 
32.6 07
50 E  
25.7 3750 
32.6 0750 Location of Deir elBahari in Egypt Deir elBahari or Dayr alBahri Arabic   romanized alDayr alBar lit.the Monastery of the North Coptic    lit.the monastery of Apa Phoibammon Ancient Egyptian djeserdjeseru1 is a complex of mortuary temples and tombs located on the west bank of the Nile opposite the city of Luxor Egypt. This is a part of the Theban Necropolis. The first monument built at the site was the mortuary temple of Mentuhotep II of the Eleventh Dynasty. It was constructed during the 
21 st century BC. During the Eighteenth Dynasty Amenhotep I and Hatshepsut also built extensively at the site. Mortuary temple of Nebhepetre Mentuhotepedit Site plan of Deir elBahari Mentuhotep II the Eleventh Dynasty king who reunited Egypt at the beginning of the Middle Kingdom built a very unusual funerary complex. His mortuary temple was built on several levels in the great bay at Deir elBahari. It was approached by a 
16 metrewide 
50 ft causeway leading from a valley temple which no longer exists. The mortuary temple itself consists of a forecourt and entrance gate enclosed by walls on three sides and a terrace on which stands a large square structure that may represent the primeval mound that arose from the waters of chaos. As the temple faces east the structure is likely to be connected with the sun cult of R and the resurrection of the king. From the eastern part of the forecourt an opening called the Bab elHosan Gate of the Horseman leads to an underground passage and an unfinished tomb or cenotaph containing a seated statue of the king. On the western side tamarisk and sycamore trees were planted beside the ramp leading up to the terrace. At the back of the forecourt and terrace are colonnades decorated in relief with boat processions hunts and scenes showing the kings military achievements. Statues of the Twelfth Dynasty king Senusret III were found here too. The inner part of the temple was actually cut into the cliff and consists of a peristyle court a hypostyle hall and an underground passage leading into the tomb itself. The cult of the dead king centred on the small shrine cut into the rear of the Hypostyle Hall. The mastabalike structure on the terrace is surrounded by a pillared ambulatory along the west wall where the statue shrines and tombs of several royal wives and daughters were found. These royal princesses were the priestesses of Hathor one of the main ancient Egyptian funerary deities. Although little remained of the kings own burial six sarcophagi were retrieved from the tombs of the royal ladies Ashayet Henhenet Kawit Kemsit Muyet and Sadhe. Each was formed of six slabs held together at the corners by metal braces and carved in sunken relief. The sarcophagus of Queen Kawit now in the Cairo Museum is particularly fine. The burial shaft and subsequent tunnel descend for 150 meters and end in a burial chamber 45 meters below the court. The chamber held a shrine which once held the wooden coffin of Nebhepetre Mentuhotep. A great treelined court was reached by means of the processional causeway leading up from the valley temple. Beneath the court a deep shaft was cut which led to unfinished rooms believed to have been intended originally as the kings tomb. A wrapped image of the pharaoh was discovered in this area by Howard Carter. The temple complex also held six mortuary chapels and shaft tombs built for the pharaohs wives and daughters. Mortuary temple of Hatshepsutedit Copper plate probably part of an axeblade showing cartouche of Hatshepsut. Foundation deposit in a small pit covered with a mat Deir elBahri Egypt. 
18 th Dynasty. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London. Main article Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut See also Depiction of Hatshepsuts birth and coronation The focal point of the Deir elBahari complex is the DjeserDjeseru meaning the Holy of Holies the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut. It is a colonnaded structure which was designed and implemented by Senenmut royal steward and architect of Hatshepsut to serve for her posthumous worship and to honor the glory of Amun. DjeserDjeseru sits atop a series of colonnaded terraces reached by long ramps that once were graced with gardens.2 It is built into a cliff face that rises sharply above it and is largely considered to be one of the incomparable monuments of ancient Egypt.3 It is 97 feet 30 m tall.citation needed The unusual form of Hatshepsuts temple is explained by the choice of location in the valley basin of Deir elBahari surrounded by steep cliffs. It was here in about 2050 BC that Mentuhotep II the founder of the Middle Kingdom laid out his sloping terraceshaped mortuary temple. The pillared galleries at either side of the central ramp of the Djeser Djeseru correspond to the pillar positions on two successive levels of the Temple of Mentuhotep. Today the terraces of Deir elBahari only convey a faint impression of the original intentions of Senenmut. Most of the statue ornaments are missing  the statues of Osiris in front of the pillars of the upper colonnade the sphinx avenues in front of the court and the standing sitting and kneeling figures of Hatshepsut these were destroyed in a posthumous condemnation of this pharaoh. The architecture of the temple has been considerably altered as a result of misguided reconstruction in the early twentieth century AD. Architectureedit Sanctuary doorways While Hatshepsut used Mentuhoteps temple as a model the two structures are significantly different. Hatshepsut employed a lengthy colonnaded terrace that deviated from the centralized massing of Mentuhoteps model  an anomaly that may be caused by the decentralized location of her burial chamber.3 There are three layered terraces reaching 97 feet 30 m in height. Each story is articulated by a double colonnade of square piers with the exception of the northwest corner of the central terrace which employs ProtoDoric columns to house the chapel. These terraces are connected by long ramps which were once surrounded by gardens. The layering of Hatshepsuts temple corresponds with the classical Theban form employing pylon courts hypostyle hall sun court chapel and sanctuary. The relief sculpture within Hatshepsuts temple recites the tale of the divine birth of the pharaoh. The text and pictorial cycle also tell of an expedition to the Land of Punt an exotic country on the Red Sea coast. On either side of the entrance to the sanctuary shown right are painted pillars with images of Hathor as the capitals. Just under the roof is an image of Wadjet displayed as a bilateral solar symbol flanked by two other long serpents. The temple includes an image shown to the right of Hatshepsut depicted as male pharaoh giving offerings to Horus and to their left an animal skin wound around a tall staff that is a symbol of the god Osiris. While the statues and ornamentation have since been stolen or destroyed the temple once was home to two statues of Osiris a long avenue lined by sphinxes as well as many sculptures of pharaoh Hatshepsut in different attitudes  standing sitting or kneeling. Mortuary Temple of Thutmose IIIedit See also Temple of Thutmose III Thutmose III built a temple complex here dedicated to Amun. Discovered in 1961 it is believed to have been used during the Beautiful Festival of the Valley. Not much is known about the complex as it was abandoned after sustaining severe damage during a landslide in the latter Twentieth Dynasty. After that it was used as a source of building materials and in Christian times became the site of a Coptic cemetery. Royal and nonroyal tombsedit Jar bearing the cartouche of Hatshepsut. Filled in with cedar resin. Calcite unfinished. Foundation deposit. 
18 th Dynasty. From Deir elBahari Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London. A tomb TT320 in a hidden recess in the cliffs to the south of the temples contained a cache of forty royal mummies moved there from the Valley of the Kings. The bodies had been placed there by Twentyfirst Dynasty priests most likely to prevent further desecration and looting. The tomb was probably originally built for priests of the 
21 st Dynasty most likely the family of Pinedjem II. In the cache were found the mummies of Ahmose I along with the Eighteenth and Nineteenth dynasty leaders Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Thutmose III Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II and Ramesses IX. In a separate room were found Twentyfirst dynasty High Priests and pharaohs Pinedjem I Pinedjem II and Siamun. The discovery of the mummies cache is depicted in the Egyptian movie The Night of Counting the Years 1969. In 1891 a larger cache of 153 reburied mummies of the priests themselves also were found in a tomb at the site known today as Bab elGasus Gate of the Priests also referred to as the Priestly Cache or Second Cache. Private tombs dating from the Middle Kingdom through the Ptolemaic period are also situated here. There are two most notable private tombs at Deir elBahari. The first is that of Meketre TT280 which contained many painted wooden funerary models from the Middle Kingdom and the first recorded humanheaded canopic jar. The second the secret tomb of Senenmut  the architect and steward who oversaw the construction of the temple for Hatshepsut  was begun in the complex also. Senenmuts tomb was vandalized in antiquity but some of the relief artwork is still intact. It was meant to be a very large tomb and its corridors are over 100 yards 92 m long. However it was never finished and Senenmut was not interred there. He has another tomb not far from Deir elBahari where his body may have been placed but it too was vandalized and robbed. A large area of nonroyal tombs in this vicinity is called Sheikh Abd elQurna. Stone chestedit In March 2020 archeologists from Warsaw Universitys Institute of Archaeology led by Andrzej Niwiski discovered a treasure chest and a wooden box dating back 3500 years in the Egyptian site of Deir elBahari.citation needed The stone chest contained several items with all of them covered with linen canvas. Three bundles of flax were found during the excavation. A goose skeleton sacrificed for religious purposes was found inside one of them. The second one included goose eggs. It is believed that what the third bundle contained was an ibis egg which had a symbolic meaning for the ancient Egyptians. In addition a little wooden trinket box was discovered inside the bundle the box is believed to contain the name Pharaoh Thutmose II.4 According to the Andrzej Niwiski The chest itself is about 40 cm long with a slight smaller height. It was perfectly camouflaged looked like an ordinary stone block. Only after a closer look did it turn out to be a chest.4 Terrorismedit See also Terrorism and tourism in Egypt In 1997 58 tourists and four Egyptians were massacred at Hatshepsuts mortuary temple by Islamist terrorists from AlGamaa alIslamiyya in what has been called the Luxor massacre causing a reduction of tourism in the area.56 Galleryedit DjeserDjeseru  Hatshepsuts temple the focal point of the compound The three temples at Deir el Bahari from the top of the cliff behind them part of Hatshepsuts temple on left Tuthmosis IIIs temple in center and Mentuhotep IIs temple on right Hatshepsuts temple The unfinished colonnade on the second level of Hatshepsuts Temple7 Egyptian soldiers from Hatshepsuts Year 9 expedition to the Land of Punt as depicted on her temple at Deir elBahri DeirElBahari Hieroglyphic decorations TT 353 of SenenMut Senenmut tomb  a hypogeum built by the order of SenenMut 
97.3 
6 m long and 
41.9 
3 m deep DeirElBahari THBES  Temple Dr el bahri General view of Deir elBahari from the Temple of Hatshepsut towards the Nile valley See alsoedit List of ancient Egyptian sites Thebes Egypt Sourcesedit Mertz Barbara 1964. Temples Tombs and Hieroglyphs. New York CowardMcCann. ISBN 0872262235 Monderson Frederick 2007. Hatshepsuts Temple at Deir el Bahari. Bloomington Indiana AuthorHouse. ISBN 9781425966447. MarietteBey Auguste 1877. DeirelBahari. Documents topographiques historiques et ethnographiques recueillis dans ce temple in French. Leipzig J C Hinrichs. Referencesedit  Monastery of St. Phoibammon. An Archaeological Atlas of Coptic Literature.permanent dead link  Lonely Planet Jessica Lee Anthony Sattin 2018. Lonely Planet Egypt. Lonely Planet. pp. 370. ISBN 9781787019041.  a b Trachtenberg Marvin Isabelle Hyman 2003. Architecture from Prehistory to Postmodernity. Italy PrenticeHall Inc. p. 71. ISBN 9780810906075.  a b Stone chest found in ancient temple and containing skeleton of a sacrificial goose could lead to hidden royal tomb. www.thefirstnews.com. Archived from the original on 16 June 2020. Retrieved 13 March 2020.  Snmez S. F. Apostolopoulos Y. Tarlow P. 1999. Tourism in crisis Managing the effects of terrorism. Journal of Travel Research. 38 1 1318. CiteSeerX 

10.1.1 .4
65.2 86. doi
10.1 177004728759903800104. S
2 CID 154984322.  Tarlow P. E. 2006. Tourism and Terrorism. In Wilks J Pendergast D  Leggat P. Eds Tourism in turbulent times Towards safe experiences for visitors Advances in Tourism Research Elsevier Oxford pp. 8082.  Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut. Madain Project. Archived from the original on 10 December 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2019. Publicationsedit Publications for the excavations conducted by the Egypt Exploration Fund in the 
19 th and 
20 th centuries. External linksedit This articles use of external links may not follow Wikipedias policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. June 2021 Learn how and when to remove this message Wikimedia Commons has media related to Deir elBahari. Egypt Index at Bluffton University The Cache at Deir elBahri Archived 20 October 2005 at the Wayback Machine  Archaeology at About.com The Temple Djeser djeseru Hatshepsut from Queen to Pharaoh an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art fully available online as PDF which contains material on Deir elBahari see index v t e Kushite religion Beliefs Afterlife Christianity Creation myths Egyptian religion Eye of Ra Flooding of the Nile Maat Mythology Philosophy Prophecy of Neferti Soul Practices Burials Execration texts Funerals Mortuary temple Pilgrimage Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Triads Elephantine Naqa A Aman Amanete Amesemi Anaka Apedemak Aqedise Arensnuphis Ariten B Bes Breith D Dedun H Heka Hemen K M Makedeke Mash Mehit Menhit Merul Miket N R S Sabomakal T W Wusa Cultures AGroup Alodia BGroup Blemmyes CGroup Kerma Kingdom of alAbwab Makuria Medja Mero Napata Nobatia XGroup Locations Aniba Ballana Bigeh Deir elBahari Dodekaschoinos Dotawo Elephantine Jebel Barkal Kawa Lisht Musawwarat esSufra Philae temple complex Qasr Ibrim Qustul Semna Temple of Amun Temple of Dendur Temple of Mut Throne Hall of Dongola Tombos Sacred animals Abtu Barbary lion Cattle Falcon Hieracosphinx Medjed Nile crocodile North African elephant Ram Serpopard Sphinx Taweret Uraeus Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Christian cross Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Gold Hafir Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Languages Blemmyes language Egyptian language Meroitic language Meroitic alphabet Nubian language Category Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Germany United States Vatican Other IdRef v t e Theban Necropolis Temple sites Deir elBahari Medinet Habu Mortuary Temple of Seti I Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III Ramesseum Royal Necropolis Valley of the Kings burials Valley of the Queens burials Royal Cache Bab elGasus Other burials elAssasif elKhokha elTarif Dra Abu elNaga Qurnet Murai Sheikh Abd elQurna Related articles Aten Beautiful Festival of the Valley Deir elMedina List of Theban tombs v t e Landmarks of Luxor East Bank Luxor Temple Luxor International Airport Karnak Temple Luxor Museum Mummification Museum Winter Palace Hotel West Bank Valley of the Kings Valley of the Queens Medinet Habu The Ramesseum Deir alMadinah Tombs of the Nobles Deir elBahri Malkata Colossi of Memnon v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDeirelBaharioldid1215191450 Categories Buildings and structures completed in the 
21 st century BC Theban Necropolis Colonnades 
3 rdmillennium BC establishments in Egypt Tourist attractions in Egypt Buildings and structures in Luxor Hidden categories All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Articles containing Copticlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Wikipedia external links cleanup from June 2021 Commons link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 23 March 2024 at 1751 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width