Amenhotep II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family and early life 
2 Dates and length of reign 
3 Foreign affairs 
4 Construction projects 
5 Personality and later life 
6 Death and burial Toggle Death and burial subsection 
6.1 Mummy 
7 See also 
8 References Toggle References subsection 
8.1 Sources 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Amenhotep II 45 languages Afrikaans    Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus   Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Seventh Pharaoh of the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt Amenhotep II Amenophis II Amenhotep II standing before Osiris. Pharaoh Reign 14271401 BC or 14271397 BC Predecessor Thutmose III Successor Thutmose IV Royal titulary Horus name Ka nakht wer pekhty k nt wrpty Victorious bull great of might1 Nebty name Weser fau sekha em waset wsr fw si m wst Rich in splendor who has been made to appear in Thebes1 Golden Horus Ity sekhem.ef em tau nebu ii sm.f m tw nbw Who has seized by means of his strong arm all lands1 Prenomen Praenomen Aa kheperu re  prw r The great one of the manifestations of Re1 Great are the Manifestations of Re2 Nomen Imen hetepu heqa iunu imn tp.w h iwnw Amun is satisfied ruler of Heliopolis1 Consort Tiaa Children Amenhotep Thutmose IV Webensenu Amenemopet Nedjem Khaemwaset Aaheperkare Aakheperure Iaret Ahmose  Father Thutmose III Mother MerytreHatshepsut Died 1401 or 1397 BC Burial KV35 Dynasty 
18 th Dynasty Amenhotep II sometimes called Amenophis II and meaning Amun is Satisfied was the seventh pharaoh of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt. He inherited a vast kingdom from his father Thutmose III and held it by means of a few military campaigns in Syria however he fought much less than his father and his reign saw the effective cessation of hostilities between Egypt and Mitanni the major kingdoms vying for power in Syria. His reign is usually dated from 1427 to 1401 BC. His consort was Tiaa who was barred from any prestige until Amenhoteps son Thutmose IV came into power. Family and early lifeedit See also Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Foundation tablet. It shows the cartouche of the birth name and epithet Amenhotep the god the Ruler of Thebes. 
18 th Dynasty. From Kurna Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Foundation tablet showing the prenomen cartouche of the thronename of Amenhotep II. 
18 th Dynasty. From Temple of Amenhotep II at Kurna Qurnah Qurna Gourna Gurna Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London. With thanks to the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology UCL. Head of Amenhotep II. 
18 th Dynasty c.1420 BC. 
18 th Dynasty. State Museum of Egyptian Art Munich Amenhotep II was born to Thutmose III and a minor wife of the king MerytreHatshepsut. He was not however the firstborn son of this pharaoh his elder brother Amenemhat the son of the great kings chief wife Satiah was originally the intended heir to the throne since Amenemhat was designated the kings eldest son and overseer of the cattle of Amun in Year 24 of Thutmoses reign.3 However between Years 24 and 35 of Thutmose III both queen Satiah and prince Amenemhat died which prompted the pharaoh to marry the nonroyal MerytreHatshepsut.4 She would bear Thutmose III a number of children including the future Amenhotep II. Amenhotep II was born and raised in Memphis in the north instead of in Thebes the traditional capital.5 While a prince he oversaw deliveries of wood sent to the dockyard of Perunfe in Memphis and was made the Setem the high priest over Lower Egypt.5 Amenhotep has left several inscriptions touting his athletic skills while he was a leader of the army before his crowning. Amenhotep was no less athletic than his powerful father. He claims to have been able to shoot an arrow through a copper target one palm thick and that he was able to row his ship faster and farther than two hundred members of the navy could row theirs.5 Some scepticism concerning the truth of these claims has been expressed among Egyptologists.5 Amenhotep acceded to the throne on the first day of the fourth month of Akhet but his father died on the thirtieth day of the third month of Peret.6 If an Egyptian crown prince was proclaimed king but did not take the throne on the day after his fathers death it meant that he served as the junior coregent during his fathers reign. A coregency with Thutmose III and Amenhotep II is believed to have lasted for two years and four months.7 Sphinx head of a young Amenhotep II Muse du Louvre. When he assumed power Amenhotep II was 18 years old according to an inscription from his great Sphinx stela Now his Majesty appeared as king as a fine youth after he had become well developed and had completed eighteen years in his strength and bravery.8 After becoming pharaoh Amenhotep married a woman of uncertain parentage named Tiaa.9 As many as ten sons and one daughter have been attributed to him. Amenhoteps most important son was Thutmose IV who succeeded him however there is significant evidence for his having many more children. Princes Amenhotep Webensenu Amenemopet and Nedjem are all clearly attested and Amenemhat Khaemwaset and Aakheperure as well as a daughter Iaret are also possible children. Papyrus B.M. 10056 which dates to sometime after Amenhotep IIs tenth year refers to a kings son and setempriest Amenhotep.10 This Amenhotep might also be attested in a stele from Amenhotep IIs temple at Giza11 however the steles name has been defaced so that positive identification is impossible.12 Stele B may belong to another son Webensenu.12 Webensenus name is otherwise attested on a statue of Amenhoteps chief architect Minmose and his canopic jars and a funerary statue have been found in Amenhotep IIs tomb.13 Another Giza stele stele C records the name of a Prince Amenemopet whose name is otherwise unattested.12 The same statue with the name Webensenu on it is also inscribed with the name of prince Nedjem who is otherwise unattested.13 There are other references to kings sons from this period who may or may not be sons of Amenhotep II. Two graffiti from Sahel mention a kings son and stable master named Khaemwaset but specifically which king is his father is unknown.12 A figure with the name Amenemhet is recorded behind a prince Amenhotep in Theban tomb 64 and assuming this Amenhotep is indeed the kings son from B.M. 10056 Amenemhat would also be Amenhotep IIs son.14 Additionally a prince Aakheperure is mentioned in a Konosso graffito alongside a prince Amenhotep and if one again assumes that this Amenhotep was the same person as the one in B.M. 10056 Aakheperure would also have been Amenhotep IIs son. However in both these cases the figure identified as Amenhotep has been identified by some as possible references to the later King Amenhotep III which would make these two princes sons of Thutmose IV.11 In addition to sons Amenhotep II may have had a daughter named Iaret but she could have also been the daughter of Thutmose IV.12 Two more sons had been attributed to Amenhotep II in the past however they have since been proven to be of other parentage. Gauthier catalogued one Usersatet the Kings son of Kush i.e. Viceroy of Nubia as a son of Amenhotep II as well as one Re however both are now known to be unrelated to the royal family.15 Usersatet merely served as Amenhoteps chief official in Nubia and was not a blood relative of the king. Dates and length of reignedit Amenhotep IIs cartouche showing later damage and a variation of his nomen from Karnak. Amenhoteps coronation can be dated without much difficulty because of a number of lunar dates in the reign of his father Thutmose III. These sightings limit the date of Thutmoses accession to either 1504 or 1479 BC.16 Thutmose died after 54 years of reign17 at which time Amenhotep would have acceded to the throne. Amenhoteps short 2 year coregency with his father would then move his accession two years and four months earlier7 dating his accession to either 1427 BC in the low chronology18 or in 1452 BC in the high chronology. The minimum length of his reign is indicated by a wine jar inscribed with the kings prenomen found in Amenhotep IIs funerary temple at Thebes it is dated to this kings highest known datehis Year 
26 and lists the name of the pharaohs vintner Panehsy.19 Mortuary temples were generally not stocked until the king died or was near death therefore Amenhotep may not have lived much later beyond his 
26 th year.20 There are alternate theories which attempt to assign him a reign of up to 35 years which is the absolute maximum length he could have reigned. In this chronology he reigned from 1454 to 14
19.7  There are certain problems facing these theories which cannot be resolved.21 In particular this would mean Amenhotep died when he was 52 but an Xray analysis of his mummy has shown him to have been about 40 when he died.22 Accordingly Amenhotep II is usually given a reign of 26 years and said to have reigned from 1427 to 1401 BC.18 However it should be stressed that there are substantial gaps in clearly attested Year dates known for Amenhotep IIs reign. The monumental evidence only gives clear proof for Year 3 4 6 7 9 and 23 of this ruler hence it is not farfetched to assume that the Year 26 wine amphora does refer to this kings reign.23 This evidence alone shows that even a well known pharaoh who ruled Egypt for at least 2526 years such as Amenhotep II had a long 14 year time gap in attested years between his 
9 th and 
23 rd regnal years. The only date that can indirectly be fitted into this large time gap to Amenhotep II is a Year 18 or possible Year 19 date based on Papyrus Leningrad St. Petersburg 11
16 A that lists grain allotments for a coming psdntyw feast and other occasion.24 While mentioning no king directly the papyrus features early New Kingdom palaeography mentions PeruNefer the dockyard and royal residence once thought to be near Memphis and bears the prenomen of Akheperure which was the royal name of Amenhotep II. These three facts combined as Peter Der Manuelian writes all speak for a secure dating. The papyrus may be chronologically pinpointed further to Amenhoteps eighteenth nineteenth or twentieth year. Line 19 of the text mentions an allotment on II smw 30 from the grain of year 18 possibly indicating that the papyrus dates to year 1925 The Jewish historian Josephus in his book Contra Apionem which translated Manethos Aegyptiaca assigns Amenhotep II a certain Amenophis a reign of 30 years and 10 months.26 Therefore it is eminently possible that Amenhotep II could have reigned for 5 years more after his Year 26 date given that Amenhotep II ruled unattested for more than a decade between his 
9 th and 
23 rd regnal years. Significantly as the British Egyptologist David Aston writes inscriptions at Karnak refer to both a Heb sed and a renewal of the Heb sed under Amenophis II and since a king usually celebrated his first Heb sed festival in Year 30 and his second Year 34 these inscriptions may suggest a minimum reign of 30 years for Amenhotep II.27 Donald B. Redford in contrast in his 1986 book Pharaonic King Lists Annals and Day Books Mississauga 1986 pp. 179183 believes that Heb sed references recorded on the pillars of various Karnak monuments of Amenophis I Tuthmosis III Amenophis II and Tuthmosis IV are nothing but pillar benedictions being simply copies of those found on the pillars of the small bark temple of Sesostris I and thus have no chronological worth.27 However since Amenhotep II has a Year 26 inferred from a wine amphora this pharaoh only had to rule for another 5 years or 8 years after his Year 26 to have a reign of 31 or 34 years which is quite possible since he ruled unattested in the historical records for 14 years between his 
9 th and 
23 rd regnal years. Finally modern Xray evidence which suggests that Amenhotep II was 40 at death may not account for a persons precise age at death 3000 years ago. Amenhotep IIs Great Sphinx Stela reveals that he was 18 years old when he became king.28 If one accepts that Amenhotep II had a short 2 year coregency with his father Thutmose III at the beginning of his reign as Peter Der Manuelian notes29 he would already be 42 years old at death or 18 years plus a sole 24 year reign. But if Amenhotep II enjoyed a reign of 31 years as Josephus copy of Manethos Aegyptiaca assumes then this king would have been about 47 years old at death 18 years plus a sole 29 year reign and the Xray evidence would be incorrect by 7 years. Foreign affairsedit Limestone trial piece showing a kings head who wears the blue crown. 
18 th Dynasty. From the Temple of Amenhotep II at Thebes Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London A stele originally from Elephantine and now on display at the Kunsthistorisches Museum Vienna recording Amenhotep IIs successful campaign against Syria and dedicating war booty and prisoners to the Temple of Khnum. Amenhoteps first campaign took place in his third regnal year.30 It is known that the pharaoh was attacked by the host of Qatna while crossing the Orontes river but he emerged victorious and acquired rich booty among which even the equipment of a Mitanni charioteer is mentioned. The king was well known for his physical prowess and is said to have singlehandedly killed 7 rebel Princes at Kadesh which successfully terminated his first Syrian campaign on a victorious note.31 After the campaign the king ordered the bodies of the seven princes to be hung upside down on the prow of his ship.31 Upon reaching Thebes all but one of the princes were mounted on the city walls.31 The other was taken to the often rebellious territory of Nubia and hung on the city wall of Napata as an example of the consequence of rising against Pharaoh and to demoralise any Nubian opponents of Egyptian authority there.31 Amenhotep called this campaign his first in a Stele from Amada however he also called his second campaign his first causing some confusion.30 The most common solution for this although not universally accepted is that this was the first campaign he fought alone before the death of his father and thus before he was the sole king of Egypt and he counted his second campaign as his first because it was the first that was his and his alone.32 In April of his seventh year Amenhotep was faced with a major rebellion in Syria by the vassal states of Naharin and dispatched his army to the Levant to suppress it. This rebellion was likely instigated by Egypts chief Near Eastern rival Mitanni.33 His stele of victory carved after this campaign records no major battles which has been read a number of ways. It may be that this campaign was more similar to one of the tours of Syria which his father had fought and he only engaged minor garrisons in battle and forced cities to swear allegiance to himoaths immediately broken after his departure.34 Alternatively it appears that the two weeks when Amenhotep would have been closest to Mitanni are omitted from the stele thus it is possible that his army was defeated on this campaign.35 Amenhoteps last campaign took place in his ninth year however it apparently did not proceed farther north than the Sea of Galilee.36 According to the list of plunder from this campaign Amenhotep claims to have taken 101128 slaves.37 These numbers however are difficult to substantiate leading some to question the accuracy of Amenhoteps court scribes.38 Others have suggested that such exaggerated figures may instead be simply due to compounded accounting mistakes. Examples include a possible recount of the 15070 prisoners taken in his year 7 campaign in Nukhash being combined with the figures from his year 9 campaign.39 Egyptian relief depicting a battle against West Asiatics. Reign of Amenhotep II Eighteenth Dynasty c. 14271400 BC.40 After the campaign in Amenhoteps ninth year Mitanni sought to make peace with Egypt and from then on their armies never fought again. Amenhotep records that the kings of Babylon the Hittites and Mitanni came to make peace and pay tribute to him after his ninth year although this may be outlandish boasting.41 However a second passage appears on the walls of Karnak saying that the princes of Mitanni came to seek peace with Amenhotep and this cannot be so easily explained away.41 The rising power of the Hittites eventually persuaded Mitanni to seek an ally and there was definitely a treaty of some sort between Egypt and Mitanni by the time of Amenhoteps successor but it may be that it was enacted after Amenhoteps campaigns to try to prevent any more campaigns of mass deportations.41 Whenever formal peace was enacted an informal peace was maintained between Amenhotep and the king of Mitanni. The new peace ties between the two benefitted both nations. For Mitanni relaxing military conflict with Egypt to its south allowed it to focus more on the rising powers of the Hittites and the Assyrians to its north. For Egypt it was able to begin extracting significant amounts of resources from Syria and Palestine and it was also now able to access Mediterranean trade routes with the Aegean.4243 Thereafter Amenhotep concentrated on domestic matters with one possible exception. A shrine of Amenhoteps Nubian viceroy shows Amenhotep receiving tribute after a Nubian campaign but it is not possible to date when this happened.44 Construction projectsedit Amenhotep II shown at the Temple of Amada Lake Nasser Egypt. Since Thutmose III had devoted so much energy to expanding Karnak Amenhoteps building projects were largely focused on enlarging smaller temples all over Egypt. In the Delta his fathers Overseer of Works Minmose is attested from an inscription at Tura as overseeing construction of more temples.5 In upper Egypt small shrines are attested at Medamud elTod and Armant. Karnak despite not receiving the attention given it by his father also was not totally neglected.45 He commissioned a column to stand in the courtyard between the fourth and fifth pylons commemorating the reception of tribute from Mitanni. In Nubia Amenhotep built at Qasr Ibrim and Semna and ordered the decoration of the Temple at Kalabsha.46 However his most famous Nubian temple was at Amada.47 Thutmose III had begun constructing a temple which technically was dedicated to Horus there although the presence of ReHarakhti and AmunRe is easily observed.47 Amenhotep completed it and put in it the record of his year 3 campaign on a stele which was until 1942 the source of most information about Amenhoteps wars.32 He had a mortuary temple constructed at the edge of the cultivation in the Theban Necropolis close to where the Ramesseum was later built but it was destroyed in ancient times. Personality and later lifeedit Black granite seated statue of Sennefer with cartouche of Amenhotep Amenophis II on right arm. From the temple of Seth at Naqqada Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London A stela from this pharaohs final years highlights his openly contemptuous attitude towards nonEgyptians. The document which dates to Year 23 IV Akhet day 1 the day of the festival of Amenhotep IIs accession to power is a copy of a personal letter which the king composed himself to Usersatet his viceroy of Kush Nubia.48 In it Amenhotep II reminded Usersatet of their military exploits together in Syria and proceeds to criticise the way this official conducted his office as Viceroy.49 Amenhotep writes Copy of the order which His Majesty wrote himself with his own hand to the viceroy Usersatet. His Majesty was in the royal Residence...he spent a holiday sitting and drinking. Look this order of the king is brought to you...who are in faraway Nubia a hero who brought booty from all foreign countries a charioteer...you are master of a wife from Babylon and a maidservant from Byblos a young girl from Alalakh and an old woman from Arapkha. Now these people from Tekshi Syria are worthlesswhat are they good for Another message for the viceroy Do not trust the Nubians but beware of their people and their witchcraft. Take this servant of a commoner for example whom you made an official although he is not an official whom you should have suggested to His Majesty or did you want to allude to the proverb If you lack a gold battleaxe inlaid with bronze a heavy club of acacia wood will do So do not listen to their words and do not heed their messages49 Usersatet was so impressed or fearful of Amenhoteps message that he ordered a copy of it to be engraved on a stela that was once located at the Second Cataract in Nubia and is now in Boston.50 Amenhotep II did not openly record the names of his queens some Egyptologists theorise that he felt that women had become too powerful under titles such as Gods Wife of Amun. They point to the fact that he participated in his fathers removal of Hatshepsuts name from her monuments and the destruction of her image. The destruction of Hatshepsuts images began during the coregency of Amenhotep when his father was very old but stopped during his reign. However the king may have harboured his fathers concern that another woman would sit on the throne. Despite his efforts however it is possible that a female coregent of Akhenaten ruled as pharaoh before the end of his own 
18 th dynasty. Amenhotep II adopted a large number of Canaanite gods into the Egyptian pantheon including Resheph Hauron Baal Astarte Qetesh and a few others.51 Death and burialedit The face of the mummy of Amenhotep II as photographed in 1902. Amenhotep II was interred in his KV35 tomb in the Valley of the Kings his mummy was found there within his original sarcophagus when the tomb was discovered in March 1898 by Victor Loret. The tomb also housed a mummy cache containing several New Kingdom pharaohs including Thutmose IV Seti II Ramesses III Ramesses IV and Ramesses VI. They had been reburied in Amenhotep IIs tomb by the 
21 st Dynasty High Priest of Amun Pinedjem II during Siamuns reign to protect them from tomb robbers. Mummyedit The mummy of the king was first examined described and photographed in January 1902 by Gaston Maspero in the company of Howard Carter Friedrich Wilhelm von Bissing and Pierre Lacau.52 The Australian anatomist Grafton Elliot Smith examined Amenhoteps mummy in 1907. During this examination the linen still adhering to the face was removed for an unobstructed view. He found the body to be 
1.6 7 metres 
5.5  ft tall and noted a strong facial resemblance to his son Thutmose IV. The wavy brown hair present on his head is abundantly interspersed with white.53 The arms are crossed low over the chest with the right hand tightly clenched and the left less so. Unusually the skin all over the body is covered with small tubercles though Smith could not say if they were the result of the embalming process or disease. Resin on the body preserved the impressions of jewellery several rows of a beaded collar were present on the upper back and a diamondshaped geometric pattern seen on the back of the hips. Smith estimated he was forty to fifty at death based on his worn teeth and greying hair.53 His cause of death is unknown. His mummy has the inventory number CG 610
69.5 4 In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.55 See alsoedit Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt Family Tree History of ancient Egypt List of pharaohs Referencesedit  a b c d e Leprohon 2013 pp. 100101.  Clayton Peter. Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd. 1994. p.112  Eric Cline  David OConnor editors Thutmose III A New Biography University of Michigan Press Ann Arbor 2006. p.415  Cline  OConnor p.415  a b c d e Gardiner Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. p. 198. Oxford University Press 1964.  Manuelian 1987 p. 21.  a b c Charles C. Van Siclen. Amenhotep II The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Ed. Donald Redford. Vol. 1 p.71. Oxford University Press 2001.  Urk. IV. 12
79.8 10  Manuelian 1987 p. 171.  Manuelian 1987 p. 174.  a b Manuelian 1987 p. 175.  a b c d e Manuelian 1987 p. 176.  a b Manuelian 1987 p. 177.  Manuelian 1987 p. 178.  Manuelian 1987 p. 181.  Edward F. Wente Thutmose IIIs Accession and the Beginning of the New Kingdom p.267. Journal of Near Eastern Studies The University of Chicago Press 1975.  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 234. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906.  a b Shaw Ian and Nicholson Paul. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. p.28. The British Museum Press 1995.  Der Manuelian op. cit. pp.4243  Redford JNES Chronology p.119  Manuelian 1987 p. 43.  Manuelian 1987 p. 44.  David Aston Radiocarbon Wine Jars And New Kingdom Chronology gypten und Levante 2223 2012 p.293  Peter Der Manuelian The End of the Reign and the Accession of Amenhotep II in E. Cline  D. OConnor eds. Thutmose IIIA New Biography Univ. of Michigan Press 2006 pp.418  Peter Der Manuelian The End of the Reign and the Accession of Amenhotep II in E. Cline  D. OConnor eds. Thutmose IIIA New Biography Univ. of Michigan Press 2006 pp.418419  Josephus  20112023 by Peter Lundstrm  Some Rights Reserved  V. 
4.0   a b David Aston Radiocarbon Wine Jars And New Kingdom Chronology gypten und Levante 2223 2012 p.299  Urk. IV. 12
79.8 10  Peter Der Manuelian The End of the Reign and the Accession of Amenhotep II pp.412426 in Eric Cline  David OConnor eds. Thutmose III A New Biography university of Michigan Press 2006.  a b Gardiner Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. p. 200. Oxford University Press 1964.  a b c d Grimal 1988 p. 218.  a b Gardiner p.200  Redford Donald B. Egypt Canaan and Israel in Ancient Times. p. 162. Princeton University Press Princeton NJ 1992.  Redford Donald B. Egypt Canaan and Israel in Ancient Times. p. 163. Princeton University Press Princeton NJ 1992.  Manuelian 1987 p. 62.  Gardiner Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. p.202. Oxford University Press 1964.  Peter Der Manuelian Studies in the Reign of Amenophis II p.76. Hildesheimer gyptologische Beitrge 26 Gerstenbeg Verlag Hildesheim 1987.  Manuelian 1987 p. 77.  Gardiner Alan. op. cit. p. 203. Oxford University Press 1964.  Relief. www.metmuseum.org.  a b c Redford Donald B. Egypt Canaan and Israel in Ancient Times. p. 164. Princeton University Press Princeton NJ 1992.  Marc van der Mieroop A History of Ancient Egypt 2021 p 159  Amanda Podany Brotherhood of Kings How International Relations Shaped the Ancient Near East Oxford 2010 p 16391  Manuelian 1987 p. 92.  Grimal 1988 p. 220.  Grimal 1988 p. 219.  a b Gardiner p.199  Urk IV 134310  a b Erik Hornung The Pharaoh in Sergio Donadoni The Egyptians The University of Chicago Press 1997. p. 291  Hornung pp. 290291  Christiane ZivieCoche Foreign Gods in Egypt UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology p 2  Carter Howard von Bissing Friedrich Wilhelm Lacau Pierre Maspero Gaston 1902. Procsverbal dexamin du corps du Pharaon Amnoths II. Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte in French. 3. Le Service 120121. Retrieved 10 April 2021.  a b Elliot Smith G. 1912. The Royal Mummies 2000 reprint ed.. Bath UK Duckworth. pp. 3638. ISBN 0715629
59 X.  Habicht M.E Bouwman A.S Rhli F.J 25 January 2016. Identifications of ancient Egyptian royal mummies from the 
18 th Dynasty reconsidered. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology. 159 S61 216231. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.22909. PMID 26808107.  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Sourcesedit Grimal Nicolas 1988. A History of Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Books. Leprohon Ronald J. 2013. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary. SBL Press. ISBN 9781589837362. Retrieved 7 December 2021. Manuelian Peter der 1987. Studies in the Reign of Amenophis II. Verlag Hildesheimer gyptologische Beitrge HB. Reisinger Magnus 2005. Entwicklung der gyptischen Knigsplastik in der frhen und hohen 18. Dynastie. Mnster AgnusVerlag. ISBN 3000158642. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amenhotep II. Panorama view of the tomb of Amenhotep II v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Israel United States People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAmenhotepIIoldid1220465534 Categories Amenhotep II 
15 thcentury BC births 
15 thcentury BC deaths 
15 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
14 thcentury BC Pharaohs Ancient Egyptian mummies Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Children of Thutmose III Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 2314 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width