Dream Stele - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Location and description 
2 Text 
3 Interpretations of the text Toggle Interpretations of the text subsection 
3.1 Medical analysis of the text 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Dream Stele 15 languages Afrikaans  Catal Deutsch  Espaol Franais Italiano Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokml Portugus Slovenina   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 2958
31 N 3108
16 E  
29.9 75
28 N 
31.1 37
78 E  
29.9 7528 
31.1 3778 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian stele Dream Stele of Thutmose IV The Dream Stele between the paws of the Great Sphinx of Giza Shown within Egypt Location Giza Egypt Region Egypt Coordinates 2958
31 N 3108
16 E  
29.9 75
28 N 
31.1 37
78 E  
29.9 7528 
31.1 3778 Dream Stele as recorded by Lepsius The Dream Stele also called the Sphinx Stele is an epigraphic stele erected between the front paws of the Great Sphinx of Giza by the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Thutmose IV in the first year of the kings reign 1401 BC during the 
18 th Dynasty. As was common with other New Kingdom rulers the epigraph makes claim to a divine legitimisation of kingship.1 Location and descriptionedit The Dream Stele is a rectangular stele made of granite 
3.6  metres 12 ft tall and weighing 15 tons. It originally formed the back wall of a small openair chapel built by Thutmose IV between the paws of the Sphinx.2 It was rediscovered in 1818 during Giovanni Battista Caviglias clearance of the Sphinx.3 The stele itself is a reused door lintel from the entry to the mortuary temple of Khafre as pivot sockets on the back of the stele match those at the threshold of the temple.2 The scene in the lunette shows Thutmose IV on the left and right making offerings and libations to the Sphinx which sits on a high pedestal with a door at the base. This is likely an artistic device used to raise the Sphinx above the head and shoulders of the king but it has contributed to the idea that a temple or passageway exists beneath the Sphinx.2 Textedit The text is fragmented with a large asymmetrical crack beginning at the twelfth line and resulting in only partial preservation of the following two lines. The stele is preserved to a height of approximately 4 feet 
1.2  m on the left edge and 
5.4  feet 
1.6  m on the right. Given its restored height was some 12 feet 
3.7  m approximately half of the text is now missing.4 The preserved text runs as follows Year I third month of the first season day 19 under the Majesty of Horus the Mighty Bull begetting radiance the Favourite of the Two Goddesses enduring in Kingship like Atum the Golden Horus Mighty of Sword repelling the Nine Bows the King of Upper and Lower Egypt MenkheperuRa the Son of Ra Thothmes IV Shining in Diadems beloved of Amon given life stability and dominion like Ra for ever. Live the Good God the Son of Atum Protector of Horakhty Living Image of the AllLord Sovereign Begotten of Ra Excellent Heir of Kheperi beautiful of face like his father who came forth equipped with the form of Horus upon him a King who... favour with the Ennead of the Gods who purifies Heliopolis who satisfies Ra who beautifies Memphis who presents Truth to Atum who offers it to Him who is South of his Wall Ptah who makes a monument by daily offering to the God who created all things seeking benefits for the Gods of the South and the North who builds their houses of limestone who endows all their offerings Son of Atum of His Body Thothmes IV Shining in Diadems like Ra Heir of Horus upon His Throne MenkheperuRa given life. When His Majesty was a stripling like Horus the Youth in Khemmis his beauty was like the Protector of His Father he seemed like the God himself. The army rejoiced because of love for him and he repeated the circuit of his might like the Son of Nut and all the princes and all the great ones... Behold he did a thing which gave him pleasure upon the highlands of the Memphite Nome upon its southern and northern road shooting at a target with copper bolts hunting lions and the small game of the desert coursing in his chariot his horses being swifter than the wind together with two of his followers while not a soul knew it. Now when his hour came for giving rest to his followers it was always at the Setepet Sanctuary of Horemakhet beside Seker in Rostaw Rennutet in IatTaMut... in the desert or necropolis Mut of the Southern... Neit Mistress of the Southern Wall. Sekhmet presiding over the Mountain the Splendid Place of the Beginning of Time opposite the Lords of Kherahah Babylon the sacred road of the Gods to the Western Necropolis of Iwn Heliopolis. Now the very great statue of Kheperi rests in this place the great in power the splendid in strength upon which the shadow of Ra tarries. The quarters of Memphis and all the cities which are by him come to him raising their hands for him in praise to his face bearing oblations for his Ka. One of those days it came to pass that the Kings Son Thothmes came coursing at the time of midday and he rested in the shadow of this Great God. Sleep seized him at the hour when the sun was in its zenith and he found the Majesty of this Revered God speaking with his own mouth as a father speaks with his son saying Behold thou me my son Thothmes. I am thy father HoremakhetKheperiRaAtum I will give to thee my Kingdom upon earth at the head of the living. Thou shalt wear the White Crown and the Red Crown upon the Throne of Geb the Hereditary Prince. The land shall be thine in its length and in its breath that which the eye of the AllLord shines upon. The food of the Two Lands shall be thine the great tribute of all countries the duration of a long period of years. My face is directed to you my heart is to you Thou shalt be to me the protector of my affairs because I am ailing in all my limbs. The sands of the Sanctuary upon which I am have reached me turn to me in order to do what I desire. I know that thou art my son my protector behold I am with thee I am thy leader. When he finished this speech the Kings Son awoke hearing this... he understood the words of the God and he put them in his heart. He said Come let us hasten to our houses in the city they shall protect the oblations for this God which we bring for him or that we shall protect... and that we may bring oxen... and all young vegetables and we shall give praise to Wennefer... Khafra the statue made for AtumHoremakhet...5 The rest of the text likely gave Thutmoses response and an affirmation of the works carried out.4 Interpretations of the textedit Dream Stele detail of lunette reproduction at Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum San Jose. The Sphinxs promise to make Thutmose ruler of Egypt if he clears the sand has led to speculation that Thutmose IV was not the crown prince if he was he would have ascended the throne on his fathers death anyway and that he may instead have seized the throne from his older brothers with the erection of the stele serving solely to legitimize his rule. This interpretation is based on the find of three finely carved stele now lost which depict other sons of Amenhotep II making offerings to the Sphinx the names of these princes have been carefully erased.6 Selim Hassans publication of the stelae partially composed by Dorothy Eady was the first to propose this interpretation We may suppose then that these elder brothers stood in the way of his ambitions and that Thothmes removed them in some way either by death or disgrace and then obliterated their names in order that their very memories might be forgotten... I am afraid that this theory does not present Thothmes IV in a very favourable light and if he was not actually a wholesale murderer and there seems to be grounds for supposing that he was at least he was a coldhearted egoist.6 This characterisation of Thutmose as a ruthless usurper is still influential. However the divine determination and birth of kings is a common 
18 th Dynasty motif and was utilised by rulers such as Hatshepsut Thutmose III and Thutmose IVs father Amenhotep II on his own Sphinx Stele. Though we can never be sure of the circumstances surrounding Thutmoses ascension the text of the stele cannot be used as an indicator of his legitimacy.7 Medical analysis of the textedit In 2012 Dr Hutan Ashrafian a surgeon at Imperial College London hypothesized that early deaths of Thutmose IV and other 
18 th Dynasty pharaohs including Akhenaten and Tutankhamun were likely a result of familial temporal epilepsy. This would account for the untimely demise of Thutmose IV and could also explain his religious vision described on the Dream Stele as this type of epilepsy is associated with intense spiritual visions and religiosity.8 Referencesedit  Shaw Ian 2000. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt Hardback ed.. Oxford Oxford University Press. p. 254. ISBN 0198150342.  a b c Lehner Mark 1997. The Complete Pyramids Solving the Ancient Mysteries. London Thames and Hudson. p. 132. ISBN 0500050848.  Vyse Colonel Howard 1842. Appendix The Sphinx Account of M. Caviglias Excavations in 1818 Taken From the Papers of the Late Mr. Salt. Appendix To Operations Carried On At The Pyramids Of Gizeh In 1837 Vol.III. London Moyes and Barclay. pp. 107116. Retrieved 30 August 2020.  a b Mallet D. 1889. The Stele of Thothmes IV Of the Eighteenth Dynasty. In Sayce A. H. ed.. Records of the Past Being English Translations of the Ancient Monuments of Egypt and Western Asia New Series Vol. II. London Samuel Bagster and Sons Limited. pp. 4556.  Hassan Selim 1953. The Great Sphinx And Its Secrets Historical Studies In The Light Of Recent Excavations PDF. Cairo Government Press. pp. 9495. Retrieved 28 August 2020.  a b Hassan Selim 1953. The Great Sphinx And Its Secrets Historical Studies In The Light Of Recent Excavations PDF. Cairo Government Press. pp. 8391. Retrieved 28 August 2020.  Bryan Betsy M. 1991. Chapter Two All The Kings Sons. The Reign of Thutmose IV. Baltimore and London The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 3892.  Ashrafian Hutan. 2012. Familial epilepsy in the pharaohs of ancient Egypts eighteenth dynasty. Epilepsy Behav. 25 1 2331. doi
10.1 0
16 j.yebeh.20
12.0 
6.0 14. PMID 22980077. S
2 CID 20771815. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDreamSteleoldid1154737472 Categories Ancient Egyptian stelas Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt 
15 thcentury BC steles Thutmose IV Great Sphinx of Giza Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 May 2023 at 1026 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width