Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Excavation history 
2 Layout 
3 Purpose 
4 Major findings Toggle Major findings subsection 
4.1 Statues 
4.2 Pottery 
4.3 Stelae 
5 The temples future 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III 13 languages Afrikaans  Catal Deutsch Espaol Franais Italiano Magyar  Nederlands  Svenska  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 2543
16 N 3236
36 E  
25.7 
21 N 
32.6 
10 E  
25.7 21 
32.6 10 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Eighteenth Dynasty temple built for Amenhotep III Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III Aerial view of the Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III Shown within Egypt Location Upper Egypt Coordinates 2543
16 N 3236
36 E  
25.7 
21 N 
32.6 
10 E  
25.7 21 
32.6 10 Type Mortuary temple History Builder Amenhotep son of Hapu The Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III also known as Kom elHettn was built by the main architect Amenhotep son of Hapu for Pharaoh Amenhotep III during the 
18 th Dynasty of the New Kingdom.1 The mortuary temple is located on the Western bank of the Nile river across from the eastern bank city of Luxor. During its time the Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III was the largest funerary complex in Thebes that was built.1 Only parts of the mortuary temples layout remain as well as the Colossi of Memnon which are two large stone statues placed at the entrance measuring 18 meters 59 feet high.2 Because the mortuary temple was built relatively close to the river the annual flooding caused the site to decay at a more rapid rate. New research indicates that a large majority of the destruction on the mortuary temple can be attributed to the effects of an earthquake.3 It was long speculated that the earthquake occurred around 27 BC however investigations into the mortuary temple and surrounding colossi have debunked this time frame and instead have demonstrated it occurred around 1200 BC. Additional earthquakes after the one in 1200 BC have not been ruled out.34 The Colossi of Memnon and Amenhotep III Temple Project have helped conserve the site as well as possible.5 Colossi of Memnon Excavation historyedit View of the site in 2014 Dr. Hourig Sourouzian was the main excavator in the early 20
00 s and the site was visited by Dr. Zahi Hawass although the mortuary temple was previously excavated in the late 19
00 s as well. Laurent Bavay examined the pottery found at the site from the 19992002 excavation seasons. The Hypostyle Hall was cleared by Myriam Seco lvarez.5 The mortuary temple has undergone several excavations since the early 20
00 s which have garnered new information including the north wall undecorated granite pieces Kushites as bound captives lists of Nubian towns surrounding the Nile and red granite colossal statues.6 Recent geoarchaeological research has shown that the main axis of the temple was constructed on a natural elongated mound that stood well above the floodplain level of the New Kingdom period.7 As a result the Temple area at the west end stood high and dry most of the time and would have been subject to flooding only during very rare high flood events. Another important discovery by the same project has been a previously unknown branch of the Nile on the west side of the Nile Valley.78 It ran approximately southnorth with the Colossi of Memnon placed on the west bank of the river giving a dramatic riverside entrance to the Temple complex.7 This branch then ran north past the Ramesseum and other mortuary temples before swinging back east to rejoin the main channel of the Nile somewhere opposite Karnak Temple.8 This same branch was probably used in the various processional ceremonies that linked the east and west bank temples.8 It was probably also used to deliver building materials including the Colossal statues to the site.7 Layoutedit Layout of the Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III The temple faced to the east which is most likely due to the sun rising in the east since Amenhotep III revered the sun god Amun. At the front of the mortuary temple the Colossi of Memnon can be found and as one enters the long Hypostyle Hall leads to the Peristyle Sun Court and the whole area is surrounded by three pylons also known as gates.6 The Sun Court is divided into the north and south halves and consisted of statues of both Amenhotep III and the gods. The north side had brown quartzite statues from Lower Egypt while the south side had red granite statues from Aswan in Upper Egypt.9 Purposeedit The mortuary temples primary purpose was as a place for offerings for Amenhotep III for after his passing and movement into the afterlife.10 The whole temple also symbolizes a mound and the emergence of the world from the primeval waters of creation every time the Nile river flooded the temple since the Egyptians believed that the Earth was formed by a mound emerging from the water.2 Therefore it is believed that the temple was intentionally built on a flood plain so this ideology could come true.1 Amenhotep III wanted to be revered as a god on Earth not just in the afterlife. He built this enormous mortuary temple to leave a legacy that he was a living god who ruled on Earth. Examining the remains within the temple the temple indicates the unification of Egypt and the Sed Festival of Amenhotep III. The statues found within the temple were used during rituals commonly found within the Sed Festival however relief fragments show that the temple was not yet standing during Amenhotep IIIs first Sed Festival. A time frame for when a celebration at a later date may have occurred within the temple is II peret 29 or III peret 
1.1 1 These celebrations took place in a courtyard within the temple during the last ten years of Amenhotep IIIs reign.12 The importance of the Sed Festival is that it portrays a reenactment of the unification of Egypt. To further reinforce the idea of unification building materials from both Upper and Lower Egypt were used which demonstrates Amenhotep III maintained sematawy unification of both lands. Additionally Amenhotep III established the idea of Maat justice and peace over Islet chaos by having the statues of faunaclarification needed and therefore having control over them as well as depicting bound Egyptian enemies such as the Nubian Asiatics Mesopotamians Aegeans and Hittites next to statues of himself.2 Major findingsedit Statuesedit Crocodile sphinx seen from the road Head of a monumental red granite statue of Amenhotep III ca. 1370 BC 
18 th Dynasty New Kingdom H 290 cm British Museum London There are hundreds to possibly thousands of statues within the temple. A large number of statues are unique to the temple and the rarity and form of the statues was also specific to this temple. The majority of the statues were for Gods such as the Sekhmet lionheaded goddess animals such as lioncrocodile sphinx jackals scarabs beetles and a white hippopotamus other Egyptian gods and Amenhotep III as a god. The purpose of the statues correlate with the larger purpose of the mortuary temple the sed festival.11 Within the festival there are many rituals that make up Amenhoteps III first Sed.clarification needed The Sekhmet statues served an important purpose in the ritual festivals. Looking at the statues some Sekhmet statues are standing some are sitting while some are holding a papyrus scepter on the left hand and the symbol of life on the right hand. Jean Yoyotte a French Egyptologist comments that the goddess Sekhmet served an important role as the mistress of drunkenness who provides healing qualities which are meant to cure any illnesses of Amenhotep III. Also she played an important role in the royal jubilee in order to protect the sunking against the enemies of the sun.13 Two specific rituals in which the other animal statues were used are the solar ritual and the creation of the sky map. The creation of the sky map in the mortuary temple was seen throughout the 
18 th dynasty especially Thutmose III to honor the deities of the heavens. Sekhmet statues were used in the process of creating the sky map in addition to the lioncrocodile sphinx statues of a Hippo and bull statue. The lioncrocodile sphinx is the third dimensional representation found.clarification needed Looking at the white Hippopotamus it is thought to have served a role in the white Hippopotamus ritual which had been seen under Thutmose III. For the specific solar festival statues of Asbet Maat Hu Horus Isis for times of the day were seen.clarification needed11 Outside of the SedFestival statuary recent excavations around the pylons have found several colossi scattered throughout the temple. The most notable preserved colossi are the Colossi of Memnon located at the first pylon. Fragments of a quartzite colossus such as the chest fallen torso and knee were found behind the Colossi of Memnon. Near the second pylon another colossus of Amenhotep III made of monolithic quartzite was found. Examinations of the plinths of the colossi revealed imagery of the unification of Egypt and foreign lands that were under Egypts rule.6 Colossal quartzite statue of Amenhotep III c. 1350 BC 
18 th Dynasty New Kingdom 117 cm  88 cm  66 cm 46 in  35 in  26 in British Museum London Potteryedit Some of the pottery was examined by Laurent Bavay a Belgium Egyptologist who found ringbased cups beer jars and wine amphorae. These pieces were found in the Peristyle Sun Court and Third Pylon.5 Pottery found within the mortuary temple can be dated back to both the New Kingdom as well as the Late Roman Period. Moreover pottery shards that were found on the eroded northern wall of temple provided evidence for the occurrence of earthquakes.4 Stelaeedit The two most prominent stelae within the mortuary temple are the Northern and the Southern Stelae. The northern found in the Peristyle Court where it stands in full form underwent several conservation efforts in 20102012. Similarly the Southern Stelae was raised in the middle of the 
20 th century and mentions Amenhotep III describing the temple as magnified.1410 The temples futureedit Dr. Zahi Hawass Mansour Boraik Ali elAsfar and Ibrahim Soliman want to bring back the artifacts and findings from the Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III to the original site since they are dispersed in different museums. Many new statutes and colossi continue to be excavated but there are many more statutes and artifacts damaged by the earthquake that are waiting be erected and displayed. Those working on conserving the temple hope to form an openair museum and to eventually bring awareness of the importance of onsite conservation however due to a lack of funding no current progress has been made.10 See alsoedit Colossal quartzite statue of Amenhotep III found at the Mortuary Temple Medinet Habu Mortuary Temple of Ramesses III Referencesedit  a b c Kozloff Arielle Bryan Betsy 1992. Egypts Dazzling Sun Amenhotep III and His World. Cleveland Museum of Art Bookstore. ISBN 0940717166.  a b c Wilkinson Richard 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 9780500051009.  a b Karakhanyan Arkadi Avagyan Ara Sourouzian Hourig 2010 Archaeoseismological studies at the temple of Amenhotep III Luxor Egypt Ancient Earthquakes Geological Society of America doi
10.1 13020
10.2 47117 ISBN 9780813724713 retrieved 20210427  a b Sourouzian Hourig 2011. Fifth Report on Excavation and Conservation Work at Km ElHettan From 
9 th to 
12 th seasons 20072010. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Institut. 85 273304.  a b c Sourouzian Hourig 2004. The temple of Amenhotep III at Thebes excavation and conservation at Kom elHettn. Third report on the fifth season in 20022003. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts. 60 171236.  a b c Sourouzian Hourig 2005. Recent Discoveries and new Southern Place Names at the Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III Kom elHettn. Sudan and Nubia. 9 7681.  a b c d Toonen W.H.J. Graham A. MassonBerghoff A. Peeters J. Winkels T.G. Pennington B.T. Hunter M.A. Strutt K.D. Barker D.S. Emery V.L. Sollars L. Sourouzian H. 1 June 2019. Amenhotep IIIs Mansion of Millions of Years in Thebes Luxor Egypt Submergence of high grounds by river floods and Nile sediments. Journal of Archaeological Science Reports. 25 195205. doi
10.1 0
16 j.jasrep.20
19.0 
3.0 03. S
2 CID 146471744.  a b c Toonen Willem H. J. Graham Angus Pennington Benjamin T. Hunter Morag A. Strutt Kristian D. Barker Dominic S. MassonBerghoff Aurlia Emery Virginia L. 2018. Holocene fluvial history of the Niles west bank at ancient Thebes Luxor Egypt and its relation with cultural dynamics and basinwide hydroclimatic variability. Geoarchaeology. 33 3 273290. doi
10.1 0
02 gea.21631.  Kozloff Arielle 2012. Amenhotep III Egypts Radiant Pharaoh. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107638549.  a b c DAEA. msuanthropology.github.io. Retrieved 20210507.  a b c Quirke Stephen 1999. The Statue Program for the Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III. The Temple in Ancient Egypt New Discoveries and Recent Research. British Museum. pp. 5767. ISBN 0714109932.  Sphinx and Sekhmet statues found at Pharaoh Amenhotep IIIs mortuary temple. Archaeology Wiki. Retrieved 27 February 2023.  Sourouzian Hourig 2007. The Temple of Amenhotep III at Thebes Excavations and Conservation at Kom elHettn. Fourth report on the sixth seventh and eighth season in 2004 20042005 and 2006. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Institut. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Institut. 63 247335.  Stiftung Gerda Henkel. Conservation work at the temple of Amenhotep III at Thebes By The Colossi of Memnon and Amenhotep III Temple Conservation Project. L.I.S.A. WISSENSCHAFTSPORTAL GERDA HENKEL STIFTUNG in German. Retrieved 20210507. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III. Hourig Sourouzian Beyond Memnon Buried for more than 3300 years remnants of Amenhotep IIIs extraordinary mortuary temple at Kom elHettan rise from beneath the earth ICON Magazine Summer 2004 p.1017. v t e Theban Necropolis Temple sites Deir elBahari Medinet Habu Mortuary Temple of Seti I Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III Ramesseum Royal Necropolis Valley of the Kings burials Valley of the Queens burials Royal Cache Bab elGasus Other burials elAssasif elKhokha elTarif Dra Abu elNaga Qurnet Murai Sheikh Abd elQurna Related articles Aten Beautiful Festival of the Valley Deir elMedina List of Theban tombs Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMortuaryTempleofAmenhotepIIIoldid1197755426 Categories Buildings and structures completed in the 
14 th century BC Amenhotep III Theban Necropolis Hidden categories CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers This page was last edited on 21 January 2024 at 2036 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width