Monotheism - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology and usage 
2 History 
3 Regions Toggle Regions subsection 
3.1 Africa 

3.1.1 Indigenous African religion 

3.1.2 Ancient Egypt 

3.1.2 .
1 Atenism 

3.1.2 .
2 Other monotheistic traditions 
3.2 Americas 

3.2.1 Native American religion 
3.3 Eastern Asia 

3.3.1 Chinese religion 

3.3.2 Tengrism 
3.4 Europe 

3.4.1 Ancient protoIndoEuropean religion 

3.4.2 Ancient Greek religion 

3.4.2 .
1 Classical Greece 

3.4.2 .
2 Hellenistic religion 
3.5 Western Asia 

3.5.1 Abrahamic religions 

3.5.1 .
1 Judaism 

3.5.1 .
2 Christianity 

3.5.1 .
3 Islam 

3.5.1 .
4 Mandaeism 

3.5.1 .
5 Bah Faith 

3.5.1 .
6 Rastafari 

3.5.2 Zoroastrianism 

3.5.3 Yazidism 
3.6 Oceania 

3.6.1 Aboriginal Australian religion 

3.6.2 Andaman Islands 
3.7 South Asia 

3.7.1 Hinduism 

3.7.2 Sikhism 
4 Criticism 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Further reading 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Monotheism 133 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch   Aragons  Asturianu Azrbaycanca     Bnlmg       Boarisch  Bosanski Brezhoneg  Catal Cebuano etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch  Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Fiji Hindi Franais Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Galego     Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano     Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyl ayisyen Kurd  Ladino Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Limburgs Lingla Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar  Malagasy     Bahasa Melayu   Nederlands  Napulitano  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha     Papiamentu  Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn     Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina lnski    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara   Trke Tyap     Vepsn kel Ting Vit Vro Walon Winaray    Zazaki emaitka  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia This is the latest accepted revision reviewed on 7 May 2024. Belief that there is only one god Not to be confused with Classical theism. Monotheist redirects here. For the death metal band see Monotheist band. For the album by Celtic Frost see Monotheist album. Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme Being Sustainer The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Bah Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism IndoIranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil theodicy Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e Monotheism is the belief that one god is the only deity.12345 A distinction may be made between exclusive monotheism in which the one God is a singular existence and both inclusive and pluriform monotheism in which multiple gods or godly forms are recognized but each are postulated as extensions of the same God.2 Monotheism is distinguished from henotheism a religious system in which the believer worships one god without denying that others may worship different gods with equal validity and monolatrism the recognition of the existence of many gods but with the consistent worship of only one deity.6 The term monolatry was perhaps first used by Julius Wellhausen.7 The prophets of ancient Israel were among the earliest preachers of monotheism establishing it as a foundational tenet of the Jewish religious tradition which endures as one of its most profound and enduring legacies.8 Monotheism characterizes the traditions of Zoroastrianism9 Bbism the Bah Faith Christianity10 Deism Druzism11 Eckankar Sikhism Manichaeism Islam Judaism Samaritanism Mandaeism Rastafari SeichonoIe Tenrikyo Yazidism and Atenism. Elements of monotheistic thought are found in early religions such as ancient Chinese religion Tengrism and Yahwism.21213 Etymology and usageedit The word monotheism comes from the Greek  monos14 meaning single and  theos15 meaning god.16 The English term was first used by Henry More 161416
87.1 7 Monotheism is a complex and nuanced concept. The biblical authors had various ways of understanding God and the divine shaped by their historical and cultural contexts. The notion of monotheism that is used today was developed much later influenced by the Enlightenment and Christian views. Many definitions of monotheism are too modern western and Christiancentered to account for the diversity and complexity of the ancient sources which include not only the biblical texts but also other writings inscriptions and material remains that help reconstruct the ancient beliefs and practices of the people of Judah and Israel.18 The term monotheism is often contrasted with polytheism but many scholars prefer other terms such as monolatry henotheism or onegod discourse.18 Historyedit This section relies excessively on references to primary sources. Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Find sources Monotheism history  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR July 2017 Learn how and when to remove this message Quasimonotheistic claims of the existence of a universal deity date to the Late Bronze Age with Akhenatens Great Hymn to the Aten from the 
14 th century BCE. In the IronAge South Asian Vedic period19 a possible inclination towards monotheism emerged. The Rigveda exhibits notions of monism of the Brahman particularly in the comparatively late tenth book20 which is dated to the early Iron Age e.g. in the Nasadiya Sukta. Later ancient Hindu theology was monist but was not strictly monotheistic in worship because it still maintained the existence of many gods who were envisioned as aspects of one supreme God Brahman.21 In China the orthodox faith system held by most dynasties since at least the Shang Dynasty 1766 BCE until the modern period centered on the worship of Shangdi literally Above Sovereign generally translated as God or Heaven as an omnipotent force.22 However this faith system was not truly monotheistic since other lesser gods and spirits which varied with locality were also worshipped along with Shangdi. Still later variants such as Mohism 470 BCEc.391 BCE approached true monotheism teaching that the function of lesser gods and ancestral spirits is merely to carry out the will of Shangdi akin to the angels in Abrahamic religions which in turn counts as only one god. Since the sixth century BCE Zoroastrians have believed in the supremacy of one God above all Ahura Mazda as the Maker of All23 and the first being before all others.24252627 The prophet Zoroaster is credited with the founding of the first monotheistic religion in history sometime around the middle of the second millennium BCE antedating the Israelites and leaving a lasting imprint on Second Temple Judaism and through it on later monotheistic religions.28 Postexilic29 Judaism after the late 
6 th century BCE was the first religion to conceive the notion of a personal monotheistic God within a monist context.21 The concept of ethical monotheism which holds that morality stems from God alone and that its laws are unchanging30 first occurred in Judaism31 but is now a core tenet of most modern monotheistic religions including Christianity Islam Sikhism and Bah Faith.32 Also from the 
6 th century BCE Thales followed by other Monists such as Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitus Parmenides proposed that nature can be explained by reference to a single unitary principle that pervades everything.29 Numerous ancient Greek philosophers including Xenophanes of Colophon and Antisthenes believed in a similar polytheistic monism that bore some similarities to monotheism.21 The first known reference to a unitary God is Platos Demiurge divine Craftsman followed by Aristotles unmoved mover both of which would profoundly influence Jewish and Christian theology.29 According to Jewish Christian and Islamic tradition monotheism was the original religion of humanity this original religion is sometimes referred to as the Adamic religion or in the terms of Andrew Lang the Urreligion. Scholars of religion largely abandoned that view in the 
19 th century in favour of an evolutionary progression from animism via polytheism to monotheism but by 1974 this theory was less widely held and a modified view similar to Langs became more prominent.
4 need quotation to verify Austrian anthropologist Wilhelm Schmidt had postulated an Urmonotheismus original or primitive monotheism in the 19
10 s.33 It was objectedby whom that Judaism Christianity and Islam had grown up in opposition to polytheism as had Greek philosophical monotheism.4 More recently Karen Armstrong34 and other authors have returned to the idea of an evolutionary progression beginning with animism which developed into polytheism which developed into henotheism which developed into monolatry which developed into true monotheism.35 Regionsedit Africaedit Indigenous African religionedit The Tikar people of Cameroon have a traditional spirituality that emphasizes the worship of a single god Nyuy.36 The Himba people of Namibia practice a form of monotheistic panentheism and worship the god Mukuru. The deceased ancestors of the Himba and Herero are subservient to him acting as intermediaries.37 The Igbo people practice a form of monotheism called Odinani.38 Odinani has monotheistic and panentheistic attributes having a single God as the source of all things. Although a pantheon of spirits exists these are lesser spirits prevalent in Odinani expressly serving as elements of Chineke or Chukwu the supreme being or high god. Waaq is the name of a singular God in the traditional religion of many Cushitic people in the Horn of Africa denoting an early monotheistic religion. However this religion was mostly replaced with the Abrahamic religions. Some approximately 3 of Oromo still follow this traditional monotheistic religion called Waaqeffanna in Oromo. Ancient Egyptedit Atenismedit Main article Atenism Pharaoh Akhenaten and his family adoring the Aten Amenhotep IV initially introduced Atenism in Year 5 of his reign 13481346 BCE during the 
18 th dynasty of the New Kingdom. He raised Aten once a relatively obscure Egyptian solar deity representing the disk of the sun to the status of Supreme God in the Egyptian pantheon.39 To emphasise the change Atens name was written in the cartouche form normally reserved for Pharaohs an innovation of Atenism. This religious reformation appears to coincide with the proclamation of a Sed festival a sort of royal jubilee intended to reinforce the Pharaohs divine powers of kingship. Traditionally held in the thirtieth year of the Pharaohs reign this possibly was a festival in honour of Amenhotep III who some Egyptologistswho think had a coregency with his son Amenhotep IV of two to twelve years. Year 5 is believed to mark the beginning of Amenhotep IVs construction of a new capital Akhetaten Horizon of the Aten at the site known today as Amarna.40 Evidence of this appears on three of the boundary stelae used to mark the boundaries of this new capital.citation needed At this time Amenhotep IV officially changed his name to Akhenaten Agreeable to Aten as evidence of his new worship.40 The date given for the event has been estimated to fall around January 2 of that year.citation needed In Year 7 of his reign 13461344 BCE the capital was moved from Thebes to Akhetaten near modern Amarna though construction of the city seems to have continued for two more years.41 In shifting his court from the traditional ceremonial centres Akhenaten was signalling a dramatic transformation in the focus of religious and political power.citation needed The move separated the Pharaoh and his court from the influence of the priesthood and from the traditional centres of worship but his decree had deeper religious significance tootaken in conjunction with his name change it is possible that the move to Amarna was also meant as a signal of Akhenatens symbolic death and rebirth.citation needed It may also have coincided with the death of his father and the end of the coregency.citation needed In addition to constructing a new capital in honor of Aten Akhenaten also oversaw the construction of some of the most massive temple complexes in ancient Egypt including one at Karnak and one at Thebes close to the old temple of Amun.citation needed In Year 9 13441342 BCE Akhenaten declared a more radical version of his new religion declaring Aten not merely the supreme god of the Egyptian pantheon but the only God of Egypt with himself as the sole intermediary between the Aten and the Egyptian people.citation needed Key features of Atenism included a ban on idols and other images of the Aten with the exception of a rayed solar disc in which the rays commonly depicted ending in hands appear to represent the unseen spirit of Aten.citation needed Akhenaten made it however clear that the image of the Aten only represented the god but that the god transcended creation and so could not be fully understood or represented.42 Aten was addressed by Akhenaten in prayers such as the Great Hymn to the Aten O Sole God beside whom there is none. The details of Atenist theology are still unclear. The exclusion of all but one god and the prohibition of idols was a radical departure from Egyptian tradition but scholarswho see Akhenaten as a practitioner of monolatry rather than monotheism as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods he simply refrained from worshiping any but Aten.citation needed Akhenaten associated Aten with Ra and put forward the eminence of Aten as the renewal of the kingship of Ra.43 Under Akhenatens successors Egypt reverted to its traditional religion and Akhenaten himself came to be reviled as a heretic.44 Other monotheistic traditionsedit Some Egyptian ethical text authors believed in only a single god ruling over the universe.45 Americasedit Native American religionedit Native American religions may be monotheistic polytheistic henotheistic animistic or some combination thereof. Cherokee religion for example is monotheist as well as pantheist.46 The Great Spirit called Wakan Tanka among the Sioux47 and Gitche Manitou in Algonquian is a conception of universal spiritual force or supreme being prevalent among some Native American and First Nation cultures.48 According to Lakota activist Russell Means a better translation of Wakan Tanka is the Great Mystery.49 Some researchers have interpreted Aztec philosophy as fundamentally monotheistic or panentheistic. While the populace at large believed in a polytheistic pantheon Aztec priests and nobles might have come to an interpretation of Teotl as a single universal force with many facets.50 There has been criticism to this idea however most notably that many assertions of this supposed monotheism might actually come from postConquistador bias imposing an Antiquity pagan model onto the Aztec.51 Eastern Asiaedit Chinese religionedit Main articles Shangdi Tian and Mohism Shang Dynasty bronze script character for tian  which translates to Heaven and sky The orthodox faith system held by most dynasties of China since at least the Shang Dynasty 1766 BCE until the modern period centered on the worship of Shangdi literally Above Sovereign generally translated as Highgod or Heaven as a supreme being standing above other gods.52 This faith system predated the development of Confucianism and Taoism and the introduction of Buddhism and Christianity. It has some features of monotheism in that Heaven is seen as an omnipotent entity a noncorporeal force with a personality transcending the world. However this faith system was not truly monotheistic since other lesser gods and spirits which varied with locality were also worshiped along with Shangdi.52 Still later variants such as Mohism 470 BCEc.391 BCE approached true monotheism teaching that the function of lesser gods and ancestral spirits is merely to carry out the will of Shangdi. In Mozis Will of Heaven  he writes I know Heaven loves men dearly not without reason. Heaven ordered the sun the moon and the stars to enlighten and guide them. Heaven ordained the four seasons Spring Autumn Winter and Summer to regulate them. Heaven sent down snow frost rain and dew to grow the five grains and flax and silk that so the people could use and enjoy them. Heaven established the hills and rivers ravines and valleys and arranged many things to minister to mans good or bring him evil. He appointed the dukes and lords to reward the virtuous and punish the wicked and to gather metal and wood birds and beasts and to engage in cultivating the five grains and flax and silk to provide for the peoples food and clothing. This has been so from antiquity to the present.  Will of Heaven Chapter 27 Paragraph 6 ca. 
5 th century BCE Worship of Shangdi and Heaven in ancient China includes the erection of shrines the last and greatest being the Temple of Heaven in Beijing and the offering of prayers. The ruler of China in every Chinese dynasty would perform annual sacrificial rituals to Shangdi usually by slaughtering a completely healthy bull as sacrifice. Although its popularity gradually diminished after the advent of Taoism and Buddhism among other religions its concepts remained in use throughout the premodern period and have been incorporated in later religions in China including terminology used by early Christians in China. Despite the rising of nontheistic and pantheistic spirituality contributed by Taoism and Buddhism Shangdi was still praised up until the end of the Qing Dynasty as the last ruler of the Qing declared himself son of heaven. In the 
19 th century in the Guangdong region monotheist influences led to the Taiping Rebellion.53 Tengrismedit See also Tengrism Tengrism or Tangrism sometimes stylized as Tengriism occasionally referred to as Tengrianism is a modern term54 for a Central Asian religion characterized by features of shamanism animism totemism both polytheism and monotheism55565758 and ancestor worship. Historically it was the prevailing religion of the Bulgars Turks Mongols and Hungarians as well as the Xiongnu and the Huns.5960 It was the state religion of the six ancient Turkic states Avar Khaganate Old Great Bulgaria First Bulgarian Empire Gktrks Khaganate Eastern Tourkia and Western Turkic Khaganate. In Irk Bitig Tengri is mentioned as Trk Tngrisi God of Turks.61 The term is perceived among Turkic peoples as a national religion. In Chinese and TurcoMongol traditions the Supreme God is commonly referred to as the ruler of Heaven or the Sky Lord granted with omnipotent powers but it has largely diminished in those regions due to ancestor worship Taoisms pantheistic views and Buddhisms rejection of a creator God. On some occasions in the mythology the Sky Lord as identified as a male has been associated to mate with an Earth Mother while some traditions kept the omnipotence of the Sky Lord unshared.citation needed Europeedit Ancient protoIndoEuropean religionedit Main article ProtoIndoEuropean religion The head deity of the ProtoIndoEuropean religion was the god Dyus Patr . A number of words derived from the name of this prominent deity are used in various IndoEuropean languages to denote a monotheistic God. Nonetheless in spite of this ProtoIndoEuropean religion itself was not monotheistic.62 In Eastern Europe the ancient traditions of the Slavic religion contained elements of monotheism. In the sixth century AD the Byzantine chronicler Procopius recorded that the Slavs acknowledge that one god creator of lightning is the only lord of all to him do they sacrifice an ox and all sacrificial animals.63 The deity to whom Procopius is referring is the storm god Pern whose name is derived from Perkwunos the ProtoIndoEuropean god of lightning. The ancient Slavs syncretized him with the Germanic god Thor and the Biblical prophet Elijah.64 Ancient Greek religionedit Main article Ancient Greek religion Classical Greeceedit Fictionalized portrait of Xenophanes from a 
17 thcentury engraving The surviving fragments of the poems of the classical Greek philosopher Xenophanes of Colophon suggest that he held views very similar to those of modern monotheists.65 His poems harshly criticize the traditional notion of anthropomorphic gods commenting that ...if cattle and horses and lions had hands or could paint with their hands and create works such as men do... they also would depict the gods shapes and make their bodies of such a sort as the form they themselves have.66 Instead Xenophanes declares that there is ...one god greatest among gods and humans like mortals neither in form nor in thought.67 Xenophaness theology appears to have been monist but not truly monotheistic in the strictest sense.21 Although some later philosophers such as Antisthenes believed in doctrines similar to those expounded by Xenophanes his ideas do not appear to have become widely popular.21 Although Plato himself was a polytheist in his writings he often presents Socrates as speaking of the god in the singular form. He does however often speak of the gods in the plural form as well. The Euthyphro dilemma for example is formulated as Is that which is holy loved by the gods because it is holy or is it holy because it is loved by the gods68 Hellenistic religionedit Main article Hellenistic religion The development of pure philosophical monotheism is a product of the Late Antiquity. During the 
2 nd to 
3 rd centuries early Christianity was just one of several competing religious movements advocating monotheism. The One   is a concept that is prominent in the writings of the Neoplatonists especially those of the philosopher Plotinus.69 In the writings of Plotinus The One is described as an inconceivable transcendent allembodying permanent eternal causative entity that permeates throughout all of existence.70 Remains of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi Greece A number of oracles of Apollo from Didyma and Clarus the socalled theological oracles dated to the 
2 nd and 
3 rd century CE proclaim that there is only one highest god of whom the gods of polytheistic religions are mere manifestations or servants.71 
4 th century CE Cyprus had besides Christianity an apparently monotheistic cult of Dionysus.72 The Hypsistarians were a religious group who believed in a most high god according to Greek documents. Later revisions of this Hellenic religion were adjusted towards monotheism as it gained consideration among a wider populace. The worship of Zeus as the headgod signaled a trend in the direction of monotheism with less honour paid to the fragmented powers of the lesser gods. Western Asiaedit Abrahamic religionsedit Main article Abrahamic religions Further information God in Abrahamic religions Judaismedit Main articles God in Judaism Yahwism Elohim and Baal The tetragrammaton in PaleoHebrew 
10 th century BCE to 135 CE old Aramaic 
10 th century BCE to 
4 th century CE and square Hebrew 
3 rd century BCE to present scripts Judaism is traditionally considered one of the oldest monotheistic religions in the world73 although in the 
8 th century BCE the Israelites were polytheistic with their worship including the gods El Baal Asherah and Astarte.7475 Yahweh was originally the national god of the Kingdom of Israel and the Kingdom of Judah.76 During the 
8 th century BCE the worship of Yahweh in Israel was in competition with many other cults described by the Yahwist faction collectively as Baals. The oldest books of the Hebrew Bible reflect this competition as in the books of Hosea and Nahum whose authors lament the apostasy of the people of Israel threatening them with the wrath of God if they do not give up their polytheistic cults.7778 As time progressed the henotheistic cult of Yahweh grew increasingly militant in its opposition to the worship of other gods.74 Later the reforms of King Josiah imposed a form of strict monolatrism. After the fall of Judah and the beginning of the Babylonian captivity a small circle of priests and scribes gathered around the exiled royal court where they first developed the concept of Yahweh as the sole God of the world.21 Second Temple Judaism and later Rabbinic Judaism became strictly monotheistic.79 The Babylonian Talmud references other foreign gods as nonexistent entities to whom humans mistakenly ascribe reality and power.80 One of the bestknown statements of Rabbinic Judaism on monotheism is the Second of Maimonides 13 Principles of faith God the Cause of all is one. This does not mean one as in one of a pair nor one like a species which encompasses many individuals nor one as in an object that is made up of many elements nor as a single simple object that is infinitely divisible. Rather God is a unity unlike any other possible unity.81 Some in Judaism and Islam reject the Christian idea of monotheism.82 Modern Judaism uses the term shituf to refer to the worship of God in a manner which Judaism deems to be neither purely monotheistic though still permissible for nonJews nor polytheistic which would be prohibited.83 Christianityedit Main articles God in Christianity and Trinity The Trinity is the Christian belief that God is one God in essence but three persons God the Father God the Son Jesus and God the Holy Spirit.84 Among early Christians there was considerable debate over the nature of the Godhead with some denying the incarnation but not the deity of Jesus Docetism and others later calling for an Arian conception of God. Despite at least one earlier local synod rejecting the claim of Arius this Christological issue was to be one of the items addressed at the First Council of Nicaea. The First Council of Nicaea held in Nicaea in presentday Turkey convoked by the Roman Emperor Constantine I in 325 was the first ecumenical85 council of bishops of the Roman Empire and most significantly resulted in the first uniform Christian doctrine called the Nicene Creed. With the creation of the creed a precedent was established for subsequent general ecumenical councils of bishops synods to create statements of belief and canons of doctrinal orthodoxythe intent being to define a common creed for the Church and address heretical ideas. One purpose of the council was to resolve disagreements in Alexandria over the nature of Jesus in relationship to the Father in particular whether Jesus was of the same substance as God the Father or merely of similar substance. All but two bishops took the first position while Arius argument failed. God in The Creation of Adam fresco by Michelangelo c. 15081512 Christian orthodox traditions Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Roman Catholic and most Protestants follow this decision which was reaffirmed in 381 at the First Council of Constantinople and reached its full development through the work of the Cappadocian Fathers. They consider God to be a triune entity called the Trinity comprising three persons God the Father God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. These three are described as being of the same substance . Christians overwhelmingly assert that monotheism is central to the Christian faith as the Nicene Creed and others which gives the orthodox Christian definition of the Trinity begins I believe in one God. From earlier than the times of the Nicene Creed 325 CE various Christian figures advocated86 the triune mysterynature of God as a normative profession of faith. According to Roger E. Olson and Christopher Hall through prayer meditation study and practice the Christian community concluded that God must exist as both a unity and trinity codifying this in ecumenical council at the end of the 
4 th century.87 Most modern Christians believe the Godhead is triune meaning that the three persons of the Trinity are in one union in which each person is also wholly God. They also hold to the doctrine of a mangod Christ Jesus as God incarnate. These Christians also do not believe that one of the three divine figures is God alone and the other two are not but that all three are mysteriously God and one. Other Christian religions including Unitarian Universalism Jehovahs Witnesses Mormonism and others do not share those views on the Trinity. Some Christian faiths such as Mormonism argue that the Godhead is in fact three separate individuals which include God the Father His Son Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost88 each individual having a distinct purpose in the grand existence of human kind.89 Furthermore Mormons believe that before the Council of Nicaea the predominant belief among many early Christians was that the Godhead was three separate individuals. In support of this view they cite early Christian examples of belief in subordinationism.90 Unitarianism is a theological movement named for its understanding of God as one person in direct contrast to Trinitarianism.91 Some in Judaism and some in Islam do not consider Trinitarian Christianity to be a pure form of monotheism due to the pluriform monotheistic Christian doctrine of the Trinity classifying it as shituf in Judaism and as shirk in Islam.928393 Trinitarian Christians on the other hand argue that the doctrine of the Trinity is a valid expression of monotheism citing that the Trinity does not consist of three separate deities but rather the three persons who exist consubstantially as one substance within a single Godhead.9495 Islamedit Main articles God in Islam Tawhid and Hanif Arabic calligraphy reading Allah may his glory be glorified In Islam God Allh is allpowerful and allknowing the Creator Sustainer Ordainer and Judge of the universe.9697 God in Islam is strictly singular tawhid98 unique wahid and inherently One ahad allmerciful and omnipotent.99 Allh exists on the AlArsh Quran 754 but the Quran states that No vision can encompass Him but He encompasses all vision. For He is the Most Subtle AllAware. Quran 610397 Allh is the only God and the same God worshiped in Christianity and JudaismQ29
46.1 00 Islam emerged in the 
7 th century CE in the context of both Christianity and Judaism with some thematic elements similar to Gnosticism.101102103104105106107108 Islamic belief states that Muhammad did not bring a new religion from God but rather the same religion as practiced by Abraham Moses David Jesus and all the other prophets of God.109 The assertion of Islam is that the message of God had been corrupted distorted or lost over time and the Quran was sent to Muhammad in order to correct the lost message of the Tawrat Torah Injil Gospel and Zabur.110111112113114115 The Quran asserts the existence of a single and absolute truth that transcends the world a unique and indivisible being who is independent of the creation.116 The Quran rejects binary modes of thinking such as the idea of a duality of God by arguing that both good and evil generate from Gods creative act. God is a universal god rather than a local tribal or parochial one an absolute who integrates all affirmative values and brooks no evil.117 Ashari theology which dominated Sunni Islam from the tenth to the nineteenth century insists on ultimate divine transcendence and holds that divine unity is not accessible to human reason. Asharism teaches that human knowledge regarding it is limited to what has been revealed through the prophets and on such paradoxes as Gods creation of evil revelation had to accept bila kayfa without asking how.118 Tawhid constitutes the foremost article of the Muslim profession of faith There is no god but God Muhammad is the messenger of God.119 To attribute divinity to a created entity is the only unpardonable sin mentioned in the Quran.117 The entirety of the Islamic teaching rests on the principle of tawhid.120 Medieval Islamic philosopher AlGhazali offered a proof of monotheism from omnipotence asserting there can only be one omnipotent being. For if there were two omnipotent beings the first would either have power over the second meaning the second is not omnipotent or not meaning the first is not omnipotent thus implying that there could only be one omnipotent being.121 As they traditionally profess a concept of monotheism with a singular entity as God Judaism82 and Islam reject the Christian idea of monotheism. Judaism uses the term Shituf to refer to nonmonotheistic ways of worshiping God. Although Muslims venerate Jesus Isa in Arabic as a prophet and messiah they do not accept the doctrine that he was a begotten son of God. Mandaeismedit Mandaean pendant Main articles Mandaeism and Mandaeans Mandaeism or Mandaeanism Arabic  Mandyah sometimes also known as Sabianism is a monotheistic Gnostic and ethnic religion.1221231 Mandaeans consider Adam Seth Noah Shem and John the Baptist to be prophets with Adam being the founder of the religion and John being the greatest and final prophet.12445 The Mandaeans believe in one God commonly named Hayyi Rabbi meaning The Great Life or The Great Living God.125 The Mandaeans speak a dialect of Eastern Aramaic known as Mandaic. The name Mandaean comes from the Aramaic manda meaning knowledge as does Greek gnosis.126127 The term Sabianism is derived from the Sabians Arabic  albia a mysterious religious group mentioned three times in the Quran alongside the Jews the Christians and the Zoroastrians as a people of the book and whose name was historically claimed by the Mandaeans as well as by several other religious groups in order to gain the legal protection dhimma offered by Islamic law.128 Mandaeans recognize God to be the eternal creator of all the one and only in domination who has no partner.129 Bah Faithedit Main article God in the Bah Faith Bah House of Worship Langenhain Germany God in the Bah Faith is taught to be the Imperishable uncreated Being Who is the source of existence too great for humans to fully comprehend. Human primitive understanding of God is achieved through his revelations via his divine intermediary Manifestations.130131 In the Bah faith such Christian doctrines as the Trinity are seen as compromising the Bah view that God is single and has no equal132 and the very existence of the Bah Faith is a challenge to the Islamic doctrine of the finality of Muhammads revelation.133 God in the Bah Faith communicates to humanity through divine intermediaries known as Manifestations of God.134 These Manifestations establish religion in the world.131 It is through these divine intermediaries that humans can approach God and through them God brings divine revelation and law.135 The Oneness of God is one of the core teachings of the Bah Faith. The obligatory prayers in the Bah Faith involve explicit monotheistic testimony.136137 God is the imperishable uncreated being who is the source of all existence.138 He is described as a personal God unknowable inaccessible the source of all Revelation eternal omniscient omnipresent and almighty.139140 Although transcendent and inaccessible directly his image is reflected in his creation. The purpose of creation is for the created to have the capacity to know and love its creator.141 God communicates his will and purpose to humanity through intermediaries known as Manifestations of God who are the prophets and messengers that have founded religions from prehistoric times up to the present day.134 Rastafariedit Rastafari sometimes termed Rastafarianism is classified as both a new religious movement and social movement. It developed in Jamaica during the 19
30 s. It lacks any centralised authority and there is much heterogeneity among practitioners who are known as Rastafari Rastafarians or Rastas. Rastafari refer to their beliefs which are based on a specific interpretation of the Bible as Rastalogy. Central is a monotheistic belief in a single Godreferred to as Jahwho partially resides within each individual. The former emperor of Ethiopia Haile Selassie is given central importance. Many Rastas regard him as an incarnation of Jah on Earth and as the Second Coming of Christ. Others regard him as a human prophet who fully recognised the inner divinity within every individual. Zoroastrianismedit Main articles Zoroastrianism and Iranian religions Faravahar or Ferohar is one of the primary symbols of Zoroastrianism believed to be the depiction of a Fravashi guardian spirit. By some scholars the Zoroastrians Parsis or Zartoshtis are sometimes credited with being some of the first monotheists and having had influence on other world religions.142143 Zoroastrianism combines cosmogonic dualism and eschatological monotheism which makes it unique among the religions of the world. There are two issues that have long made it problematic to identify Zoroastrianism as true monotheism the presence of lesser deities and dualism. But before hastening to conclude that the Amesha Spentas and the other yazatas compromise the purity of monotheism we should consider that the other historical monotheisms too made room for other figures endowed with supernatural powers to bridge the gulf between the exalted remote Creator God and the human world the angels in all of them whose conception in postexilic Judaism was apparently developed after the pattern of the Amesha Spentas Boyce and Grenet 1991 404405 the saints and the Virgin Mary in several Christian churches and the other persons of the Trinity in all of Christianity. Despite the vast differences with Zoroastrian theology the common thread is that all these beings are subordinate to the Godhead as helpers or in the case of the persons of the Trinity coequals hence they do not pursue different interests and are worshiped jointly with the Godhead not separately therefore the supplicants dilemma does not arise.142144145  Yazidismedit Main article Yazidism God in Yazidism created the world and entrusted it into the care of seven Holy Beings known as Angels.146147148 The Yazidis believe in a divine Triad.146148149 The original hidden God of the Yazidis is considered to be remote and inactive in relation to his creation except to contain and bind it together within his essence.146 His first emanation is the Angel Melek Tas Taws Melek who functions as the ruler of the world and leader of the other Angels.146148149 The second hypostasis of the divine Triad is the Sheikh Ad ibn Musafir. The third is Sultan Ezid. These are the three hypostases of the one God. The identity of these three is sometimes blurred with Sheikh Ad considered to be a manifestation of Taws Melek and vice versa the same also applies to Sultan Ezid.146 Yazidis are called Milet Taws Melek the nation of Taws Melek.150 God is referred to by Yazidis as Xwed Xwedawend zdan and Pedsha King and less commonly Ellah and Heq.151152147146153 According to some Yazidi hymns known as Qewls God has 1001 names or 3003 names according to other Qewls.154155 Oceaniaedit Aboriginal Australian religionedit Aboriginal Australians are typically described as polytheistic in nature.156 Although some researchers shy from referring to Dreamtime figures as gods or deities they are broadly described as such for the sake of simplicity.157 In Southeastern Australian cultures the sky father Baiame is perceived as the creator of the universe though this role is sometimes taken by other gods like Yhi or Bunjil and at least among the Gamilaraay traditionally revered above other mythical figures.158 Equation between him and the Christian god is common among both missionaries and modern Christian Aboriginals.159 The Yolngu had extensive contact with the Makassans and adopted religious practises inspired by those of Islam. The god Walithawalitha is based on Allah specifically with the waTaala suffix but while this deity had a role in funerary practises it is unclear if it was Allahlike in terms of functions.160 Andaman Islandsedit The religion of the Andamanese peoples has at times been described as animistic monotheism believing foremost in a single deity Pluga who created the universe.161 However Pluga is not worshipped and anthropomorphic personifications of natural phenomena are also known.162 South Asiaedit Main articles ProtoIndoIranian religion and Indian religions Hinduismedit Main articles Hindu views on monotheism and God in Hinduism See also Hindu denominations Krishna displaying his Vishvarupa universal form to Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra As an old religion Hinduism inherits religious concepts spanning monotheism polytheism panentheism pantheism monism and atheism among others163164165166 and its concept of God is complex and depends upon each individual and the tradition and philosophy followed. Hindu views are broad and range from monism through pantheism and panentheism alternatively called monistic theism by some scholars to monotheism and even atheism. Hinduism cannot be said to be purely polytheistic. Hindu religious leaders have repeatedly stressed that while Gods forms are many and the ways to communicate with him are many God is one. The puja of the murti is a way to communicate with the abstract one god Brahman which creates sustains and dissolves creation.167 Rig Veda 
1.1 
64.4 6 Indra mitra varuamaghnimhuratho divya sa suparo gharutmn eka sad vipr bahudh vadantyaghni yama mtarivnamhu They call him Indra Mitra Varua Agni and he is heavenly noblywinged Garuda. To what is One sages give many a title they call it Agni Yama Mtarivan. trans. Griffith Traditions of Gaudiya Vaishnavas the Nimbarka Sampradaya and followers of Swaminarayan and Vallabha consider Krishna to be the source of all avatars168 and the source of Vishnu himself or to be the same as Narayana. As such he is therefore regarded as Svayam Bhagavan.169170171 When Krishna is recognized to be Svayam Bhagavan it can be understood that this is the belief of Gaudiya Vaishnavism172 the Vallabha Sampradaya173 and the Nimbarka Sampradaya where Krishna is accepted to be the source of all other avatars and the source of Vishnu himself. This belief is drawn primarily from the famous statement of the Bhagavatam174 

1.3.2 
8.1 75 A viewpoint differing from this theological concept is the concept of Krishna as an avatar of Narayana or Vishnu. It should be however noted that although it is usual to speak of Vishnu as the source of the avataras this is only one of the names of the God of Vaishnavism who is also known as Narayana Vasudeva and Krishna and behind each of those names there is a divine figure with attributed supremacy in Vaishnavism.176 The Rig Veda discusses monotheistic thought as do the Atharva Veda and Yajur Veda Devas are always looking to the supreme abode of Vishnu tad vio parama pada sad payanti sraya Rig Veda 
1.2 
2.2 0 The One Truth sages know by many names Rig Veda 
1.1 
64.4 6177 When at first the unborn sprung into being He won His own dominion beyond which nothing higher has been in existence Atharva Veda 

10.7.3 1178 There is none to compare with Him. There is no parallel to Him whose glory verily is great. Yajur Veda 
32.3 179 The number of auspicious qualities of God are countless with the following six qualities bhaga being the most important Jna omniscience defined as the power to know about all beings simultaneously Aishvarya sovereignty derived from the word Ishvara which consists in unchallenged rule over all Shakti energy or power which is the capacity to make the impossible possible Bala strength which is the capacity to support everything by will and without any fatigue Vrya vigor which indicates the power to retain immateriality as the supreme being in spite of being the material cause of mutable creations Tejas splendor which expresses His selfsufficiency and the capacity to overpower everything by His spiritual effulgence180 In the Shaivite tradition the Shri Rudram Sanskrit   to which the Chamakam  is added by scriptural tradition is a Hindu stotra dedicated to Rudra an epithet of Shiva taken from the Yajurveda TS 
4.5  

4.7.1 81182 Shri Rudram is also known as Sri Rudraprasna atarudrya and Rudradhyaya. The text is important in Vedanta where Shiva is equated to the Universal supreme God. The hymn is an early example of enumerating the names of a deity183 a tradition developed extensively in the sahasranama literature of Hinduism. The Nyaya school of Hinduism has made several arguments regarding a monotheistic view. The Naiyanikas have given an argument that such a god can only be one. In the Nyaya Kusumanjali this is discussed against the proposition of the Mimamsa school that let us assume there were many demigods devas and sages rishis in the beginning who wrote the Vedas and created the world. Nyaya says that If they assume such omniscient beings those endowed with the various superhuman faculties of assuming infinitesimal size and so on and capable of creating everything then we reply that the law of parsimony bids us assume only one such namely Him the adorable Lord. There can be no confidence in a noneternal and nonomniscient being and hence it follows that according to the system which rejects God the tradition of the Veda is simultaneously overthrown there is no other way open.citation needed In other words Nyaya says that the polytheist would have to give elaborate proofs for the existence and origin of his several celestial spirits none of which would be logical and that it is more logical to assume one eternal omniscient god.184 Many other Hindus however view polytheism as far preferable to monotheism. The famous Hindu revitalist leader Ram Swarup for example points to the Vedas as being specifically polytheistic185 and states that only some form of polytheism alone can do justice to this variety and richness.186 Sita Ram Goel another 
20 thcentury Hindu historian wrote I had an occasion to read the typescript of a book Ram Swarup had finished writing in 1973. It was a profound study of Monotheism the central dogma of both Islam and Christianity as well as a powerful presentation of what the monotheists denounce as Hindu Polytheism. I had never read anything like it. It was a revelation to me that Monotheism was not a religious concept but an imperialist idea. I must confess that I myself had been inclined towards Monotheism till this time. I had never thought that a multiplicity of Gods was the natural and spontaneous expression of an evolved consciousness.187 Sikhismedit Main article Sikhism A Sikh temple known as Nanaksar Gurudwara in Alberta Canada Ik Onkr a Sikh symbol representing the One Supreme Reality Sikhi is a monotheistic188189 and a revealed religion.190 God in Sikhism is called Akal Purakh which means The Immortal Being or Vhigur Wondrous Enlightener. However other names like Rama Brahman Khuda Allah etc. are also used to refer to the same God who is shapeless timeless and sightless nirakr akaal and alakh. Sikhi presents a unique perspective where God is present sarav vipak in all of its creation and does not exist outside of its creation. God must be seen from the inward eye or the heart. Sikhs follow the Aad Guru Granth Sahib and are instructed to meditate on the Naam Name of God  Vhigur to progress towards enlightenment as its rigorous application permits the existence of communication between God and human beings.191 Sikhism is a monotheistic faith192193 that arose in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent during the 
16 th and 
17 th centuries. Sikhs believe in one timeless omnipresent supreme creator. The opening verse of the Guru Granth Sahib known as the Mul Mantra signifies this Punjabi               Transliteration ikk ankr satinmu karat purakhu nirabhau niravairu akla mrati ajn saibhang gura prasdi. One Universal creator God The supreme Unchangeable Truth The Creator of the Universe Beyond Fear Beyond Hatred Beyond Death Beyond Birth SelfExistent by Gurus Grace. The word  Ik akr has two components. The first is  the digit 1 in Gurmukhi signifying the singularity of the creator. Together the word means One Universal creator God. It is often said that the 1430 pages of the Guru Granth Sahib are all expansions on the Mul Mantra. Although the Sikhs have many names for God some derived from Islam and Hinduism they all refer to the same Supreme Being. The Sikh holy scriptures refer to the One God who pervades the whole of space and is the creator of all beings in the universe. The following quotation from the Guru Granth Sahib highlights this point Chant and meditate on the One God who permeates and pervades the many beings of the whole Universe. God created it and God spreads through it everywhere. Everywhere I look I see God. The Perfect Lord is perfectly pervading and permeating the water the land and the sky there is no place without Him. Guru Granth Sahib Page 782 However there is a strong case for arguing that the Guru Granth Sahib teaches monism due to its nondualistic tendencies Punjabi                You have thousands of Lotus Feet and yet You do not have even one foot. You have no nose but you have thousands of noses. This Play of Yours entrances me. Guru Granth Sahib Page 13 Sikhs believe that God has been given many names but they all refer to the One God VhiGur. Sikh holy scripture Guru Granth Sahib speaks to all faiths and Sikhs believe that members of other religions such as Islam Hinduism and Christianity all worship the same God and the names Allah Rahim Karim Hari Raam and Paarbrahm are therefore frequently mentioned in the Sikh holy scripture Guru Granth Sahib . God in Sikhism is most commonly referred to as Akal Purakh which means The Immortal Being or Waheguru the Wondrous Enlightener. Criticismedit Main article Criticism of monotheism See also Criticism of religion Critics have described monotheism as a cause of ignorance oppression and violence. David Hume 17111776 said that monotheism is less pluralistic and thus less tolerant than polytheism because monotheism stipulates that people pigeonhole their beliefs into one tenet.194 In the same vein Auguste Comte said that Monotheism is irreconcilable with the existence in our nature of the instincts of benevolence because it compels followers to devote themselves to a single Creator.195 Mark S. Smith an American biblical scholar and ancient historian wrote that monotheism has been a totalizing discourse often coopting all aspects of a social belief system resulting in the exclusion of others.196 Jacob Neusner suggests that the logic of monotheism ... yields little basis for tolerating other religions.197 Ancient monotheism is described as the instigator of violence in its early days because it inspired the Israelites to wage war upon the Canaanites who believed in multiple gods.198 Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan regarded monotheism as a cause of violence saying The intolerance of narrow monotheism is written in letters of blood across the history of man from the time when first the tribes of Israel burst into the land of Canaan. The worshippers of the one jealous God are egged on to aggressive wars against people of alien beliefs and cultures. They invoke divine sanction for the cruelties inflicted on the conquered. The spirit of old Israel is inherited by Christianity and Islam and it might not be unreasonable to suggest that it would have been better for Western civilization if Greece had moulded it on this question rather than Palestine.199 See alsoedit Seicho no Ie Cheondoism Tenrikyo Criticism of monotheism Deism Idolatry Intelligent design Panentheism Pantheism Postmonotheism Unmoved mover Portal Religion Referencesedit  
14.2  Types of Religions. 4 June 2020.  a b c Monotheism. Encyclopdia Britannica. 24 May 2023.  Monotheism. Hutchinson Encyclopedia 
12 th edition. p. 644.  a b c Cross F.L. Livingstone E.A. eds. 1974. Monotheism. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church 2 ed.. Oxford Oxford University Press.  William Wainwright 2018. Monotheism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab Stanford University.  Frank E. Eakin Jr. The Religion and Culture of Israel Boston Allyn and Bacon 1971 70.  Mackintosh Robert 1916. Monolatry and Henotheism. Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. Vol. VIII. p. 810. Retrieved Jan 21 2016.  Cleveland William L. 2004. A History of the Modern Middle East 
3 rd ed.. WestView Press. pp. 23. ISBN 0813340489. Monotheism was first preached by the prophets of ancient Israel and is one of the most significant and enduring legacies of the Jewish faith.  Ferrero Mario 2021. From Polytheism to Monotheism Zoroaster and Some Economic Theory. Homo Oeconomicus. 38 14 77108. doi
10.1 0
07 s41412021001134.  Christianitys status as monotheistic is affirmed in among other sources the Catholic Encyclopedia article Monotheism Archived 20180704 at the Wayback Machine William F. Albright From the Stone Age to Christianity H. Richard Niebuhr About.com Monotheistic Religion resources Archived 20060521 at the Wayback Machine Kirsch God Against the Gods Woodhead An Introduction to Christianity The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia Monotheism Archived 20071012 at the Wayback Machine The New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy monotheism New Dictionary of Theology Paul Archived 20180704 at the Wayback Machine pp. 496499 Meconi. Pagan Monotheism in Late Antiquity. pp. 1
11 ff.  Obeid Anis 2006. The Druze  Their Faith in Tawhid. Syracuse University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780815652571. Retrieved 27 May 2017.  Hayes Christine 2012. Understanding Biblical Monotheism. Introduction to the Bible. The Open Yale Courses Series. New Haven and London Yale University Press. pp. 1528. ISBN 9780300181791. JSTOR j.ctt
32 bxpm.6.  References McDaniel J. 20130920. A Modern Hindu Monotheism Indonesian Hindus as People of the Book. The Journal of Hindu Studies. 6 3. Oxford University Press OUP 333362. doi
10.1 0
93 jhshit030. ISSN 17564255. Zoroastrian Studies The Iranian Religion and Various Monographs 1928  Page 31 A. V. Williams Jackson  2003 Global Institutions of Religion Ancient Movers Modern Shakers  Page 88 Katherine Marshall  2013 Ethnic Groups of South Asia and the Pacific An Encyclopedia  Page 348 James B. Minahan  2012 Introduction To Sikhism  Page 15 Gobind Singh Mansukhani  1993 The Popular Encyclopedia of World Religions  Page 95 Richard Wolff  2007 Focus Arrogance and Greed Americas Cancer  Page 102 Jim Gray  2012  Monos Archived 20070526 at the Wayback Machine Henry George Liddell Robert Scott A GreekEnglish Lexicon at Perseus  Theos Archived 20070526 at the Wayback Machine Henry George Liddell Robert Scott A GreekEnglish Lexicon at Perseus  The compound  is current only in Modern Greek. There is a single attestation of  in a Byzantine hymn Canones Junii 

20.6.4 3 A. Acconcia Longo and G. Schir Analecta hymnica graeca vol. 11 e codicibus eruta Italiae inferioris. Rome Istituto di Studi Bizantini e Neoellenici. Universit di Roma 1978  More Henry 1660. An Explanation of the Grand Mystery of Godliness. London Flesher  Morden. p. 62.  a b Ballentine Debra Scoggins 20211115. Monotheism and the Hebrew Bible. Religion Compass. 16 1. doi
10.1 1
11 rec
3.1 2425. ISSN 17498171. S
2 CID 244280953.  Sharma Chandradhar 1962. Chronological Summary of History of Indian Philosophy. Indian Philosophy A Critical Survey. New York Barnes  Noble. p. vi.  Rig Veda RigVeda Book 10 HYMN CXC. Creation. www.sacredtexts.com. Archived from the original on 20220720. Retrieved 20220805.  a b c d e f Gnuse Robert Karl 1 May 1997. No Other Gods Emergent Monotheism in Israel. Sheffield Academic Press. p. 225. ISBN 1850756570.  Homer H. Dubs Theism and Naturalism in Ancient Chinese Philosophy Philosophy of East and West Vol. 9 No. 34 1959  Yasna XLIV.7  First and last for all Eternity as the Father of the Good Mind the true Creator of Truth and Lord over the actions of life. Yasna 
31.8   Vispanam Datarem Creator of All Yasna 
44.7   Data Angheush Creator of Life Yasna 
50.1 1  The Zend Avesta Part II SBE23 Nyyis I. Khrshd Nyyis. www.sacredtexts.com. Archived from the original on 20230203. Retrieved 20220805.  Ferrero Mario 2021. From Polytheism to Monotheism Zoroaster and Some Economic Theory. Homo Oeconomicus. 38 14 77108. doi
10.1 0
07 s41412021001134.  a b c Wells Colin 2010. How Did God Get Started. Arion. 
18.2  Fall. Archived from the original on 20210508. Retrieved 20201226. ...as any student of ancient philosophy can tell you we see the first appearance of a unitary God not in Jewish scripture but in the thought of the Greek philosopher Plato...  Ethical monotheism. britannica.com. Encyclopdia Britannica Inc. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. Retrieved 25 December 2014.  Fischer Paul. Judaism and Ethical Monotheism. platophilosophy. The University of Vermont Blogs. Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2017.  Nikiprowetzky V. 1975. Ethical monotheism. 2 ed. Vol. 104 pp. 6989. New York The MIT Press Article Stable. JSTOR 20024331  Armstrong Karen 1994. A History of God The 40
00 Year Quest of Judaism Christianity and Islam. New York City New York Ballantine Books. p. 3. ISBN 9780345384560.  Armstrong Karen 1994. A History of God The 40
00 Year Quest of Judaism Christianity and Islam. New York City New York Ballantine Books. ISBN 9780345384560.  Compare Theissen Gerd 1985. III Biblical Monotheism in an Evolutionary Perspective. Biblical Faith An Evolutionary Approach. Translated by Bowden John. Minneapolis Fortress Press published 2007. p. 64. ISBN 9781451408614. Retrieved 20170113. Evolutionary interpretations of the history of religion are usually understood to be an explanation of the phenomenon of religion as a result of a continuous development. The model for such development is the growth of living beings which leads to increasingly subtle differentiation and integration. Within such a framework of thought monotheism would be interpreted as the result of a continuous development from animism polytheism henotheism and monolatry to belief in the one and only God. Such a development cannot be proved. Monotheism appeared suddenly though not without being prepared for.  Asante Molefi Kete Mazama Ama 2009. Encyclopedia of African religion. Thousand Oaks Calif. SAGE. ISBN 9781412936361. OCLC 185031292. pp. 18. 95 103 748.   Crandall David P. 2000. The Place of Stunted Ironwood Trees A Year in the Lives of the CattleHerding Himba of Namibia. New York Continuum International Publishing Group Inc. pp. 47. ISBN 0826412
70 X.  Ikenga International Journal of African Studies. Institute of African Studies University of Nigeria. 1972. p. 103. Retrieved 26 July 2013.  David Rosalie 1998. Handbook to Life in Ancient Egypt. Facts on File. p. 125. ISBN 9780816033126  via Archive.org.  a b McLaughlin Elsie 22 September 2017. The Art of the Amarna Period. World History Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 2 May 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2020. In Regnal Year 5 the pharaoh dropped all pretense and declared Aten the official state deity of Egypt directing focus and funding away from the Amun priesthood to the cult of the sun disk. He even changed his name from Amenhotep Amun is Satisfied to Akhenaten Effective for the Aten and ordered the construction of a new capital city Akhetaten The Horizon of Aten in the desert. Located at the modern site of Tell elAmarna Akhetaten was situated between the ancient Egyptian cities of Thebes and Memphis on the east bank of the Nile.  Amarna Period of Egypt. World History Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 20220217. Retrieved 20220210.  The Aten  Ancient Egypt Online. Archived from the original on 20220821. Retrieved 20220805.  Hart George 2005. The Routledge dictionary of Egyptian gods and goddesses 
2 nd ed.. Routledge. p. 39. ISBN 9780415344951.  Akhenaten The Mysteries of Religious Revolution. ARCE. Retrieved 20240221.  Pinch Geraldine 2004. The gods themselves deities and myth. Egyptian Myth A Very Short Introduction. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192803467.  Buskirk Kathy Van 20070404. The Cherokee religion. New Statesman. Retrieved 20240228.  Ostler Jeffry. The Plains Sioux and U.S. Colonialism from Lewis and Clark to Wounded Knee. Cambridge University Press Jul 5 2004. ISBN 0521605903 pg 26.  Thomas Robert Murray. Manitou and God NorthAmerican Indian Religions and Christian Culture. Greenwood Publishing Group 2007. ISBN 0313347794 pg 35.  Means Robert. Where White Men Fear to Tread The Autobiography of Russell Means. Macmillan 1995. ISBN 0312147619 pg 241.  James Maffie 2005. Aztec Philosophy. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.  James Maffie Aztec Philosophy Understanding a World in Motion University Press of Colorado 15032014  a b Dubs Homer H. 1959. Theism and Naturalism in Ancient Chinese Philosophy. Philosophy East and West. 9 34 163172. doi
10.2 3071397096. ISSN 00318221. JSTOR 1397096. Archived from the original on 20220220. Retrieved 20220220. It does not necessarily imply monotheism however since in addition to the Supreme Highgod or Heaven there were also the ordinary gods shen and the ancestral spirits guei all of whom were worshipped in the Jou royal cult.  Chang Iris 2003. The Chinese in America A Narrative History. New York Viking Press. pp. 3031. ISBN 9780670031238.  The spelling Tengrism is found in the 19
60 s e.g. Bergounioux ed. Primitive and prehistoric religions Volume 140 Hawthorn Books 1966 p. 80. Tengrianism is a reflection of the Russian term . It is reported in 1996 socalled Tengrianism in Shnirelman ed. Who gets the past competition for ancestors among nonRussian intellectuals in Russia Woodrow Wilson Center Press 1996 ISBN 9780801852213 p. 31 in the context of the nationalist rivalry over Bulgar legacy. The spellings Tengriism and Tengrianity are later reported deprecatingly in scare quotes in 2004 in Central Asiatic journal vol. 4849 2004 p. 238 Archived 20230326 at the Wayback Machine. The Turkish term Tengricilik is also found from the 19
90 s. Mongolian   is used in a 1999 biography of Genghis Khan Boldbaatar et al.   11621227   1999 p. 18 Archived 20230420 at the Wayback Machine.  R. Meserve Religions in the central Asian environment. In History of Civilizations of Central Asia Volume IV Archived 20160303 at the Wayback Machine The age of achievement A.D. 750 to the end of the fifteenth century Part Two The achievements p. 68 ... The imperial religion was more monotheistic centred around the allpowerful god Tengri the sky god.  Michael Fergus Janar Jandosova Kazakhstan Coming of Age Stacey International 2003 p.91 ... a profound combination of monotheism and polytheism that has come to be known as Tengrism.  H. B. Paksoy Tengri in Eurasia Archived 20170911 at the Wayback Machine 2008  Napil Bazylkhan Kenje Torlanbaeva in Central Eurasian Studies Society Central Eurasian Studies Society 2004 p.40  There is no doubt that between the 
6 th and 
9 th centuries Tengrism was the religion among the nomads of the steppes Yazar Andrs RnaTas Hungarians and Europe in the early Middle Ages an introduction to early Hungarian history Yaync Central European University Press 1999 ISBN 9789639116481 p. 151 Archived 20230406 at the Wayback Machine.  RonaTas Andras Andrs RnaTas March 1999. Hungarians  Europe in the Early Middle Ages An Introduction to Early ...  Andrs RnaTas  Google Kitaplar. Central European University Press. ISBN 9789639116481. Retrieved 20130219.  JeanPaul Roux Die alttrkische Mythologie p. 255  Mallory J. P. Adams D.Q. 2006. The Oxford Introduction to ProtoIndoEuropean and the ProtoIndoEuropean World. Oxford England Oxford University Press. pp. 408411 and 423434. ISBN 9780199296682.  Katii Radoslav 2008. Boanski boj Tragovima svetih pjesama nae pretkranske starine PDF. Zagreb IBIS GRAFIKA. ISBN 9789536927418. Archived from the original PDF on 20151018.  Puhvel Jaan 1987 Comparative Mythology Baltimore Maryland Johns Hopkins University Press pp. 234235 ISBN 0801839386  McKirahan Richard D. Xenophanes of Colophon. Philosophy Before Socrates. Indianapolis Hackett Publishing Company 1994. 61. Print.  DielsKranz Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker Xenophanes frr. 1516.  Osborne Catherine. Chapter 4. Presocratic Philosophy A Very Short Introduction. Oxford UP. 62. Print.  Lamb W. R. M. Euthyphro. Perseus. Tufts University. Archived from the original on 23 August 2015. Retrieved 25 March 2017.  Wyller Egil A. 1997. Henologische Perspektiven II zu Ehren Egil A. Wyller Internales HenologieSymposium. Amsterdam Netherlands Rodopi. pp. 56. ISBN 9042003
57 X. Retrieved 25 March 2017.  Schrmann Reiner Lily Reginald 2003. Broken Hegemonies. Bloomington Indiana Indiana University Press. pp. 143144. ISBN 0253341442. Retrieved 25 March 2017.  Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible s.v. Apollo.  E. Kessler Dionysian Monotheism in Nea Paphos Cyprus two monotheistic religions Dionysian and Christian existed contemporaneously in Nea Paphos during the 
4 th century C.E. ... the particular iconography of Hermes and Dionysos in the panel of the Epiphany of Dionysos ... represents the culmination of a pagan iconographic tradition in which an infant divinity is seated on the lap of another divine figure this pagan motif was appropriated by early Christian artists and developed into the standardized icon of the Virgin and Child. Thus the mosaic helps to substantiate the existence of pagan monotheism. Abstract Archived 20080421 at the Wayback Machine  Religion Judaism. BBC. Archived from the original on 20220805. Retrieved 20220805.  a b Albertz Rainer 1994. A History of Israelite Religion Volume I From the Beginnings to the End of the Monarchy. Westminster John Knox. p. 61. ISBN 9780664227197.  Israel Drazin. Ancient Jews believed in the existence of many gods. Archived from the original on 20141021. Retrieved 20140918.  Monotheism Archived 20220412 at the Wayback Machine My Jewish Learning Many critical scholars think that the interval between the Exodus and the proclamation of monotheism was much longer. Outside of Deuteronomy the earliest passages to state that there are no gods but the Lord are in poems and prayers attributed to Hannah and David one and a half to two and a half centuries after the Exodus at the earliest. Such statements do not become common until the seventh century B.C.E. the period to which Deuteronomy is dated by the critical view.  1 Kings 18 Jeremiah 2 Othmar Keel Christoph Uehlinger Gods Goddesses and Images of God in Ancient Israel Fortress Press 1998 Mark S. Smith The Origins of Biblical Monotheism Israels Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic Texts Oxford University Press 2001  Othmar Keel Christoph Uehlinger Gods Goddesses and Images of God in Ancient Israel Fortress Press 1998 Mark S. Smith The Origins of Biblical Monotheism Israels Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic Texts Oxford University Press 2001  Maimonides 13 principles of faith Second Principle  e. g. Babylonian Talmud Megilla 
7 b
17 a.  Yesode HaTorah 17  a b Boteach Shmuley 2012 5772. Kosher Jesus. Springfield NJ Gefen Books. pp. 
47 ff 1
11 ff 1
52 ff. ISBN 9789652295781.  a b Jacobs Louis ed. 1995. The Jewish Religion A Companion 
1 st Edition. Oxford University Press. pp. 7980. ISBN 9780198264637. Archived from the original on 20200521. Retrieved 20180413.  Definition of the Fourth Lateran Council quoted in Catechism of the Catholic Church 253 Archived 20200329 at the Wayback Machine  Ecumenical from Koine Greek oikoumenikos literally meaning worldwide the earliest extant uses of the term for a council are in Eusebiuss Life of Constantine 
3.6  1 Archived 20070707 at the Wayback Machine around 338    he convoked an Ecumenical council Athanasiuss Ad Afros Epistola Synodica in 369 2 Archived 20181130 at the Wayback Machine and the Letter in 382 to Pope Damasus I and the Latin bishops from the First Council of Constantinople 3 Archived 20060613 at the Wayback Machine  Examples of anteNicene statements Hence all the power of magic became dissolved and every bond of wickedness was destroyed mens ignorance was taken away and the old kingdom abolished God Himself appearing in the form of a man for the renewal of eternal life. St. Ignatius of Antioch in Letter to the Ephesians ch.4 shorter version RobertsDonaldson translation We have also as a Physician the Lord our God Jesus the Christ the onlybegotten Son and Word before time began but who afterwards became also man of Mary the virgin. For the Word was made flesh. Being incorporeal He was in the body being impassible He was in a passable body being immortal He was in a mortal body being life He became subject to corruption that He might free our souls from death and corruption and heal them and might restore them to health when they were diseased with ungodliness and wicked lusts St. Ignatius of Antioch in Letter to the Ephesians ch.7 shorter version RobertsDonaldson translation The Church though dispersed throughout the whole world even to the ends of the earth has received from the apostles and their disciples this faith ...one God the Father Almighty Maker of heaven and earth and the sea and all things that are in them and in one Christ Jesus the Son of God who became incarnate for our salvation and in the Holy Spirit who proclaimed through the prophets the dispensations of God and the advents and the birth from a virgin and the passion and the resurrection from the dead and the ascension into heaven in the flesh of the beloved Christ Jesus our Lord and His manifestation from heaven in the glory of the Father to gather all things in one and to raise up anew all flesh of the whole human race in order that to Christ Jesus our Lord and God and Savior and King according to the will of the invisible Father every knee should bow of things in heaven and things in earth and things under the earth and that every tongue should confess to him and that He should execute just judgment towards all... St. Irenaeus in Against Heresies ch.X v.I Donaldson Sir James 1950 Ante Nicene Fathers Volume 1 Apostolic Fathers Justin Martyr Irenaeus William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. ISBN 9780802880871 For in the name of God the Father and Lord of the universe and of our Savior Jesus Christ and of the Holy Spirit they then receive the washing with water Justin Martyr in First Apology ch. LXI Donaldson Sir James 1950 Ante Nicene Fathers Volume 1 Apostolic Fathers Justin Martyr Irenaeus Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company ISBN 9780802880871  Olson Roger E. 2002. The Trinity. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 15. ISBN 9780802848277.  The Articles of Faith 13 Beliefs  ComeUntoChrist. www.churchofjesuschrist.org. Archived from the original on 20220805. Retrieved 20220805.  Jesus Christ Is Our Savior  ComeUntoChrist. www.churchofjesuschrist.org. Archived from the original on 20220805. Retrieved 20220805.  Offenders for a Word. Archived from the original on 20151210. Retrieved 20150228.  Unitarians Archived 20140705 at the Wayback Machine at Catholic Encyclopedia ed. Kevin Knight at New Advent website  Mohammed Amin. Triangulating the Abrahamic faiths  measuring the closeness of Judaism Christianity and Islam. Archived from the original on 20160222. Retrieved 20160120. Christians were seen as polytheists due to the doctrine of the Trinity. In the last few hundred years rabbis have moderated this view slightly but they still do not regard Christians as being fully monotheistic in the same manner as Jews or Muslims. Muslims were acknowledged as monotheists.  Islamic Practices. Universal Life Church Ministries. Archived from the original on 20160307. Retrieved 20160120. It is the Islamic belief that Christianity is not monotheistic as it claims but rather polytheistic with the trinitythe father son and the Holy Ghost.  Lesson 10 Three Persons are Subsistent Relations Archived 20170731 at the Wayback Machine International Catholic University The fatherhood constitutes the Person of the Father the sonship constitutes the Person of the Son and the passive aspiration constitutes the Person of the Holy Spirit. But in God everything is one where there is no distinction by relative opposition. Consequently even though in God there are three Persons there is only one consciousness one thinking and one loving. The three Persons share equally in the internal divine activity because they are all identified with the divine essence. For if each divine Person possessed his own distinct and different consciousness there would be three gods not the one God of Christian revelation. So you will see that in this regard there is an immense difference between a divine Person and a human person.  Trinity Archived 20210430 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopdia Britannica The Council of Nicaea in 325 stated the crucial formula for that doctrine in its confession that the Son is of the same substance homoousios as the Father even though it said very little about the Holy Spirit. Over the next half century Athanasius defended and refined the Nicene formula and by the end of the 
4 th century under the leadership of Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nyssa and Gregory of Nazianzus the Cappadocian Fathers the doctrine of the Trinity took substantially the form it has maintained ever since. It is accepted in all of the historic confessions of Christianity even though the impact of the Enlightenment decreased its importance.  Gerhard Bwering God and his Attributes Encyclopedia of the Quran  a b Esposito John L. 1998. Islam The Straight Path. Oxford University Press. p. 22.  Esposito 1998 p. 88.  Allah. Encyclopdia Britannica. 2007. Encyclopdia Britannica  Peters F.E. 2003. Islam. Princeton University Press. p. 4.  Lawson Todd 2011. Gnostic Apocalypse and Islam Quran Exegesis Messianism and the Literary Origins of the Babi Religion. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415495394.  Tisdall William 1911. The Sources of Islam A Persian Treatise. London Morrison and Gibb. pp. 4674.  Rudolph Kurt 2001. Gnosis The Nature And History of Gnosticism. London TT Clark Intl. pp. 367390. ISBN 9780567086402.  Hoeller Stephan A. 2002. Gnosticism New Light on the Ancient Tradition of Inner Knowing. Wheaton IL Quest Books. pp. 155174. ISBN 9780835608169.  Smith Andrew 20
08 a. The Gnostics History Tradition Scriptures Influence. Watkins. ISBN 9781905857784.  Smith Andrew 2006. The Lost Sayings of Jesus Teachings from Ancient Christian Jewish Gnostic and Islamic SourcesAnnotated  Explained. Skylight Paths Publishing. ISBN 9781594731723.  Van Den Broek Roelof 1998. Gnosis and Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times. State University of New York Press. pp. 87108. ISBN 9780791436110.  Tillman Nagel 2000. The History of Islamic Theology from Muhammad to the Present. Princeton NJ Markus Wiener Publishers. pp. 215234. ISBN 9781558762039.  People of the Book. Islam Empire of Faith. PBS. Archived from the original on 20110628. Retrieved 20101218.  Accad 2003 According to Ibn Taymiya although only some Muslims accept the textual veracity of the entire Bible most Muslims will grant the veracity of most of it.  Esposito 1998 pp. 6 12.  Esposito 2002 pp. 45. sfn error no target CITEREFEsposito2002 help  Peters 2003 p. 9.  F. Buhl A. T. Welch. Muhammad. Encyclopaedia of Islam Online.  Hava LazarusYafeh. Tahrif. Encyclopaedia of Islam Online.  Vincent J. Cornell Encyclopedia of Religion Vol 5 pp.35613562  a b Asma Barlas Believing Women in Islam p.96  Tamara Sonn 2009. Tawd. In John L. Esposito ed.. The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World. Oxford Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195305135.  D. Gimaret Tawhid Encyclopedia of Islam  Ramadan 2005 p. 230. sfn error no target CITEREFRamadan2005 help  Wainwright William Monotheism Archived 20190318 at the Wayback Machine The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Fall 2018 Edition Edward N. Zalta ed..  Buckley Jorunn Jacobsen 2002 The Mandaeans ancient texts and modern people PDF Oxford University Press p. 4 ISBN 9780195153859 archived PDF from the original on 20171011 retrieved 20191005  Ginza Rabba. Translated by AlSaadi Qais AlSaadi Hamed 
2 nd ed.. Germany Drabsha. 2019.  Brikhah S. Nasoraia 2012. Sacred Text and Esoteric Praxis in Sabian Mandaean Religion PDF. Archived PDF from the original on 20221009. Retrieved 20220317.  Nashmi Yuhana 24 April 2013 Contemporary Issues for the Mandaean Faith Mandaean Associations Union archived from the original on 31 October 2021 retrieved 8 December 2021  Rudolph Kurt 1978. Mandaeism. BRILL. p. 15. ISBN 9789004052529.  The Light and the Dark Dualism in ancient Iran India and China Petrus Franciscus Maria Fontaine  1990  De Blois Franois 19602007. bi. In Bearman P. Bianquis Th. Bosworth C.E. van Donzel E. Heinrichs W.P. eds.. Encyclopaedia of Islam Second Edition. doi
10.1 163157339
12 islamCOM0952. Van Bladel Kevin 2017. From Sasanian Mandaeans to bians of the Marshes. Leiden Brill. doi
10.1 1639789004339460. ISBN 9789004339439. Archived from the original on 20220601. Retrieved 20220619. p. 5.  Hanish Shak 2019. The Mandaeans In Iraq. In Rowe Paul S. 2019. Routledge Handbook of Minorities in the Middle East. London and New York Routledge. p. 163. ISBN 9781317233794. Archived from the original on 20220730. Retrieved 20230319.  Hatcher John S. 2005. Unveiling the Hur of Love. Journal of Bah Studies. 15 1 138. doi
10.3 15
81 jbs
15.1 
4.1 2005.  a b Cole Juan 1982. The Concept of Manifestation in the Bah Writings. Bah Studies. Vol. 9. pp. 138. Archived from the original on 20190517. Retrieved 20120528.  Stockman Robert. Jesus Christ in the Bahai Writings. Bah Studies Review. 2 1. Archived from the original on 20121003. Retrieved 20120528.   Lewis Bernard 1984. The Jews of Islam. Princeton Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691008078.  a b Smith 2008 pp. 107108  Hatcher William 1985. The Bah Faith. San Francisco Harper  Row. pp. 115123. ISBN 0060654414.  Smith P. 1999. A Concise Encyclopedia of the Bah Faith. Oxford UK Oneworld Publications. ISBN 1851681841.  Momen M. 1997. A Short Introduction to the Bah Faith. Oxford UK One World Publications. ISBN 1851682090.  Hatcher 1985 p. 74  Smith 2008 p. 106  Effendi 1944 p. 139 harvnb error no target CITEREFEffendi1944 help  Smith 2008 p. 111  a b Ferrero Mario 20211201. From Polytheism to Monotheism Zoroaster and Some Economic Theory. Homo Oeconomicus. 38 1 77108. doi
10.1 0
07 s41412021001134. ISSN 23666161.  Heckert Jason May 2023. Reflections Across Religions A Historical Examination of Common Themes in Zoroastrianism Judaism and Christianity. digitalcommons.winthrop.edu.  Buddhism in China A Historical Sketch The Journal of Religion.  Boyce 19
75 a p. 155 harvnb error no target CITEREFBoyce19
75 a help.  a b c d e f Asatrian Garnik S. Arakelova Victoria 2014. Part I The One God  MalakTws The Leader of the Triad. The Religion of the Peacock Angel The Yezidis and Their Spirit World. Gnostica. Abingdon Oxfordshire Routledge. pp. 128. doi
10.4 3249781315728896. ISBN 9781844657612. OCLC 931029996.  a b Aikyildiz Birgl 20141223. The Yezidis The History of a Community Culture and Religion. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 9780857720610.  a b c Allison Christine 25 January 2017. The Yazidis. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion. Oxford Oxford University Press. doi
10.1 0
93 acrefore97801993403
78.0 
13.2 54. ISBN 9780199340378. Archived from the original on 11 March 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2021.  a b Asatrian Garnik S. Arakelova Victoria January 2003. Asatrian Garnik S. ed.. MalakTws The Peacock Angel of the Yezidis. Iran and the Caucasus. 7 12. Leiden Brill Publishers in collaboration with the Caucasian Centre for Iranian Studies Yerevan 136. doi
10.1 1631573384
03 X00015. eISSN 15733
84 X. ISSN 16098498. JSTOR 4030968. LCCN 2001227055. OCLC 233145721.  Asatrian Garnik S. Arakelova Victoria 20140903. The Religion of the Peacock Angel The Yezidis and Their Spirit World. Routledge. ISBN 9781317544289.  Kreyenbroek Philip G. 1995. Yezidism its Background Observances and Textual Tradition. Lewiston New York Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 9780773490048.  Omarkhali Khanna 2017. The Yezidi religious textual tradition from oral to written  categories transmission scripturalisation and canonisation of the Yezidi oral religious texts with samples of oral and written religious texts and with audio and video samples on CDROM. Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 9783447108560. OCLC 994778968.  Omarkhali Khanna December 2009. Names of God and Forms of Address to God in Yezidism. With the Religious Hymn of the Lord. Manuscripta Orientalia International Journal for Oriental Manuscript Research. 15 2. Archived from the original on 20230326. Retrieved 20230209.  Kreyenbroek Philip 2005. God and Sheikh Adi are perfect sacred poems and religious narratives from the Yezidi tradition. Wiesbaden Harrassowitz. ISBN 9783447053006. OCLC 63127403.  Kartal Celalettin 20160622. Deutsche Yeziden Geschichte Gegenwart Prognosen in German. Tectum Wissenschaftsverlag. ISBN 9783828864887.  Aboriginal Culture. Archived from the original on 20210306. Retrieved 20210326.  Jennifer Isaacs 2005. Australian Dreaming 40000 Years of Aboriginal History. New South Wales New Holland.  Greenway Charles C. Honery Thomas McDonald Mr. Rowley John Malone John Creed Dr. 1878. Australian Languages and Traditions. The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. 7. JSTOR 232274. doi
10.2 3072841001. ISSN 09595295. JSTOR 2841001. Archived from the original on 20230407. Retrieved 20230312.  Aboriginal Christians  Christianity. 14 August 2020. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 26 March 2021.  Rogers Janak 24 June 2014. When Islam came to Australia. BBC News. Retrieved 25 June 2014.  RadcliffeBrown A. R. 14 November 2013. The Andaman Islanders. Cambridge University Press. p. 161. ISBN 9781107625563.  PEOPLE of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Archived from the original on 20210622. Retrieved 20210328.  Rogers Peter 2009 Ultimate Truth Book 1 AuthorHouse p. 109 ISBN 9781438979687  Chakravarti Sitansu 1991 Hinduism a way of life Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p. 71 ISBN 9788120808997  Polytheism. Encyclopdia Britannica. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 2007. Retrieved 20070705.  Pattanaik Devdutt 2002 The man who was a woman and other queer tales of Hindu lore Routledge p. 38 ISBN 9781560231813  Concept Of God In Hinduism By Dr Naik. Islam101.com. Archived from the original on 20120429. Retrieved 20120605.  Swaminarayan bicentenary commemoration volume 17811981. p. 154 ...Shri Vallabhacharya and Shri Swaminarayan... Both of them designate the highest reality as Krishna who is both the highest avatara and also the source of other avataras. To quote R. Kaladhar Bhatt in this context. In this transcendental devotieon Nirguna Bhakti the sole Deity and only is Krishna. New Dimensions in Vedanta Philosophy  Page 154 Archived 20230420 at the Wayback Machine Sahajnanda Vedanta. 1981  Delmonico N. 2004. The History Of Indic Monotheism And Modern Chaitanya Vaishnavism. The Hare Krishna Movement The Postcharismatic Fate of a Religious Transplant. ISBN 9780231122566. Retrieved 20080412.  Elkman S.M. Gosvami J. 1986. Jiva Gosvamins Tattvasandarbha A Study on the Philosophical and Sectarian Development of the Gaudiya Vaishnava Movement. Motilal Banarsidass Pub.  Dimock Jr E.C. Dimock E.C. 1989. The Place of the Hidden Moon Erotic Mysticism in the VaisnavaSahajiya Cult of Bengal. University Of Chicago Press. page 132 Archived 20230420 at the Wayback Machine  Kennedy M.T. 1925. The Chaitanya Movement A Study of the Vaishnavism of Bengal. H. Milford Oxford university press.  Flood Gavin D. 1996. An introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge UK Cambridge University Press. p. 341. ISBN 0521438780. Retrieved 20080421. gavin flood. Early Vaishnava worship focuses on three deities who become fused together namely VasudevaKrishna KrishnaGopala and Narayana who in turn all become identified with Vishnu. Put simply VasudevaKrishna and KrishnaGopala were worshiped by groups generally referred to as Bhagavatas while Narayana was worshipped by the Pancaratra sect.  Gupta Ravi M. 2007. Caitanya Vaisnava Vedanta of Jiva Gosvami. Routledge. ISBN 9780415405485.  Essential Hinduism S. Rosen 2006 Greenwood Publishing Group p.124 Archived 20230403 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 0275990060  Matchett Freda 2000. Krsna Lord or Avatara the relationship between Krsna and Visnu in the context of the Avatara myth as presented by the Harivamsa the Visnupurana and the Bhagavatapurana. Surrey Routledge. p. 4. ISBN 0700712
81 X.  Rig Veda A Metrically Restored Text with an Introduction and Notes HOS 1994. Vedavid.org. Archived from the original on 20120425. Retrieved 20120605.  Atharva Veda Spiritual  Philosophical Hymns. Archived from the original on October 7 2008.  Shukla Yajur Veda The transcendental That. Archived from the original on October 11 2008.  Tapasyananda 1991. Bhakti Schools of Vednta. Madras Sri Ramakrishna Math. ISBN 8171202268.  For an overview of the atarudriya see Kramrisch pp. 7174.  For a full translation of the complete hymn see Sivaramamurti 1976  For the atarudrya as an early example of enumeration of divine names see Flood 1996 p. 152.  Levy Charles D. ed. 20100830. The Arian Christian Doctrines The Origins of Christianity. Metaphysical Institute. p. 161. ISBN 9781453764619.  Goel Sita Ram 1987. Defence of Hindu Society. New Delhi India Voice of India. Archived from the original on 20160303. Retrieved 20110823. In the Vedic approach there is no single God. This is bad enough. But the Hindus do not have even a supreme God a fuhrerGod who presides over a multiplicity of Gods.  Ram Swarup  Goel Sita Ram 1987. Defence of Hindu Society. New Delhi India Voice of India. Archived from the original on 20160303. Retrieved 20110823.  Goel Sita Ram 1982. How I became a Hindu. New Delhi India Voice of India. p. 92.  Mark Juergensmeyer Gurinder Singh Mann 2006. The Oxford Handbook of Global Religions. US Oxford University Press. p. 41. ISBN 9780195137989.  Ardinger Barbara 2006. Pagan Every Day Finding the Extraordinary in Our Ordinary Lives. Weisfer. p. 13. ISBN 9781578633326.  Nesbitt Eleanor M. 15 November 2005. Sikhi a very short introduction. Oxford University Press. p. 136. ISBN 9780192806017. Retrieved 19 July 2010.  Parrinder Geoffrey 1971. World ReligionsFrom Ancient History to the Present. USA Hamlyn Publishing Group. p. 252. ISBN 9780871961297.  Sikh Beliefs and Doctrine. ReligionFacts. Archived from the original on 20120612. Retrieved 20120605.  A Short Introduction to Sikhism. Multifaithcentre.org. Archived from the original on 20110727. Retrieved 20120605.  David Hume said that unlike monotheism polytheism is pluralistic in nature unbound by doctrine and therefore far more tolerant than monotheism which tends to force people to believe in one faith.David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion and the Natural History of Religion ed. J. C. A. Gaskin New York Oxford University Press 1983 pp. 2632.  The Catechism of Positive Religion page 251  Mark S. Smith The Origins of Biblical Monotheism Israels Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic Texts August 2001. p. 11. Oxford University Press. Google Books.  Berchman Robert M. May 2008. The Political Foundations of Tolerance in the GrecoRoman Period. In Neusner Jacob Chilton Bruce eds.. Religious Tolerance in World Religions. Templeton Foundation Press published 2008. p. 61. ISBN 9781599471365. Retrieved 20160703. Jacob Neusner ... claims that the logic of monotheism ... yields little basis for tolerating other religions.  Regina Schwartz The Curse of Cain The Violent Legacy of Monotheism The University of Chicago Press 1997 ISBN 9780226741994  Arvind Sharma A Primal Perspective on the Philosophy of Religion Dordrecht Springer 2006 p.29. Further readingedit Bernard David K. 2019 2016. Monotheism in Pauls Rhetorical World. The Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ Deification of Jesus in Early Christian Discourse. Journal of Pentecostal Theology Supplement Series. Vol. 45. Leiden and Boston Brill Publishers. pp. 5382. ISBN 9789004397217. ISSN 09667393. Betz Arnold Gottfried 2000. Monotheism. In Freedman David Noel Myer Allen C. eds.. Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible. Grand Rapids Michigan Wm. B. Eerdmans. pp. 916917. ISBN 9053565035. William G. Dever Who Were the Early Israelites Grand Rapids MI Eerdmans 2003. William G. Dever Did God Have a Wife Archaeology and Folk Religion in Ancient Israel Eerdmans 2005 ISBN 9780802828521. Jonthan Kirsch God Against The Gods The History of the War Between Monotheism and Polytheism. Penguin Books. 2005. Hans Kchler. The Concept of Monotheism in Islam and Christianity. Vienna Braumller 1982. ISBN 3700303394 Google Books Archived 20230405 at the Wayback Machine. Niehr Herbert 1995. The Rise of YHWH in Judahite and Israelite Religion Methodological and ReligioHistorical Aspects. In Edelman Diana Vikander ed.. The Triumph of Elohim From Yahwisms to Judaisms. Leuven Peeters Publishers. pp. 4572. ISBN 9789053565032. OCLC 33819403. Patai Raphael 1990 1967. Lilith. The Hebrew Goddess. Raphael Patai Series in Jewish Folklore and Anthropology 
3 rd Enlarged ed.. Detroit Wayne State University Press. pp. 221251. ISBN 9780814322710. OCLC 20692501. Ratzinger Joseph 2004 1968. Part One God  Chapter II The Biblical Belief in God. Introduction to Christianity 
2 nd Revised ed.. San Francisco Ignatius Press. pp. 116136. ISBN 9781586170295. LCCN 2004103523. S
2 CID 169456327. Reynolds Gabriel Said 2020. God of the Bible and the Quran. Allah God in the Qurn. New Haven and London Yale University Press. pp. 203253. doi
10.2 3
07 j.ctvxkn
7 q4. ISBN 9780300246582. JSTOR j.ctvxkn
7 q4. LCCN 2019947014. S
2 CID 226129509. Rmer Thomas 2015. The Invention of God. Cambridge Massachusetts Harvard University Press. doi
10.4 1599780674915732. ISBN 9780674504974. JSTOR j.ctvjsf
3 qb. S
2 CID 170740919. Silberman Neil A. et al. The Bible Unearthed New York Simon  Schuster 2001. Smith Mark S. 2003. El Yahweh and the Original God of Israel and the Exodus. The Origins of Biblical Monotheism Israels Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic Texts. Oxford Oxford University Press. pp. 133148. doi
10.1 0930195134
80 X.0
03.0 008. ISBN 9780195134803. Smith Mark S. 2017. YHWHs Original Character Questions about an Unknown God. In Van Oorschot Jrgen Witten Markus eds.. The Origins of Yahwism. Beihefte zur Zeitschrift fr die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft. Vol. 484. Berlin and Boston De Gruyter. pp. 2344. doi
10.1 5159783110448221002. ISBN 9783110425383. S
2 CID 187378834. Smith Mark S. 2002. The Early History of God Yahweh and the Other Deities in Ancient Israel 
2 nd ed.. Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802839725. Smith Peter 2008. An Introduction to the Bahai Faith. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521862516. Van der Toorn Karel 1999. God I. In Van der Toorn Karel Becking Bob Van der Horst Pieter W. eds.. Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible 
2 nd ed.. Leiden Brill Publishers. pp. 352365. doi
10.1 163258978
02 DDDODDDOGodi. ISBN 9004111190. Van der Horst Pieter W. 1999. God II. In Van der Toorn Karel Becking Bob Van der Horst Pieter W. eds.. Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible 
2 nd ed.. Leiden Brill Publishers. pp. 365370. doi
10.1 163258978
02 DDDODDDOGodii. ISBN 9004111190. Keith Whitelam The Invention of Ancient Israel Routledge New York 1997. External linksedit Wikiquote has quotations related to Monotheism. Library resources about Monotheism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries The dictionary definition of monotheism at Wiktionary Media related to Monotheism at Wikimedia Commons About.com What is Monolatry Contains useful comparisons with henoteism etc. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Christian Monotheism biblical unitarians World Union of Deists Links to related articles v t e God Deity Divinity Goddess List Conceptions of God Existence Gender of God Agnostic theism Animism Antitheism Apatheism Atheism Agnostic atheism Christian atheism Implicit and explicit atheism Jewish atheism Negative and positive atheism New Atheism State atheism Binitarianism Classical theism Deism Ceremonial deism Christian deism Pandeism Polydeism Dipolar theism Dystheism Egotheism Misotheism Henotheism Ietsism Kathenotheism Liberal theism Monolatry Monotheism Ethical monotheism Postmonotheism Mysticism Nontheism Posttheism Nontrinitarianism Open theism Panentheism Pantheism Classical pantheism Hylotheism Naturalistic pantheism Philosophical theism Physitheism Euhemerism Polytheism Skeptical theism Spiritualism Theism Theistic finitism Transtheism Trinitarianism Tritheism Unitarianism Religion portal v t e Philosophy of religion Concepts in religion Afterlife Euthyphro dilemma Faith or religious belief Intelligent design Miracle Problem of evil Soul Spirit Theodicy Theological veto Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Bah Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Consciousness Cosmological Kalam Contingency Degree Desire Experience Finetuning of the universe Love Miracles Morality Necessary existent Ontological Pascals wager Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Reason Teleological Natural law Watchmaker analogy Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheists Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occams razor Omnipotence Poor design Russells teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism more... Religious language Eschatological verification Language game Logical positivism Apophatic theology Verificationism Problem of evil Augustinian theodicy Best of all possible worlds Euthyphro dilemma Inconsistent triad Irenaean theodicy Natural evil Theodicy Philosophers of religion by date active Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet Ren Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron dHolbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Sren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Hffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Marchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber Ren Gunon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue JeanLuc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality more... Portal Category v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Bah Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Sustainer Time Good Ahura Mazda Father of Greatness Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven  Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity  in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philos view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan Religion portal Authority control databases National Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMonotheismoldid1222675767 Categories Monotheism Philosophy of religion Religion in ancient Israel and Judah Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Greeklanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Russianlanguage text Articles containing Turkishlanguage text Articles containing Mongolianlanguage text Harv and Sfn notarget errors CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Articles lacking reliable references from July 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2017 Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from January 2017 All articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from January 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Articles containing Kurdishlanguage text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2009 Articles containing Punjabilanguage text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles prone to spam from June 2012 Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 7 May 2024 at 0837 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width