Ancient Egyptian religion - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Beliefs Toggle Beliefs subsection 
1.1 Deities 
1.2 Cosmology 
1.3 Kingship 
1.4 Afterlife 
1.5 Atenism 
2 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 
2.1 Mythology 
2.2 Ritual and magical texts 
2.3 Hymns and prayers 
2.4 Funerary texts 
3 Practices Toggle Practices subsection 
3.1 Temples 
3.2 Official rituals and festivals 
3.3 Animal cults 
3.4 Oracles 
3.5 Popular religion 
3.6 Magic 
3.7 Funerary practices 
4 History Toggle History subsection 
4.1 Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods 
4.2 Old and Middle Kingdoms 
4.3 New Kingdom 
4.4 Later periods 
4.5 Legacy 

4.5.1 Modern times 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Bibliography 
8 Further reading 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian religion 58 languages Alemannisch  Asturianu Azrbaycanca   Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaelg Galego    Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Latina Magyar  Bahasa Melayu   Norsk bokml Ozbekcha    Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Suomi Svenska    tatara   Trke   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia System of beliefs and rituals integral to ancient Egyptian society Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Cosmology Duat Maat Mythology Index Numerology Philosophy Soul Practices Funerals Offerings Offering formula Temples Priestess of Hathor Pyramids Deities list Ogdoad Amun Amunet Hauhet Heh Kauket Kek Naunet Nu Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun Duau god F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mandulis Medjed Mafdet Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nemty Nekhbet Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Locations Aaru Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Aani Abtu Ankh Atef Atet Book of Thoth Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Griffin Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Hieracosphinx Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Matet boat Medjed Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Serpopard Set animal Shen ring Sphinx Tyet Uraeus Ushabti Wassceptre Winged sun Texts Funerary texts Amduat  Books of Breathing  Book of Caverns  Book of the Dead  Book of the Earth  Book of Gates Related religions Atenism Hermeticism Thelema Kemeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy  Church of the Most High Goddess Ancient Egypt portal v t e Part of a series on Ancient Near East mythology Anatolia Hittite Luwian Armenian Egypt Hurrian Mesopotamia Babylonia Sumer Iranian Persian Scythians Ossetian Zoroastrianism Semitic Arabia Nabataean Canaan Hebrew Punic v t e Ancient Egyptian religion was a complex system of polytheistic beliefs and rituals that formed an integral part of ancient Egyptian culture. It centered on the Egyptians interactions with many deities believed to be present and in control of the world. About 1500 deities are known.1 Rituals such as prayer and offerings were provided to the gods to gain their favor. Formal religious practice centered on the pharaohs the rulers of Egypt believed to possess divine powers by virtue of their positions. They acted as intermediaries between their people and the gods and were obligated to sustain the gods through rituals and offerings so that they could maintain Maat the order of the cosmos and repel Isfet which was chaos. The state dedicated enormous resources to religious rituals and to the construction of temples. Individuals could interact with the gods for their own purposes appealing for help through prayer or compelling the gods to act through magic. These practices were distinct from but closely linked with the formal rituals and institutions. The popular religious tradition grew more prominent over the course of Egyptian history as the status of the pharaoh declined. Egyptian belief in the afterlife and the importance of funerary practices is evident in the great efforts made to ensure the survival of their souls after death  via the provision of tombs grave goods and offerings to preserve the bodies and spirits of the deceased. The religion had its roots in Egypts prehistory and lasted for 3500 years. The details of religious belief changed over time as the importance of particular gods rose and declined and their intricate relationships shifted. At various times certain gods became preeminent over the others including the sun god Ra the creator god Amun and the mother goddess Isis. For a brief period in the theology promulgated by the pharaoh Akhenaten a single god the Aten replaced the traditional pantheon. Ancient Egyptian religion and mythology left behind many writings and monuments along with significant influences on ancient and modern cultures. Beliefsedit The beliefs and rituals now referred to as ancient Egyptian religion were integral within every aspect of Egyptian culture thus the Egyptian language possessed no single term corresponding to the concept of religion. Ancient Egyptian religion consisted of a vast and varying set of beliefs and practices linked by their common focus on the interaction between the world of humans and the world of the divine. The characteristics of the gods who populated the divine realm were inextricably linked to the Egyptians understanding of the properties of the world in which they lived.2 Deitiesedit Main articles Ancient Egyptian deities and List of ancient Egyptian deities The gods Osiris Anubis and Horus in the Tomb of Horemheb KV57 in the Valley of the Kings The Egyptians believed that the phenomena of nature were divine forces in and of themselves.3 These deified forces included the elements animal characteristics or abstract forces. The Egyptians believed in a pantheon of gods which were involved in all aspects of nature and human society. Their religious practices were efforts to sustain and placate these phenomena and turn them to human advantage.4 This polytheistic system was very complex as some deities were believed to exist in many different manifestations and some had multiple mythological roles. Conversely many natural forces such as the sun were associated with multiple deities. The diverse pantheon ranged from gods with vital roles in the universe to minor deities or demons with very limited or localized functions.5 It could include gods adopted from foreign cultures and sometimes humans deceased pharaohs were believed to be divine and occasionally distinguished commoners such as Imhotep also became deified.6 The depictions of the gods in art were not meant as literal representations of how the gods might appear if they were visible as the gods true natures were believed to be mysterious. Instead these depictions gave recognizable forms to the abstract deities by using symbolic imagery to indicate each gods role in nature.7 This iconography was not fixed and many of the gods could be depicted in more than one form.8 Many gods were associated with particular regions in Egypt where their cults were most important. However these associations changed over time and they did not mean that the god associated with a place had originated there. For instance the god Montu was the original patron of the city of Thebes. Over the course of the Middle Kingdom however he was displaced in that role by Amun who may have arisen elsewhere. The national popularity and importance of individual gods fluctuated in a similar way.9 Deities had complex interrelationships which partly reflected the interaction of the forces they represented. The Egyptians often grouped gods together to reflect these relationships. One of the more common combinations was a family triad consisting of a father mother and child who were worshipped together. Some groups had wideranging importance. One such group the Ennead assembled nine deities into a theological system that was involved in the mythological areas of creation kingship and the afterlife.10 The relationships between deities could also be expressed in the process of syncretism in which two or more different gods were linked to form a composite deity. This process was a recognition of the presence of one god in another when the second god took on a role belonging to the first. These links between deities were fluid and did not represent the permanent merging of two gods into one therefore some gods could develop multiple syncretic connections.11 Sometimes syncretism combined deities with very similar characteristics. At other times it joined gods with very different natures as when Amun the god of hidden power was linked with Ra the god of the sun. The resulting god AmunRa thus united the power that lay behind all things with the greatest and most visible force in nature.12 Many deities could be given epithets that seem to indicate that they were greater than any other god suggesting some kind of unity beyond the multitude of natural forces. This is particularly true of a few gods who at various points rose to supreme importance in Egyptian religion. These included the royal patron Horus the sungod Ra and the mothergoddess Isis.13 During the New Kingdom c.15
50 c.1070 BC Amun held this position. The theology of the period described in particular detail Amuns presence in and rule over all things so that he more than any other deity embodied the allencompassing power of the divine.14 Cosmologyedit The sun rises over the circular mound of creation as goddesses pour out the primeval waters around it Nun lifts the solar barque with the newborn sun from the waters of creation. The Egyptian conception of the universe centered on Maat a word that encompasses several concepts in English including truth justice and order. It was the fixed eternal order of the universe both in the cosmos and in human society and was often personified as a goddess. It had existed since the creation of the world and without it the world would lose its cohesion. In Egyptian belief Maat was constantly under threat from the forces of disorder so all of society was required to maintain it. On the human level this meant that all members of society should cooperate and coexist on the cosmic level it meant that all of the forces of naturethe godsshould continue to function in balance.15 This latter goal was central to Egyptian religion. The Egyptians sought to maintain Maat in the cosmos by sustaining the gods through offerings and by performing rituals which staved off disorder and perpetuated the cycles of nature.1617 The most important part of the Egyptian view of the cosmos was the conception of time which was greatly concerned with the maintenance of Maat. Throughout the linear passage of time a cyclical pattern recurred in which Maat was renewed by periodic events which echoed the original creation. Among these events were the annual Nile flood and the succession from one king to another but the most important was the daily journey of the sun god Ra.1819 When thinking of the shape of the cosmos the Egyptians saw the earth as a flat expanse of land personified by the god Geb over which arched the sky goddess Nut. The two were separated by Shu the god of air. Beneath the Earth lay a parallel underworld and undersky and beyond the skies lay the infinite expanse of Nu the chaos and primordial watery abyss that had existed before creation.2021 The Egyptians also believed in a place called the Duat a mysterious region associated with death and rebirth that may have lain in the underworld or in the sky. Each day Ra traveled over the earth across the underside of the sky and at night he passed through the Duat to be reborn at dawn.22 In Egyptian belief this cosmos was inhabited by three types of sentient beings one was the gods another was the spirits of deceased humans who existed in the divine realm and possessed many of the gods abilities living humans were the third category and the most important among them was the pharaoh who bridged the human and divine realms.23 Kingshipedit See also Pharaoh Statue of Khafre an Old Kingdom pharaoh embraced by Horus Horus offers life to the pharaoh Ramesses II. Painted limestone. c.1275 BC. 
19 th dynasty. From the small temple built by Ramses II in Abydos.Louvre museum Paris France. Egyptologists have long debated the degree to which the pharaoh was considered a god. It seems most likely that the Egyptians viewed royal authority itself as a divine force. Therefore although the Egyptians recognized that the pharaoh was human and subject to human weakness they simultaneously viewed him as a god because the divine power of kingship was incarnated in him. He therefore acted as intermediary between Egypts people and the gods.24 He was key to upholding Maat both by maintaining justice and harmony in human society and by sustaining the gods with temples and offerings. For these reasons he oversaw all state religious activity.25 However the pharaohs reallife influence and prestige could differ from his portrayal in official writings and depictions and beginning in the late New Kingdom his religious importance declined drastically.2627 The king was also associated with many specific deities. He was identified directly with Horus who represented kingship itself and he was seen as the son of Ra who ruled and regulated nature as the pharaoh ruled and regulated society. By the New Kingdom he was also associated with Amun the supreme force in the cosmos.28 Upon his death the king became fully deified. In this state he was directly identified with Ra and was also associated with Osiris god of death and rebirth and the mythological father of Horus.29 Many mortuary temples were dedicated to the worship of deceased pharaohs as gods.17 Afterlifeedit Main article Ancient Egyptian afterlife beliefs The Weighing of the Heart in the Hall of Maat as depicted in the Papyrus of Hunefer 
19 th Dynasty c. 1300 BCE The elaborate beliefs about death and the afterlife reinforced the Egyptians theology in humans possessions a ka or lifeforce which left the body at the point of death. In life the ka received its sustenance from food and drink so it was believed that to endure after death the ka must continue to receive offerings of food whose spiritual essence it could still consume. Each person also had a ba the set of spiritual characteristics unique to each individual.30 Unlike the ka the ba remained attached to the body after death. Egyptian funeral rituals were intended to release the ba from the body so that it could move freely and to rejoin it with the ka so that it could live on as an akh. However it was also important that the body of the deceased be preserved as the Egyptians believed that the ba returned to its body each night to receive new life before emerging in the morning as an akh.31 Maat wearing the feather of truth In early times the deceased pharaoh was believed to ascend to the sky and dwell among the stars.32 Over the course of the Old Kingdom c.26862181 BC however he came to be more closely associated with the daily rebirth of the sun god Ra and with the underworld ruler Osiris as those deities grew more important.33 In the fully developed afterlife beliefs of the New Kingdom the soul had to avoid a variety of supernatural dangers in the Duat before undergoing a final judgement known as the Weighing of the Heart carried out by Osiris and by the Assessors of Maat. In this judgement the gods compared the actions of the deceased while alive symbolized by the heart to the feather of Maat to determine whether he or she had behaved in accordance with Maat. If the deceased was judged worthy his or her ka and ba were united into an akh.34 Several beliefs coexisted about the akhs destination. Often the dead were said to dwell in the realm of Osiris a lush and pleasant land in the underworld.35 The solar vision of the afterlife in which the deceased soul traveled with Ra on his daily journey was still primarily associated with royalty but could extend to other people as well. Over the course of the Middle and New Kingdoms the notion that the akh could also travel in the world of the living and to some degree magically affect events there became increasingly prevalent.36 Atenismedit Main article Atenism Relief depicting Akhenaten and Nefertiti with three of their daughters under the rays of Aten. During the New Kingdom the pharaoh Akhenaten abolished the official worship of other gods in favor of the sundisk Aten. This is often seen as the first instance of true monotheism in history although the details of Atenist theology are still unclear and the suggestion that it was monotheistic is disputed. The exclusion of all but one god from worship was a radical departure from Egyptian tradition and some see Akhenaten as a practitioner of monolatry or henotheism rather than monotheism3738 as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods he simply refrained from worshipping any but the Aten. Under Akhenatens successors Egypt reverted to its traditional religion and Akhenaten himself came to be reviled as a heretic.3940 Writingsedit See also Ancient Egyptian literature While the Egyptians had no unified religious scripture they produced many religious writings of various types. Together the disparate texts provide an extensive but still incomplete understanding of Egyptian religious practices and beliefs.41 Mythologyedit Main article Egyptian mythology Ra at center travels through the underworld in his barque accompanied by other gods42 Egyptian myths were stories intended to illustrate and explain the gods actions and roles in nature. The details of the events they recounted could change to convey different symbolic perspectives on the mysterious divine events they described so many myths exist in different and conflicting versions.43 Mythical narratives were rarely written in full and more often texts only contain episodes from or allusions to a larger myth.44 Knowledge of Egyptian mythology therefore is derived mostly from hymns that detail the roles of specific deities from ritual and magical texts which describe actions related to mythic events and from funerary texts which mention the roles of many deities in the afterlife. Some information is also provided by allusions in secular texts.41 Finally Greeks and Romans such as Plutarch recorded some of the extant myths late in Egyptian history.45 Among the significant Egyptian myths were the creation myths. According to these stories the world emerged as a dry space in the primordial ocean of chaos. Because the sun is essential to life on earth the first rising of Ra marked the moment of this emergence. Different forms of the myth describe the process of creation in various ways a transformation of the primordial god Atum into the elements that form the world as the creative speech of the intellectual god Ptah and as an act of the hidden power of Amun.46 Regardless of these variations the act of creation represented the initial establishment of Maat and the pattern for the subsequent cycles of time.17 Wall relief depicting the Osiris myth. Isis in the form of a bird copulates with the deceased Osiris. At either side are Horus although he is as yet unborn and Isis in human form.47 The most important of all Egyptian myths was the Osiris myth.48 It tells of the divine ruler Osiris who was murdered by his jealous brother Set a god often associated with chaos.49 Osiris sister and wife Isis resurrected him so that he could conceive an heir Horus. Osiris then entered the underworld and became the ruler of the dead. Once grown Horus fought and defeated Set to become king himself.50 Sets association with chaos and the identification of Osiris and Horus as the rightful rulers provided a rationale for pharaonic succession and portrayed the pharaohs as the upholders of order. At the same time Osiris death and rebirth were related to the Egyptian agricultural cycle in which crops grew in the wake of the Nile inundation and provided a template for the resurrection of human souls after death.51 Another important mythic motif was the journey of Ra through the Duat each night. In the course of this journey Ra met with Osiris who again acted as an agent of regeneration so that his life was renewed. He also fought each night with Apep a serpentine god representing chaos. The defeat of Apep and the meeting with Osiris ensured the rising of the sun the next morning an event that represented rebirth and the victory of order over chaos.52 Ritual and magical textsedit The procedures for religious rituals were frequently written on papyri which were used as instructions for those performing the ritual. These ritual texts were kept mainly in the temple libraries. Temples themselves are also inscribed with such texts often accompanied by illustrations. Unlike the ritual papyri these inscriptions were not intended as instructions but were meant to symbolically perpetuate the rituals even if in reality people ceased to perform them.53 Magical texts likewise describe rituals although these rituals were part of the spells used for specific goals in everyday life. Despite their mundane purpose many of these texts also originated in temple libraries and later became disseminated among the general populace.54 Hymns and prayersedit The Egyptians produced numerous prayers and hymns written in the form of poetry. Hymns and prayers follow a similar structure and are distinguished mainly by the purposes they serve. Hymns were written to praise particular deities.55 Like ritual texts they were written on papyri and on temple walls and they were probably recited as part of the rituals they accompany in temple inscriptions.56 Most are structured according to a set literary formula designed to expound on the nature aspects and mythological functions of a given deity.55 They tend to speak more explicitly about fundamental theology than other Egyptian religious writings and became particularly important in the New Kingdom a period of particularly active theological discourse.57 Prayers follow the same general pattern as hymns but address the relevant god in a more personal way asking for blessings help or forgiveness for wrongdoing. Such prayers are rare before the New Kingdom indicating that in earlier periods such direct personal interaction with a deity was not believed possible or at least was less likely to be expressed in writing. They are known mainly from inscriptions on statues and stelae left in sacred sites as votive offerings.58 Funerary textsedit Main article Ancient Egyptian funerary texts Section of the Book of the Dead for the scribe Hunefer depicting the Weighing of the Heart. Among the most significant and extensively preserved Egyptian writings are funerary texts designed to ensure that deceased souls reached a pleasant afterlife.59 The earliest of these are the Pyramid Texts. They are a loose collection of hundreds of spells inscribed on the walls of royal pyramids during the Old Kingdom intended to magically provide pharaohs with the means to join the company of the gods in the afterlife.60 The spells appear in differing arrangements and combinations and few of them appear in all of the pyramids.61 At the end of the Old Kingdom a new body of funerary spells which included material from the Pyramid Texts began appearing in tombs inscribed primarily on coffins. This collection of writings is known as the Coffin Texts and was not reserved for royalty but appeared in the tombs of nonroyal officials.62 In the New Kingdom several new funerary texts emerged of which the bestknown is the Book of the Dead. Unlike the earlier books it often contains extensive illustrations or vignettes.63 The book was copied on papyrus and sold to commoners to be placed in their tombs.64 The Coffin Texts included sections with detailed descriptions of the underworld and instructions on how to overcome its hazards. In the New Kingdom this material gave rise to several books of the netherworld including the Book of Gates the Book of Caverns and the Amduat.65 Unlike the loose collections of spells these netherworld books are structured depictions of Ras passage through the Duat and by analogy the journey of the deceased persons soul through the realm of the dead. They were originally restricted to pharaonic tombs but in the Third Intermediate Period they came to be used more widely.66 Practicesedit First pylon and colonnade of the Temple of Isis at Philae Templesedit Main article Egyptian temple Temples existed from the beginning of Egyptian history and at the height of the civilization they were present in most of its towns. They included both mortuary temples to serve the spirits of deceased pharaohs and temples dedicated to patron gods although the distinction was blurred because divinity and kingship were so closely intertwined.17 The temples were not primarily intended as places for worship by the general populace and the common people had a complex set of religious practices of their own. Instead the staterun temples served as houses for the gods in which physical images which served as their intermediaries were cared for and provided with offerings. This service was believed to be necessary to sustain the gods so that they could in turn maintain the universe itself.67 Thus temples were central to Egyptian society and vast resources were devoted to their upkeep including both donations from the monarchy and large estates of their own. Pharaohs often expanded them as part of their obligation to honor the gods so that many temples grew to enormous size.68 However not all gods had temples dedicated to them as many gods who were important in official theology received only minimal worship and many household gods were the focus of popular veneration rather than temple ritual.69 The earliest Egyptian temples were small impermanent structures but through the Old and Middle Kingdoms their designs grew more elaborate and they were increasingly built out of stone. In the New Kingdom a basic temple layout emerged which had evolved from common elements in Old and Middle Kingdom temples. With variations this plan was used for most of the temples built from then on and most of those that survive today adhere to it. In this standard plan the temple was built along a central processional way that led through a series of courts and halls to the sanctuary which held a statue of the temples god. Access to this most sacred part of the temple was restricted to the pharaoh and the highestranking priests. The journey from the temple entrance to the sanctuary was seen as a journey from the human world to the divine realm a point emphasized by the complex mythological symbolism present in temple architecture.70 Well beyond the temple building proper was the outermost wall. Between the two lay many subsidiary buildings including workshops and storage areas to supply the temples needs and the library where the temples sacred writings and mundane records were kept and which also served as a center of learning on a multitude of subjects.71 Theoretically it was the duty of the pharaoh to carry out temple rituals as he was Egypts official representative to the gods. In reality ritual duties were almost always carried out by priests. During the Old and Middle Kingdoms there was no separate class of priests instead many government officials served in this capacity for several months out of the year before returning to their secular duties. Only in the New Kingdom did professional priesthood become widespread although most lowerranking priests were still parttime. All were still employed by the state and the pharaoh had final say in their appointments.72 However as the wealth of the temples grew the influence of their priesthoods increased until it rivaled that of the pharaoh. In the political fragmentation of the Third Intermediate Period c.1070664 BC the high priests of Amun at Karnak even became the effective rulers of Upper Egypt.73 The temple staff also included many people other than priests such as musicians and chanters in temple ceremonies. Outside the temple were artisans and other laborers who helped supply the temples needs as well as farmers who worked on temple estates. All were paid with portions of the temples income. Large temples were therefore very important centers of economic activity sometimes employing thousands of people.74 Official rituals and festivalsedit Ancient Egyptian wooden stela depicting Lady Djedkhonsuiwesankh giving offerings of food drink and flowers to ReHorakhty State religious practice included both temple rituals involved in the cult of a deity and ceremonies related to divine kingship. Among the latter were coronation ceremonies and the Sed festival a ritual renewal of the pharaohs strength that took place periodically during his reign.75 There were numerous temple rituals including rites that took place across the country and rites limited to single temples or to the temples of a single god. Some were performed daily while others took place annually or on rare occasions.76 The most common temple ritual was the morning offering ceremony performed daily in temples across Egypt. In it a highranking priest or occasionally the pharaoh washed anointed and elaborately dressed the gods statue before presenting it with offerings. Afterward when the god had consumed the spiritual essence of the offerings the items themselves were taken to be distributed among the priests.75 The less frequent temple rituals or festivals were still numerous with dozens occurring every year. These festivals often entailed actions beyond simple offerings to the gods such as reenactments of particular myths or the symbolic destruction of the forces of disorder.77 Most of these events were probably celebrated only by the priests and took place only inside the temple.76 However the most important temple festivals like the Opet Festival celebrated at Karnak usually involved a procession carrying the gods image out of the sanctuary in a model barque to visit other significant sites such as the temple of a related deity. Commoners gathered to watch the procession and sometimes received portions of the unusually large offerings given to the gods on these occasions.78 Animal cultsedit The Apis bull At many sacred sites the Egyptians worshipped individual animals which they believed to be manifestations of particular deities. These animals were selected based on specific sacred markings which were believed to indicate their fitness for the role. Some of these cult animals retained their positions for the rest of their lives as with the Apis bull worshipped in Memphis as a manifestation of Ptah. Other animals were selected for much shorter periods. These cults grew more popular in later times and many temples began raising stocks of such animals from which to choose a new divine manifestation.79 A separate practice developed in the Twentysixth Dynasty when people began mummifying any member of a particular animal species as an offering to the god whom the species represented. Millions of mummified cats birds and other creatures were buried at temples honoring Egyptian deities.8081 Worshippers paid the priests of a particular deity to obtain and mummify an animal associated with that deity and the mummy was placed in a cemetery near the gods cult center. Oraclesedit The Egyptians used oracles to ask the gods for knowledge or guidance. Egyptian oracles are known mainly from the New Kingdom and afterward though they probably appeared much earlier. People of all classes including the king asked questions of oracles.82 The most common means of consulting an oracle was to pose a question to the divine image while it was being carried in a festival procession and interpret an answer from the barques movements. Other methods included interpreting the behavior of cult animals drawing lots or consulting statues through which a priest apparently spoke. The means of discerning the gods will gave great influence to the priests who spoke and interpreted the gods message.83 Popular religionedit While the state cults were meant to preserve the stability of the Egyptian world lay individuals had their own religious practices that related more directly to daily life.84 This popular religion left less evidence than the official cults and because this evidence was mostly produced by the wealthiest portion of the Egyptian population it is uncertain to what degree it reflects the practices of the populace as a whole.85 Popular religious practice included ceremonies marking important transitions in life. These included birth because of the danger involved in the process and naming because the name was held to be a crucial part of a persons identity. The most important of these ceremonies were those surrounding death because they ensured the souls survival beyond it.86 Other religious practices sought to discern the gods will or seek their knowledge. These included the interpretation of dreams which could be seen as messages from the divine realm and the consultation of oracles. People also sought to affect the gods behavior to their own benefit through magical rituals.87 Individual Egyptians also prayed to gods and gave them private offerings. Evidence of this type of personal piety is sparse before the New Kingdom. This is probably due to cultural restrictions on depiction of nonroyal religious activity which relaxed during the Middle and New Kingdoms. Personal piety became still more prominent in the late New Kingdom when it was believed that the gods intervened directly in individual lives punishing wrongdoers and saving the pious from disaster.58 Official temples were important venues for private prayer and offering even though their central activities were closed to laypeople. Egyptians frequently donated goods to be offered to the temple deity and objects inscribed with prayers to be placed in temple courts. Often they prayed in person before temple statues or in shrines set aside for their use.85 Yet in addition to temples the populace also used separate local chapels smaller but more accessible than the formal temples. These chapels were very numerous and probably staffed by members of the community.88 Households too often had their own small shrines for offering to gods or deceased relatives.89 The deities invoked in these situations differed somewhat from those at the center of state cults. Many of the important popular deities such as the fertility goddess Taweret and the household protector Bes had no temples of their own. However many other gods including Amun and Osiris were very important in both popular and official religion.90 Some individuals might be particularly devoted to a single god. Often they favored deities affiliated with their own region or with their role in life. The god Ptah for instance was particularly important in his cult center of Memphis but as the patron of craftsmen he received the nationwide veneration of many in that occupation.91 Magicedit Main article Heka Amulet in the shape of the Eye of Horus a common magical symbol The word magic is normally used to translate the Egyptian term heka which meant as James P. Allen puts it the ability to make things happen by indirect means.92 Heka was believed to be a natural phenomenon the force which was used to create the universe and which the gods employed to work their will. Humans could also use it and magical practices were closely intertwined with religion. In fact even the regular rituals performed in temples were counted as magical.93 Individuals also frequently employed magical techniques for personal purposes. Although these ends could be harmful to other people no form of magic was considered inimical in itself. Instead magic was seen primarily as a way for humans to prevent or overcome negative events.94 Magic was closely associated with the priesthood. Because temple libraries contained numerous magical texts great magical knowledge was ascribed to the lector priests who studied these texts. These priests often worked outside their temples hiring out their magical services to laymen. Other professions also commonly employed magic as part of their work including doctors scorpioncharmers and makers of magical amulets. It is also possible that the peasantry used simple magic for their own purposes but because this magical knowledge would have been passed down orally there is limited evidence of it.95 Language was closely linked with heka to such a degree that Thoth the god of writing was sometimes said to be the inventor of heka.96 Therefore magic frequently involved written or spoken incantations although these were usually accompanied by ritual actions. Often these rituals invoked an appropriate deity to perform the desired action using the power of heka to compel the deity to act. Sometimes this entailed casting the practitioner or subject of a ritual in the role of a character in mythology thus inducing the god to act toward that person as it had in the myth. Rituals also employed sympathetic magic using objects believed to have a magically significant resemblance to the subject of the rite. The Egyptians also commonly used objects believed to be imbued with heka of their own such as the magically protective amulets worn in great numbers by ordinary Egyptians.97 Funerary practicesedit Main article Ancient Egyptian funerary practices The Opening of the Mouth ceremony being performed before the tomb Because it was considered necessary for the survival of the soul preservation of the body was a central part of Egyptian funerary practices. Originally the Egyptians buried their dead in the desert where the arid conditions mummified the body naturally. In the Early Dynastic Period however they began using tombs for greater protection and the body was insulated from the desiccating effect of the sand and was subject to natural decay. Thus the Egyptians developed their elaborate embalming practices in which the corpse was artificially desiccated and wrapped to be placed in its coffin.98 The quality of the process varied according to cost however and those who could not afford it were still buried in desert graves.99 Once the mummification process was complete the mummy was carried from the deceased persons house to the tomb in a funeral procession that included his or her relatives and friends along with a variety of priests. Before the burial these priests performed several rituals including the Opening of the mouth ceremony intended to restore the dead persons senses and give him or her the ability to receive offerings. Then the mummy was buried and the tomb sealed.100 Afterwards relatives or hired priests gave food offerings to the deceased in a nearby mortuary chapel at regular intervals. Over time families inevitably neglected offerings to longdead relatives so most mortuary cults only lasted one or two generations.101 However while the cult lasted the living sometimes wrote letters asking deceased relatives for help in the belief that the dead could affect the world of the living as the gods did.102 The first Egyptian tombs were mastabas rectangular brick structures where kings and nobles were entombed. Each of them contained a subterranean burial chamber and a separate above ground chapel for mortuary rituals. In the Old Kingdom the mastaba developed into the pyramid which symbolized the primeval mound of Egyptian myth. Pyramids were reserved for royalty and were accompanied by large mortuary temples sitting at their base. Middle Kingdom pharaohs continued to build pyramids but the popularity of mastabas waned. Increasingly commoners with sufficient means were buried in rockcut tombs with separate mortuary chapels nearby an approach which was less vulnerable to tomb robbery. By the beginning of the New Kingdom even the pharaohs were buried in such tombs and they continued to be used until the decline of the religion itself.103 Tombs could contain a great variety of other items including statues of the deceased to serve as substitutes for the body in case it was damaged.104 Because it was believed that the deceased would have to do work in the afterlife just as in life burials often included small models of humans to do work in place of the deceased.105 Human sacrifices found in early royal tombs were probably meant to serve the pharaoh in his afterlife.106 The tombs of wealthier individuals could also contain furniture clothing and other everyday objects intended for use in the afterlife along with amulets and other items intended to provide magical protection against the hazards of the spirit world.107 Further protection was provided by funerary texts included in the burial. The tomb walls also bore artwork such as images of the deceased eating food that were believed to allow him or her to magically receive sustenance even after the mortuary offerings had ceased.108 Historyedit Predynastic and Early Dynastic periodsedit Narmer a Predynastic ruler accompanied by men carrying the standards of various local gods The Narmer Palette. The face of a woman with the horns and ears of a cow representing Bat or Hathor appears twice at the top of the palette and a falcon representing Horus appears to the right of the palette. The beginnings of Egyptian religion extend into prehistory though evidence for them comes only from the sparse and ambiguous archaeological record. Careful burials during the Predynastic period imply that the people of this time believed in some form of an afterlife.109 At the same time animals were ritually buried a practice which may reflect the development of zoomorphic deities like those found in the later religion.110 The evidence is less clear for gods in human form and this type of deity may have emerged more slowly than those in animal shape. Each region of Egypt originally had its own patron deity but it is likely that as these small communities conquered or absorbed each other the god of the defeated area was either incorporated into the other gods mythology or entirely subsumed by it. This resulted in a complex pantheon in which some deities remained only locally important while others developed more universal significance.111112 Archaeological data has suggested that the Egyptian religious system had close cultural affinities with Eastern African populations and arose from an African substratum rather than deriving from the Mesopotamian or Mediterranean regions.113114115116 The Early Dynastic Period began with the unification of Egypt around 3000 BC. This event transformed Egyptian religion as some deities rose to national importance and the cult of the divine pharaoh became the central focus of religious activity.117 Horus was identified with the king and his cult center in the Upper Egyptian city of Nekhen was among the most important religious sites of the period. Another important center was Abydos where the early rulers built large funerary complexes.118 Old and Middle Kingdomsedit During the Old Kingdom the priesthoods of the major deities attempted to organize the complicated national pantheon into groups linked by their mythology and worshipped in a single cult center such as the Ennead of Heliopolis which linked important deities such as Atum Ra Osiris and Set in a single creation myth.119 Meanwhile pyramids accompanied by large mortuary temple complexes replaced mastabas as the tombs of pharaohs. In contrast with the great size of the pyramid complexes temples to gods remained comparatively small suggesting that official religion in this period emphasized the cult of the divine king more than the direct worship of deities. The funerary rituals and architecture of this time greatly influenced the more elaborate temples and rituals used in worshipping the gods in later periods.120 The pyramid complex of Djedkare Isesi The Ancient Egyptians regarded the sun as a powerful life force. The sun god Ra had been worshipped from the Early Dynastic period 31002686 BCE but it was not until the Old Kingdom 26862181 BCE when Ra became the dominant figure in the Egyptian pantheon that the Sun Cult took power.121 Early in the Old Kingdom Ra grew in influence and his cult center at Heliopolis became the nations most important religious site.122 By the Fifth Dynasty Ra was the most prominent god in Egypt and had developed the close links with kingship and the afterlife that he retained for the rest of Egyptian history.123 Around the same time Osiris became an important afterlife deity. The Pyramid Texts first written at this time reflect the prominence of the solar and Osirian concepts of the afterlife although they also contain remnants of much older traditions.124 The texts are an extremely important source for understanding early Egyptian theology.125 Symbols such as the winged disc took on new features. Originally the solar disk with the wings of a hawk was originally the symbol of Horus and associated with his cult in the Delta town of Behdet. The sacred cobras were added on either side of the disc during the Old Kingdom. The winged disc had protective significance and was found on temple ceilings and ceremonial entrances. In the 
22 nd century BC the Old Kingdom collapsed into the disorder of the First Intermediate Period. Eventually rulers from Thebes reunified the Egyptian nation in the Middle Kingdom c.20551650 BC. These Theban pharaohs initially promoted their patron god Montu to national importance but during the Middle Kingdom he was eclipsed by the rising popularity of Amun.126 In this new Egyptian state personal piety grew more important and was expressed more freely in writing a trend that continued in the New Kingdom.127 New Kingdomedit The Middle Kingdom crumbled in the Second Intermediate Period c.16501550 BC but the country was again reunited by Theban rulers who became the first pharaohs of the New Kingdom. Under the new regime Amun became the supreme state god. He was syncretized with Ra the longestablished patron of kingship and his temple at Karnak in Thebes became Egypts most important religious center. Amuns elevation was partly due to the great importance of Thebes but it was also due to the increasingly professional priesthood. Their sophisticated theological discussion produced detailed descriptions of Amuns universal power.128129 Increased contact with outside peoples in this period led to the adoption of many Near Eastern deities into the pantheon. At the same time the subjugated Nubians absorbed Egyptian religious beliefs and in particular adopted Amun as their own.130 Akhenaten and his family worshipping the Aten The New Kingdom religious order was disrupted when Akhenaten acceded and replaced Amun with the Aten as the state god. Eventually he eliminated the official worship of most other gods and moved Egypts capital to a new city at Amarna. This part of Egyptian history the Amarna Period is named after this. In doing so Akhenaten claimed unprecedented status only he could worship the Aten and the populace directed their worship toward him. The Atenist system lacked welldeveloped mythology and afterlife beliefs and the Aten seemed distant and impersonal so the new order did not appeal to ordinary Egyptians.131 Thus many probably continued to worship the traditional gods in private. Nevertheless the withdrawal of state support for the other deities severely disrupted Egyptian society.132 Akhenatens successors restored the traditional religious system and eventually they dismantled all Atenist monuments.133 Before the Amarna Period popular religion had trended toward more personal relationships between worshippers and their gods. Akhenatens changes had reversed this trend but once the traditional religion was restored there was a backlash. The populace began to believe that the gods were much more directly involved in daily life. Amun the supreme god was increasingly seen as the final arbiter of human destiny the true ruler of Egypt. The pharaoh was correspondingly more human and less divine. The importance of oracles as a means of decisionmaking grew as did the wealth and influence of the oracles interpreters the priesthood. These trends undermined the traditional structure of society and contributed to the breakdown of the New Kingdom.134135 Later periodsedit Further information Decline of ancient Egyptian religion Further information Roman Egypt Copperalloy statuettes of Anubis left and Horus centre as Roman officers with contrapposto stances National Archaeological Museum Athens Distinctively Roman statue of Isis holding a sistrum and a situla In the 
1 st millennium BC Egypt was significantly weaker than in earlier times and in several periods foreigners seized the country and assumed the position of pharaoh. The importance of the pharaoh continued to decline and the emphasis on popular piety continued to increase. Animal cults a characteristically Egyptian form of worship became increasingly popular in this period possibly as a response to the uncertainty and foreign influence of the time.136 Isis grew more popular as a goddess of protection magic and personal salvation and became the most important goddess in Egypt.137 In the 
4 th century BC Egypt became a Hellenistic kingdom under the Ptolemaic dynasty 30530 BC which assumed the pharaonic role maintaining the traditional religion and building or rebuilding many temples. The kingdoms Greek ruling class identified the Egyptian deities with their own.138 From this crosscultural syncretism emerged Serapis a god who combined Osiris and Apis with characteristics of Greek deities and who became very popular among the Greek population. Nevertheless for the most part the two belief systems remained separate and the Egyptian deities remained Egyptian.139 Ptolemaicera beliefs changed little after Egypt became a province of the Roman Empire in 30 BC with the Ptolemaic kings replaced by distant emperors.138 The cult of Isis appealed even to Greeks and Romans outside Egypt and in Hellenized form it spread across the empire.140 In Egypt itself as the empire weakened official temples fell into decay and without their centralizing influence religious practice became fragmented and localized. Meanwhile Christianity spread across Egypt and in the third and fourth centuries AD edicts by Christian emperors and the missionary activity of Christians eroded traditional beliefs. Nevertheless the traditional Egyptian religion persisted for a long time. The traditional worship in the temples of the city of Philae apparently survived at least until the 
5 th century despite the active Christianization of Egypt. In fact the fifthcentury historian Priscus mentions a treaty between the Roman commander Maximinus and the Blemmyes and Nobades in 452 which among other things ensured access to the cult image of Isis.141142143 According to the 
6 thcentury historian Procopius the temples in Philae was closed down officially in AD 537 by the local commander Narses the Persarmenian in accordance with an order of Byzantine emperor Justinian I.144 This event is conventionally considered to mark the end of ancient Egyptian religion.145 However its importance has recently come into question following a major study by Jitse Dijkstra who argues that organized paganism at Philae ended in the fifth century based on the fact that the last inscriptional evidence of an active pagan priesthood there dates to the 4
50 s.141143 Nevertheless some adherence to traditional religion seems to have survived into the sixth century based on a petition from Dioscorus of Aphrodito to the governor of the Thebaid dated to 5
67.1 46143 The letter warns of an unnamed man the text calls him eater of raw meat who in addition to plundering houses and stealing tax revenue is alleged to have restored paganism at the sanctuaries possibly referring to the temples at Philae.146143 While it persisted among the populace for some time Egyptian religion slowly faded away.147 Hermanubis in the November panel of a Roman mosaic calendar from Sousse Tunisia Isis seated right welcoming the Greek Io into Egypt depicted on the southern wall of the Ekklesiasterion Anubis Harpocrates Isis and Serapis antique fresco in Pompeii Italy Statue of Hermanubis from Rome Roman black and white marble statue of Isis Legacyedit Egyptian religion produced the temples and tombs which are ancient Egypts most enduring monuments but it also influenced other cultures. In pharaonic times many of its symbols such as the sphinx and winged solar disk were adopted by other cultures across the Mediterranean and Near East as were some of its deities such as Bes. Some of these connections are difficult to trace. The Greek concept of Elysium may have derived from the Egyptian vision of the afterlife.148 In late antiquity the Christian conception of Hell was most likely influenced by some of the imagery of the Duat. Egyptian beliefs also influenced or gave rise to several esoteric belief systems developed by Greeks and Romans who considered Egypt as a source of mystic wisdom. Hermeticism for instance derived from the tradition of secret magical knowledge associated with Thoth.149 Modern timesedit Further information Kemetism Further information Modern paganism Altar to Thoth of a Kemetic follower Traces of ancient beliefs remained in Egyptian folk traditions into modern times but its influence on modern societies greatly increased with the French Campaign in Egypt and Syria in 1798 and their seeing the monuments and images. As a result of it Westerners began to study Egyptian beliefs firsthand and Egyptian religious motifs were adopted into Western art.150151 Egyptian religion has since had a significant influence in popular culture. Due to continued interest in Egyptian beliefs in the late 
20 th century several new religious groups going under the blanket term of Kemetism have formed based on different reconstructions of ancient Egyptian religion.152 Kemetism is a neopagan religion and revival of the ancient Egyptian religion and related expressions of religion in classical and late antiquity emerging during the 19
70 s. Kemetics do not consider themselves direct descendants of the ancient Egyptian religion but consistently speak of its recreation or restoration.153154 See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal Prehistoric religion Religions of the ancient Near East Outline of ancient Egypt Index of Egyptian mythology articles Referencesedit  Kaelin Oskar 20161122. Gods in Ancient Egypt. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion. doi
10.1 0
93 acrefore97801993403
78.0 
13.2 44. ISBN 9780199340378. Retrieved 20230410.  Assmann 2001 pp. 15 80.  Assmann 2001 pp. 6364 82.  Allen 2000 pp. 4344.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 30 32 89.  Silverman 1991 pp. 5558.  David 2002 p. 53.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 28.  Teeter 2001 pp. 34044.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 7479.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 2728.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 3335.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 36 67.  Assmann 2001 pp. 18992 24142.  Allen 2000 pp. 11517.  Assmann 2001 pp. 45.  a b c d Shafer 1997 pp. 24.  Assmann 2001 pp. 6879.  Allen 2000 pp. 104 127.  Lesko 1991 pp. 11721.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 4546.  Allen James P. The Cosmology of the Pyramid Texts in Simpson 1989 pp. 2026.  Allen 2000 p. 31.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 5456.  Assmann 2001 pp. 56.  Wilkinson 2003 p. 55.  Van Dijk Jacobus The Amarna Period and the Later New Kingdom in Shaw 2000 pp. 31112.  David 2002 pp. 69 95 184.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 6063.  Allen 2000 pp. 7980.  Allen 2000 pp. 9495.  Taylor 2001 p. 25.  David 2002 pp. 90 9495.  Fleming  Lothian 1997 p. 104.  David 2002 pp. 16061.  Assmann 2005 pp. 20910 398402.  Montserrat Dominic 2000 Akhenaten History Fantasy and Ancient Egypt Routledge pp. 
36 ff ISBN 0415185491.  Najovits Simson 2003. Egypt trunk of the tree. Vol. 2. Algora. pp. 13144. ISBN 9780875862569.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 p. 35.  Allen 2000 p. 198.  a b Traunecker 2001 pp. 15.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 222223.  Tobin 2001 pp. 46468.  Pinch 1995 p. 18.  Fleming  Lothian 1997 p. 26.  Allen 2000 pp. 14345 17173 182.  Meeks  FavardMeeks 1996 p. 37.  Assmann 2001 p. 124.  Fleming  Lothian 1997 pp. 76 78.  Quirke  Spencer 1992 p. 67.  Fleming  Lothian 1997 pp. 84 107108.  Fleming  Lothian 1997 pp. 33 3839.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 9399.  Pinch 1995 p. 63.  a b Foster 2001 vol. II pp. 31217.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 p. 94.  Assmann 2001 p. 166.  a b Ockinga Boyo Piety in Redford 2001 vol. III pp. 4446.  Allen 2000 p. 315.  Hornung 1999 pp. 15.  David 2002 p. 93.  Taylor 2001 pp. 19495.  Hornung 1999 pp. xvii 14.  Quirke  Spencer 1992 p. 98.  Allen 2000 pp. 31617.  Hornung 1999 pp. 2627 30.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 4244.  Wilkinson 2000 pp. 89 50.  Wilkinson 2000 p. 82.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 7282 8689.  Wilkinson 2000 pp. 7275.  Shafer 1997 p. 9.  Wilkinson 2000 pp. 9 2526.  Wilkinson 2000 pp. 9293.  a b Thompson Stephen E. Cults Overview in Redford 2001 vol. I 326332  a b Wilkinson 2000 p. 95  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 9395 Shafer 1997 p. 25  Shafer 1997 pp. 2728.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 21 83.  Quirke  Spencer 1992 pp. 78 9294.  Owen James 2004. Egyptian Animals Were Mummified Same Way as Humans. National Geographic News. Archived from the original on September 17 2004. Retrieved 20100806.  Kruchten JeanMarie Oracles in Redford 2001 pp. 609611  Frankfurter 1998 pp. 145152.  Sadek 1988 pp. 12.  a b Wilkinson 2003 pp. 46  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 128131.  Baines in Shafer 1991 pp. 164171  Lesko Barbara S. Cults Private Cults in Redford 2001 vol. I pp. 336339  Sadek 1988 pp. 7678.  David 2002 pp. 273 276277.  Traunecker 2001 p. 98.  Allen 2000 pp. 156157.  Pinch 1995 pp. 917.  Baines in Shafer 1991 p. 165.  Pinch 1995 pp. 5163.  Pinch 1995 pp. 16 28.  Pinch 1995 pp. 7378.  Quirke  Spencer 1992 pp. 8690.  David 2002 pp. 3001.  Taylor 2001 pp. 18793.  Taylor 2001 p. 95.  David 2002 p. 282.  Taylor 2001 pp. 14155.  Fleming  Lothian 1997 pp. 1001.  Taylor 2001 pp. 99103.  Sergio Donadoni The Egyptians Chicago University of Chicago Press 1997 p. 262  Taylor 2001 pp. 10710 20013.  Quirke  Spencer 1992 pp. 9798 112.  citation needed  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 1215.  Wilkinson 2003 p. 31.  David 2002 pp. 5052.  Smith Stuart Tyson 1 January 2018. Gift of the Nile Climate Change the Origins of Egyptian Civilization and Its Interactions within Northeast Africa. Across the Mediterranean  Along the Nile Studies in Egyptology Nubiology and Late Antiquity Dedicated to Lszl Trk. Budapest.  Egyptian Religion in Macropedia Vol. 6 Encyclopedia Britannica 1984 ed.. pp. 506508.  Frankfort Henri 1978. Kingship and the gods  a study of ancient Near Eastern religion as the integration of society  nature Phoenix ed.. Chicago University of Chicago Press. pp. 161223. ISBN 0226260119.  Manzo Andrea 2022. Ancient Egypt in its African context  economic networks social and cultural interactions. Cambridge. pp. 150. ISBN 9781009074544.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Wilkinson 2003 p. 15.  Wilkinson 2000 pp. 1719.  David 2002 pp. 51 8185.  Dunand  ZivieCoche 2005 pp. 7879.  Strudwick Helen 2006. The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. New York Sterling Publishing Co. Inc. pp. 108111. ISBN 9781435146549.  Malek 2000 pp. 9293 1089.  David 2002 pp. 9091 112.  Malek 2000 p. 113.  David 2002 p. 92.  David 2002 p. 154.  Callender Gae The Middle Kingdom in Shaw 2000 pp. 18081.  David 2002 pp. 18184 186.  Assmann 2001 pp. 166 19192.  David 2002 pp. 276 304.  David 2002 pp. 21518 238.  Van Dijk 2000 pp. 287 311.  David 2002 pp. 23839.  Van Dijk 2000 pp. 289 31012.  Assmann State and Religion in the New Kingdom in Simpson 1989 pp. 7279.  David 2002 pp. 31217.  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 51 14649.  a b Peacock 2000 pp. 43738.  David 2002 pp. 32528.  David 2002 p. 326.  a b Holger Kockelmann 20120424. Philae. In Wendrich Willeke et al. eds.. UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology. Vol. 1.  Lloyd Alan B. 2001. Philae. In Redford Donald ed.. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Vol. 3. Oxford Oxford University Press. pp. 4044. ISBN 0195138236.  a b c d Moawad Samuel 2013. Christianity on Philae. In Gabra Gawdat Takla Hany N. eds.. Christianity and Monasticism in Aswan and Nubia. Christianity and Monasticism in Egypt. Cairo American University in Cairo Press. pp. 2738. ISBN 9789774165610.  Procopius Bell. Pers. 
1.1 
9.3 7  Joann Fletcher 2016. The amazing history of Egypt MP3 podcast. BBC History Magazine. Event occurs at 5346. Retrieved 17 Jan 2016.  a b Dijkstra Jitse H.F. 2004. A Cult of Isis at Philae after Justinian Reconsidering P. Cair. Masp. I 67004. Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik. 146 137154. JSTOR 20191757.  Frankfurter 1998 pp. 2330.  Assmann 2001 p. 392.  Hornung 2001 pp. 1 911 7375.  Hornung 2001 p. 75.  Fleming  Lothian 1997 pp. 13336.  Melton 2009 pp. 841 847 851 855.  International Network of Kemetics. Archived from the original on 20081005. Retrieved 20080821.  Raneb Djehutijdjedef. Egypt  the image of heaven in Czech. Retrieved 20090926. Bibliographyedit Allen James P 2000. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521774837. Assmann Jan 2001 1984. The Search for God in Ancient Egypt. Lorton David transl. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801487293.  2005 2001. Death and Salvation in Ancient Egypt. Lorton David transl. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801442419. David Rosalie 2002. Religion and Magic in Ancient Egypt. Penguin. ISBN 0140262520. Dunand Franoise ZivieCoche Christiane 2005. Gods and Men in Egypt 3000 BCE to 395 CE. Lorton David transl. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801488532. Fleming Fergus Lothian Alan 1997. The Way to Eternity Egyptian Myth. Amsterdam Duncan Baird. ISBN 0705435032. Foster John L 2001 Lyric in Redford 2001 vol. II pp. 31217. Frankfurter David 1998. Religion in Roman Egypt Assimilation and Resistance. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691070547. Hornung Erik 1999. The Ancient Egyptian Books of the Afterlife. Lorton David transl. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801485150.  2001. The Secret Lore of Egypt Its Impact on the West. Lorton David transl. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801438470. Lesko Leonard H 1991 Ancient Egyptian Cosmogonies and Cosmology in Shafer 1991 pp. 11721. Malek Jaromir 2000 The Old Kingdom in Shaw 2000 pp. 9293 1089. Meeks Dimitri FavardMeeks Christine 1996 French 1993. Daily Life of the Egyptian Gods. Translated by G. M. Goshgarian. Cornell University Press. ISBN 9780801482489. Melton J. Gordon 2009. Encyclopedia of American Religions 
8 th ed.. Gale Cengage Learning. ISBN 9780787696962. Peacock David 2000 The Roman Period in Shaw 2000 pp. 43738. Pinch Geraldine 1995. Magic in Ancient Egypt. University of Texas Press. ISBN 0292765592.permanent dead link Quirke Stephen Spencer Jeffrey 1992. The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500279020. Redford Donald B ed. 2001. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195102347. Sadek Ashraf Iskander 1988. Popular Religion in Egypt during the New Kingdom. Hildesheim. ISBN 3806781079. Shafer Byron E ed. 1991. Religion in Ancient Egypt Gods Myths and Personal Practice. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801497868. Shafer Byron E ed. 1997. Temples of Ancient Egypt. IB Tauris. ISBN 1850439451. Shaw Ian ed. 2000. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198150342. Silverman David P 1991 Divinity and Deities in Ancient Egypt in Shafer 1991 pp. 5558. Simpson William Kelly ed. 1989. Religion and Philosophy in Ancient Egypt. Yale Egyptological Seminar. ISBN 0912532181. Taylor John 2001. Death and the Afterlife in Ancient Egypt. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226791645. Teeter Emily 2001 Cults Divine Cults in Redford 2001 vol. I pp. 34044. Tobin Vincent Arieh 2001 Myths An Overview in Redford 2001 vol. II pp. 46468. Traunecker Claude 2001 1992. The Gods of Egypt. Lorton David transl. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801438349. Van Dijk Jacobus 2000 The Amarna Period and the Later New Kingdom in Shaw 2000 pp. 31112. Wilkinson Richard H 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500051003.  2003. The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500051208. Further readingedit Assmann Jan Kucharek Andrea 2008. gyptische Religion Totenliteratur. Aus dem gyptischen bersetzt und herausgegeben in German. Frankfurt am Main Verlag der Weltreligionen. ISBN 9783458700111. Assmann Jan Kucharek Andrea 2018. gyptische Religion Gtterliteratur. Aus dem gyptischen bersetzt und herausgegeben in German. Frankfurt am Main Verlag der Weltreligionen. ISBN 9783458700562. Clarysse Willy Schoors Antoon Willems Harco Quaegebeur Jan 1998. Egyptian Religion The Last Thousand Years Studies Dedicated to the Memory of Jan Quaegebeur. Peeters. ISBN 9042906693.. Harris Geraldine Sibbick John OConnor David 1992. Gods and Pharaohs from Egyptian Mythology. Bedrick. ISBN 0872269078.. Hart George 1997. Egyptian Myths. Legendary Past. University of Texas Press. ISBN 0292720769.. Hill Marsha 2007. Gifts for the gods images from Egyptian temples. New York The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9781588392312. Bilolo Mubabinge 2004 KinshasaMunich 1987. Les cosmothologies philosophiques dHliopolis et dHermopolis. Essai de thmatisation et de systmatisation. Academy of African Thought in French. Vol. 2. MunichParis. sec I.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link.  2003 KinshasaMunich 1986. Les cosmothologies philosophiques de lgypte Antique. Problmatique prmisses hermneutiques et problmes majeurs. Academy of African Thought in French. Vol. 1. MunichParis. sec I.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link.  2003 KinshasaMunich 1995. Mtaphysique Pharaonique IIIme millnaire av. J.C. Academy of African Thought in French. Vol. 4. MunichParis C.A. DiopCenter for Egyptological StudiesINADEP. sec I..  2004 KinshasaMunich 1988. Le Crateur et la Cration dans la pense memphite et amarnienne. Approche synoptique du Document Philosophique de Memphis et du Grand Hymne Thologique dEchnaton. Academy of African Thought in French. Vol. 2. MunichParis. sec I.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link. Pinch Geraldine 2004. Egyptian Mythology A Guide to the Gods Goddesses and Traditions of ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195170245.. Schulz R Seidel M 1998. Egypt The World of the Pharaohs. Cologne Knemann. ISBN 3895089133.. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Religion in ancient Egypt. Ideology and Belief in Ancient Egypt Digital Egypt UK UCL archived from the original on 20141022 retrieved 20180721. Ancient Egypt The Internet Sacred Text Archive. Religion in the Lives of the Ancient Egyptians U Chicago archived from the original on 20180716 retrieved 20180721. Links to related articles v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal v t e History of religions Timeline of religion List of religions and spiritual traditions Major groups Abrahamic Bah Christianity Islam Judaism Rastafari Amerindian Aztec Mayan Inca East Asian Confucianism Taoism Shinto Indian Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Iranian Mithraism Zoroastrianism Manichaeanism Modern Neopaganism Wicca New Thought Kardecist spiritism Historical Prehistoric Paleolithic Near East Egyptian Semitic Mesopotamian IndoEuropean Baltic Celtic Germanic Greek Gnosticism Neoplatonism Illyrothracian Roman Slavic Vedic Hinduism Related topics Evolution of morality Evolutionary origin of religions Evolutionary psychology of religion History of atheism History of theology GrecoAbrahamic Humanism Irreligion Roman School Secularism v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Church Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian ProtoProtestantism HussitesMoravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neocharismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Nondenominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible StudentsJehovahs Witnesses British Israelism Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunni Asharism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shia Twelver Shiism Zaydism Ismailism Alawis Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ahmadi Mahdawi movement Quranism Milah Abraham Nondenominational list Other AliIllahism Bbism Bah Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian IlmeKhshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Yazdnism Ishikism Shabakism Yarsanism Yazidism Other AssianismUatsdin Roshani Chinese Manichaeism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japanese Shinto list Shugend Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion o Mu Caodaism Hoahaoism o Bu Sn K Hng Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Sauraism rauta Sant Mat NeoHinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana ChanZenThin Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan NeoBuddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara vetmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Srilankan Vedda Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic TurkoMongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Traditional Sabahan religions Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Mori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Anishinaabe Blackfoot Californian Miwok Ohlone Pomo Cherokee Chilote Choctaw Creek Guarani Haida HoChunk Hopi Iroquois Longhouse Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakawakw Lakota Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Olmec Purpecha Midewiwin Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuuchahnulth Pawnee Tsimshian Ute Zuni Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi TibetoBurmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba DonyiPolo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church SubSaharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba If Diasporic Candombl Bantu Jej Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santera Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Brahmoism Falun Gong Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy NeoTheosophy Agni Yoga Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturba Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism modern religion ItaloRoman Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Romanian Slavic Uralic Estonian Modern Finnish paganism Hungarian Mari religion Erzyan native religion Smi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Ralism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Arabian Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selknam Georgian Germanic AngloSaxon Continental Frankish paganism Norse Greek Gnosticism GrecoBuddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan Indigenous religion Olmec PaleoBalkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian ProtoIndoIranian Iranian Vedic Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater GalloRoman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Semitic Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy  Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Clergy Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Ethnic Faith Fire Folk religion God Goddess Indigenous Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clergy  Laity Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Happiness Homosexuality Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism Science State Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea GuineaBissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda So Tom and Prncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Paganism and modern paganism Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions existing and extinct Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi TibetoBurmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese DonyiPolo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic AngloSaxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic PaleoBalkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele GalloRoman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Scythian Slavic Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Sami MiddleEastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Mori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan SubSaharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern pagan movements Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturba Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu ItaloRoman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic TurkoMongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochranes Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blt Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and Paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan Authority control databases National Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientEgyptianreligionoldid1222827222 Category Ancient Egyptian religion Hidden categories All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 CS1 maint location missing publisher CS1 Czechlanguage sources cs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely moveprotected pages All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 8 May 2024 at 0434 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width