Polytheism - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Terminology 
2 Soft versus hard 
3 Gods and divinity 
4 Types of deities 
5 Religion and mythology 
6 Ancient and historical religions Toggle Ancient and historical religions subsection 
6.1 Ancient Greece 
7 Folk religions 
8 Modern religions Toggle Modern religions subsection 
8.1 Buddhism 
8.2 Christianity 

8.2.1 Mormonism 
8.3 Hinduism 
8.4 Zoroastrianism 
8.5 Tengrism 
8.6 Modern Paganism 

8.6.1 Reconstructionism 

8.6.2 Wicca 
8.7 Serer 
9 Use as a term of abuse 
10 Polydeism 
11 See also 
12 References 
13 Further reading 
14 External links Toggle the table of contents Polytheism 116 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca     Bnlmg      Boarisch  Bosanski Brezhoneg  Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Fiji Hindi Franais Frysk Furlan Galego    Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano     Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyl gwiyannen  Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar  Malagasy    Bahasa Melayu   Nederlands   Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan   Ozbekcha     Papiamentu Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn     Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara  Trke     Vepsn kel Ting Vit Vro Winaray    emaitka  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Worship of or belief in multiple deities Egyptian gods in the Carnegie Museum of Natural History Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme Being Sustainer The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Bah Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism IndoIranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil theodicy Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e Polytheism is the belief in or worship of more than one god.123 According to Oxford Reference it is not easy to count gods and so not always obvious whether an apparently polytheistic religion such as Chinese Folk Religions is really so or whether the apparent different objects of worship are to be thought of as manifestations of a singular divinity.1 Polytheistic belief is usually assembled into a pantheon of gods and goddesses along with their own religious sects and rituals. Polytheism is a type of theism. Within theism it contrasts with monotheism the belief in a singular God who is in most cases transcendent. In religions that accept polytheism the different gods and goddesses may be representations of forces of nature or ancestral principles they can be viewed either as autonomous or as aspects or emanations of a creator deity or transcendental absolute principle monistic theologies which manifests immanently in nature panentheistic and pantheistic theologies.4 Polytheists do not always worship all the gods equally they can be in monolatrists or kathenotheists specializing in the worship of one particular deity only or at certain times respectively. The recognition of the existence of multiple gods and goddesses does not necessarily equate to the worship of all the deities of one or more pantheons as the believer can either worship them as a whole or concentrate only on a specific group of deities determined by various conditions such as the believers occupation tastes personal experience family tradition etc. It is also possible to worship a single deity considered supreme without ruling out the existence of other gods. This religious position has been called henotheism but some prefer to call it monolatry. Although the term henotheism is controversial it is recognized by scholars that the worship of a single God accompanied by belief in other deities maintains the principle of polytheism.5 Polytheism was the typical form of religion before the development and spread of the Abrahamic religions of Judaism Christianity and Islam which enforce monotheism. It is well documented throughout history from prehistory and the earliest records of ancient Egyptian religion and ancient Mesopotamian religion to the religions prevalent during Classical antiquity such as ancient Greek religion and ancient Roman religion and in ethnic religions such as Germanic Slavic and Baltic paganism and Native American religions. Notable polytheistic religions practiced today include Hinduism Taoism Shenism or Chinese folk religion Japanese Shinto Santera most Traditional African religions6 and various neopagan faiths such as Wicca. Hinduism while popularly held as polytheistic cannot be exclusively categorised as such as some Hindus consider themselves to be pantheists panentheists henotheist polymorphist monotheists or monist. They are compatible with Hindu texts since there exists no consensus of standardisation in the faith. Vedanta the most dominant school of Hinduism offers a combination of pantheismpanentheism and polytheism holding that Brahman is the sole ultimate reality of the universe yet unity with it can be reached by worshipping the innumerable deities that represent the Supreme Absolute Truth. Hindus who practice Bhakti ultimately believe in one God who is known variously as Paramatman Parabrahman Bhagavan Ishvara and so on that transcends all categories e.g. both of form and formless. Even though God is one God manifests in infinite forms to help HisHer devotees realise HimHer and this is not to be confused with the belief that there are multiple GodsGoddesses this can be referred to as Polymorphic Monotheism. Terminologyedit The term comes from the Greek  poly many and  theos god and was coined by the Jewish writer Philo of Alexandria to argue with the Greeks. When Christianity spread throughout Europe and the Mediterranean nonChristians were just called Gentiles a term originally used by Jews to refer to nonJews or pagans locals or by the clearly pejorative term idolaters worshippers of false gods. In modern times the term polytheism was first revived in French by Jean Bodin in 1580 followed by Samuel Purchass usage in English in 16
14.7  Soft versus hardedit See also Interpretatio graeca A major division in modern polytheistic practices is between socalled soft polytheism and hard polytheism.89 Soft polytheism is the belief that different gods may either be psychological archetypes personifications of natural forces or as being one essential god interpreted through the lenses of different cultures e.g. Odin Zeus and Indra all being the same god as interpreted by Germanic Greek and Indic peoples respectively  known as omnitheism.10 In this way gods may be interchangeable for one another across cultures.9 Hard polytheism is the belief that gods are distinct separate real divine beings rather than psychological archetypes or personifications of natural forces. Hard polytheists reject the idea that all gods are one essential god and may also reject the existence of gods outside their own pantheon altogether.9 Gods and divinityedit Bulul statues serve as avatars of rice deities in the Anitist beliefs of the Ifugao in the Philippines. The deities of polytheism are often portrayed as complex personages of greater or lesser status with individual skills needs desires and histories in many ways similar to humans anthropomorphic in their personality traits but with additional individual powers abilities knowledge or perceptions. Polytheism cannot be cleanly separated from the animist beliefs prevalent in most folk religions. The gods of polytheism are in many cases the highest order of a continuum of supernatural beings or spirits which may include ancestors demons wights and others. In some cases these spirits are divided into celestial or chthonic classes and belief in the existence of all these beings does not imply that all are worshipped. Types of deitiesedit Further information List of deities Types of deities often found in polytheism may include Creator deity Culture hero Death deity chthonic Lifedeathrebirth deity Love deity Mother goddess Political deity such as a king or emperor Sky deity celestial Solar deity Trickster deity Water deity Lunar deity Deities of music arts science farming or other endeavors Religion and mythologyedit Main article Religion and mythology In the Classical era 
4 th century CE Neoplatonist Sallustius categorized mythology into five types11 Theological myths that contemplate the essence of the gods such as Cronus swallowing his children which Sallustius regarded as expressing in allegory the essence of divinity Physical expressing the activities of gods in the world Psychological myths as allegories of the activities of the soul itself or the souls acts of thought Material regarding material objects as gods for example to call the earth Gaia the ocean Okeanos or heat Typhon Mixed The beliefs of many historical polytheistic religions are commonly referred to as mythology
12 unreliable source though the stories cultures tell about their gods should be distinguishedaccording to whom from their worship or religious practice. For instance deities portrayed in conflict in mythology were often nonetheless worshipped side by side illustrating the distinction within the religion between belief and practice.citation needed Scholars such as Jaan Puhvel J. P. Mallory and Douglas Q. Adams have reconstructed aspects of the ancient ProtoIndoEuropean religion from which the religions of the various IndoEuropean peoples are thought to derive which is believed to have been an essentially naturalist numenistic religion.citation needed An example of a religious notion from this shared past is the concept of dyus which is attested in several religious systems of IndoEuropeanspeaking peoples. Ancient and historical religionsedit Wellknown historical polytheistic pantheons include the Sumerian gods the Egyptian gods the pantheon attested in Classical Antiquity in ancient Greek and Roman religion the Norse sir and Vanir the Yoruba Orisha and the Aztec gods. In many civilizations pantheons tended to grow over time. Deities first worshipped as the patrons of cities or other places came to be collected together as empires extended over larger territories. Conquests could lead to the subordination of a cultures pantheon to that of the invaders as in the Greek Titanomachia and possibly also the sirVanir war in the Norse mythos. Cultural exchange could lead to the same deity being revered in two places under different names as seen with the Greeks Etruscans and Romans and also to the cultural transmission of elements of an extraneous religion as with the ancient Egyptian deity Osiris who was later worshipped in ancient Greece. Most ancient belief systems held that gods influenced human lives. However the Greek philosopher Epicurus held that the gods were incorruptible but material blissful beings who inhabited the empty spaces between worlds and did not trouble themselves with the affairs of mortals but could be perceived by the mind especially during sleep. Ancient Greeceedit Main article Religion in ancient Greece Procession of the Twelve Olympians The classical scheme in Ancient Greece of the Twelve Olympians the Canonical Twelve of art and poetry were1314 Zeus Hera Poseidon Athena Ares Demeter Apollo Artemis Hephaestus Aphrodite Hermes and Hestia. Though it is suggested that Hestia stepped down when Dionysus was invited to Mount Olympus this is a matter of controversy. Robert Graves The Greek Myths cites two sources1516 that obviously do not suggest Hestia surrendered her seat though he suggests she did. Hades17 was often excluded because he dwelt in the underworld. All of the gods had a power. There was however a great deal of fluidity as to whom was counted among their number in antiquity.18 Different cities often worshipped the same deities sometimes with epithets that distinguished them and specified their local nature. Hellenic Polytheism extended beyond mainland Greece to the islands and coasts of Ionia in Asia Minor to Magna Graecia Sicily and southern Italy and to scattered Greek colonies in the Western Mediterranean such as Massalia Marseille. Greek religion tempered Etruscan cult and belief to form much of the later Roman religion. During the Hellenistic Era philosophical schools like Epicureanism developed distinct theologies.19 Hellenism is in practice primarily centered around polytheistic and animistic worship. Folk religionsedit Main article Folk religion Further information Saint Angel Folk Catholicism and Shamanism The majority of socalled folk religions in the world today distinguished from traditional ethnic religions are found in the AsiaPacific region.20 This fact conforms to the trend of the majority of polytheist religions being found outside the western world.21 Folk religions are often closely tied to animism. Animistic beliefs are found in historical and modern cultures. Folk beliefs are often labeled superstitions when they are present in monotheistic societies.22 Folk religions often do not have organized authorities also known as priesthoods or any formal sacred texts.23 They often coincide with other religions as well. Abrahamic monotheistic religions which dominate the western world typically do not approve of practicing parts of multiple religions but folk religions often overlap with others.22 Followers of polytheistic religions do not often problematize following practices and beliefs from multiple religions. Modern religionsedit Further information Theology Pantheon gods Euhemerism Interpretatio graeca Demigod and Apotheosis Buddhismedit Further information God in Buddhism Deva Buddhism and Nontheism  Buddhism Depending on the type of Buddhism practiced it may be seen as polytheistic as it at least acknowledges the existence of multiple gods. The Buddha is a leader figure but is not meant to be worshipped as a god. Devas a Sanskrit word for gods are also not meant to be worshipped. They are not immortal and have limited powers. They may have been humans who had positive karma in their life and were reborn as a deva.24 A common Buddhist practice is tantra which is the use of rituals to achieve enlightenment. Tantra focuses on seeing yourself as a deity and the use of deities as symbols rather than supernatural agents.25 Buddhism is most closely aligned with polytheism when it is linked with other religions often folk religions. For example the Japanese Shinto religion in which deities called kami are worshipped is sometimes mixed with Buddhism.26 Christianityedit See also God in Christianity and Trinity Although Christianity is usually described as a monotheistic religion2728 it is sometimes claimed that Christianity is not truly monotheistic because of its idea of the Trinity.29 The Trinity believes that God consists of the Father the Son and the Holy Spirit. Because the deity is three persons some people believe Christianity should be considered a form of Tritheism or Polytheism.3031 Christians contend that one God exists in Three Persons and One Substance32 but that a deity cannot be a person who has one individual identity. Christianity inherited the idea of one God from Judaism and maintains that its monotheistic doctrine is central to the faith. It is sometimes claimed that Christianity is not truly monotheistic because of its idea of the Trinity Jordan Paper a Western scholar and selfdescribed polytheist considers polytheism to be the normal state in human culture. He argues that Even the Catholic Church shows polytheistic aspects with the veneration of the saints. On the other hand he complains monotheistic missionaries and scholars were eager to see a protomonotheism or at least henotheism in polytheistic religions for example when taking from the Chinese pair of Sky and Earth only one part and calling it the King of Heaven as Matteo Ricci did.33 In 1508 a London Lollard named William Pottier was accused of believing in six gods.34 Mormonismedit Further information God in Mormonism Joseph Smith the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement believed in the plurality of Gods saying I have always declared God to be a distinct personage Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods.35 Mormonism which emerged from Protestantism 36 teaches exaltation defined as the idea that people can become like god in the afterlife.37 Mormonism also affirms the existence of a Heavenly Mother38 and the prevailing view among Mormons is that God the Father was once a man who lived on a planet with his own higher God and who became perfect after following this higher God.3940 Some critics of Mormonism argue that statements in the Book of Mormon describe a trinitarian conception of God e.g. 2 Nephi 3121 Alma 1144 but were superseded by later revelations.41 Due to teachings within Mormon cosmology some theologians claim that it allows for an infinite number of gods.424344454647 Mormons teach that scriptural statements on the unity of the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost represent a oneness of purpose not of substance.48 They believe that the early Christian church did not characterize divinity in terms of an immaterial formless shared substance until postapostolic theologians began to incorporate Greek metaphysical philosophies such as Neoplatonism into Christian doctrine.4950 Mormons believe that the truth about Gods nature was restored through modern day revelation which reinstated the original JudeoChristian concept of a natural corporeal immortal God51 who is the literal Father of the spirits of humans.52 It is to this personage alone that Mormons pray as He is and always will be their Heavenly Father the supreme God of gods Deuteronomy 1017. In the sense that Mormons worship only God the Father they consider themselves monotheists. Nevertheless Mormons adhere to Christs teaching that those who receive Gods word can obtain the title of gods John 103336 because as literal children of God they can take upon themselves His divine attributes.53 Mormons teach that The glory of God is intelligence Doctrine and Covenants 9336 and that it is by sharing the Fathers perfect comprehension of all things that both Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit are also divine.54 Hinduismedit Further information Hindu views on monotheism Hinduism is not a monolithic religion a wide variety of religious traditions and practices are grouped together under this umbrella term and some modern scholars have questioned the legitimacy of unifying them artificially and suggest that one should speak of Hinduisms in the plural.55 Theistic Hinduism encompasses both monotheistic and polytheistic tendencies and variations on or mixes of both structures. Hindus venerate deities in the form of the pratima or idol. The Puja worship of the pratima is like a way to communicate with the formless abstract divinity Brahman in Hinduism which creates sustains and dissolves creation. However there are sects who have advocated that there is no need of giving a shape to God and that it is omnipresent and beyond the things which human can see or feel tangibly. Especially the Arya Samaj founded by Swami Dayananda Saraswati and Brahmo Samaj founded by Ram Mohan Roy there are others also do not worship deities. Arya Samaj favours Vedic chants and Havan while Brahmo Samaj stresses simple prayers.citation needed Some Hindu philosophers and theologians argue for a transcendent metaphysical structure with a single divine essence.citation needed This divine essence is usually referred to as Brahman or Atman but the understanding of the nature of this absolute divine essence is the line which defines many Hindu philosophical traditions such as Vedanta. Among lay Hindus some believe in different deities emanating from Brahman while others practice more traditional polytheism and henotheism focusing their worship on one or more personal deities while granting the existence of others. Academically speaking the ancient Vedic scriptures upon which Hinduism is derived describe four authorized disciplic lines of teaching coming down over thousands of years. Padma Purana. Four of them propound that the Absolute Truth is Fully Personal as in JudeoChristian theology. They say that the Primal Original God is Personal both transcendent and immanent throughout creation. He can be and is often approached through worship of Prathimas called ArchaVigraha which are described in the Vedas as identical with His various dynamic spiritual Forms. This is the Vaisnava theology. The fifth disciplic line of Vedic spirituality founded by Adi Shankaracharya promotes the concept that the Absolute is Brahman without clear differentiations without will without thought without intelligence. In the Smarta denomination of Hinduism the philosophy of Advaita expounded by Shankara allows veneration of numerous deities citation needed with the understanding that all of them are but manifestations of one impersonal divine power Brahman. Therefore according to various schools of Vedanta including Shankara which is the most influential and important Hindu theological tradition there are a great number of deities in Hinduism such as Vishnu Shiva Ganesha Hanuman Lakshmi and Kali but they are essentially different forms of the same Being.citation needed However many Vedantic philosophers also argue that all individuals were united by the same impersonal divine power in the form of the Atman. Many other Hindus however view polytheism as far preferable to monotheism. Ram Swarup for example points to the Vedas as being specifically polytheistic56 and states that only some form of polytheism alone can do justice to this variety and richness.57 Sita Ram Goel another 
20 thcentury Hindu historian wrote I had an occasion to read the typescript of a book Ram Swarup had finished writing in 1973. It was a profound study of Monotheism the central dogma of both Islam and Christianity as well as a powerful presentation of what the monotheists denounce as Hindu Polytheism. I had never read anything like it. It was a revelation to me that Monotheism was not a religious concept but an imperialist idea. I must confess that I myself had been inclined towards Monotheism till this time. I had never thought that a multiplicity of Gods was the natural and spontaneous expression of an evolved consciousness.58 Some Hindus construe this notion of polytheism in the sense of polymorphismone God with many forms or names. The Rig Veda the primary Hindu scripture elucidates this as follows They call him Indra Mitra Varuna Agni and he is heavenly noblywinged Garutman. To what is One sages give many a title they call it Agni Yama Matarisvan. Book I Hymn 164 Verse 46 Rigveda59 Zoroastrianismedit See also Criticism of Zoroastrianism  Polytheism Ahura Mazda is the supreme god but Zoroastrianism does not deny other deities. Ahura Mazda has yazatas good agents some of which include Anahita Sraosha Mithra Rashnu and Tishtrya. Richard Foltz has put forth evidence that Iranians of PreIslamic era worshiped all these figures especially Mithra and Anahita.60 Prods Oktor Skjrv states Zoroastrianism is henotheistic and a dualistic and polytheistic religion but with one supreme god who is the father of the ordered cosmos.61 Other scholars state that this is unclear because historic texts present a conflicting picture ranging from Zoroastrianisms belief in one god two gods or a best god henotheism.62 Tengrismedit See also Turkic mythology Mongol mythology and Mongolian shamanism The nature of Tengrism remains debatable. According to many scholars Tengrism was originally polytheistic but a monotheistic branch with the sky god KkTengri as the supreme being evolved as a dynastical legitimation. It is at least agreed that Tengrism formed from the diverse folk religions of the local people and may have had diverse branches.636465 It is suggested that Tengrism was a monotheistic religion only at the imperial level in aristocratic circles 666768 and perhaps only by the 
12 th
13 th centuries a late form of development of ancient animistic shamanism in the era of the Mongol empire.69 According to JeanPaul Roux the monotheistic concept evolved later out of a polytheistic system and was not the original form of Tengrism. The monotheistic concept helped to legitimate the rule of the dynasty As there is only one God in Heaven there can only be one ruler on the earth ....70 Others point out that Tengri itself was never an Absolute but only one of many gods of the upper world the sky deity of polytheistic shamanism later known as Tengrism.71 The term also describes several contemporary TurkoMongolic native religious movements and teachings. All modern adherents of political Tengrism are monotheists.72 Modern Paganismedit Modern Paganism also known as neopaganism and contemporary paganism73 is a group of contemporary religious movements influenced by or claiming to be derived from the various historical pagan beliefs of premodern Europe.7475 Although they have commonalities contemporary pagan religious movements are diverse and no single set of beliefs practices or texts are shared by them all.76 Founder of Wicca Gerald Gardner helped to revive ancient polytheism.7778 English occultist Dion Fortune was a major populiser of soft polytheism. In her novel The Sea Priestess she wrote All gods are one god and all goddesses are one goddess and there is one initiator.79 Reconstructionismedit Main article Polytheistic reconstructionism Reconstructionist polytheists apply scholarly disciplines such as history archaeology and language study to revive ancient traditional religions that have been fragmented damaged or even destroyed such as Norse Paganism Roman and Celtic. A reconstructionist endeavors to revive and reconstruct an authentic practice based on the ways of the ancestors but workable in contemporary life. These polytheists sharply differ from neopagans in that they consider their religion not only as inspired by historical religions but in many cases as a continuation or revival of those religions.
80 selfpublished source Wiccaedit Main article Wicca Wicca is a duotheistic faith created by Gerald Gardner that allows for polytheism.818283 Wiccans specifically worship the Lord and Lady of the Isles their names are oathbound.82838485 It is an orthopraxic mystery religion that requires initiation to the priesthood in order to consider oneself Wiccan.828386 Wicca emphasizes duality and the cycle of nature.828387 Sereredit Main articles Serer religion Timeline of Serer history and States headed by ancient Serer Lamanes In Africa polytheism in Serer religion dates to the Neolithic Era or possibly earlier when the ancient ancestors of the Serer people represented their Pangool on the Tassili nAjjer.88 The supreme creator deity in Serer religion is Roog. However there are many deities89 and Pangool singular  Fangool the interceders with the divine in Serer religion.88 Each one has its own purpose and serves as Roogs agent on Earth.89 Amongst the Cangin speakers a subgroup of the Serers Roog is known as Koox.90 Use as a term of abuseedit The term polytheist is sometimes used by Sunni Muslim extremist groups such as Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ISIL as a derogatory reference to Shiite Muslims whom they view as having strayed from Islams monotheistic creed because of the reverence they show for historical figures like Imam Ali.91 Professor Paul Vitz an opponent of Selfism sic viewed America as a most polytheistic nation.92 Polydeismedit Deism Origins Deus Deus otiosus Logos  Ancient Greek philosophy Neoplatonism  The One Chinese theology  Confucian theology Averroism Socinianism Unmoved mover Watchmaker God Movements 
18 thcentury England and France Christian Deism Pandeism in Asia and Christianity criticism Spinozism Cult of the Supreme Being Theophilanthropy Deistic evolution Natural theology Congregationalism in the US  Disinterested benevolence Polydeism Notable figures Edward Herbert 
1 st Baron Herbert of Cherbury Henry St John 
1 st Viscount Bolingbroke Matthew Tindal Voltaire Charles Blount Thomas Chubb Thomas Jefferson Thomas Paine Guido von List Cayetano Ripoll False equivalencies Ceremonial deism Moralistic therapeutic deism Opposition Catholic Church John Leland Edward Stillingfleet  Philosophical controversy Anthony Bliss John Jackson Johann Georg Hamann Charles Jennens Religious thought of Edmund Burke Richard Blackmore  Nonepic writing James McGready Valentin Ernst Lscher Continental prophecies  Themes Friedrich Julius Stahl v t e Polydeism from the Greek  poly many and Latin deus meaning god is a portmanteau referencing a polytheistic form of deism encompassing the belief that the universe was the collective creation of multiple gods each of whom created a piece of the universe or multiverse and then ceased to intervene in its evolution. This concept addresses an apparent contradiction in deism that a monotheistic God created the universe but now expresses no apparent interest in it by supposing that if the universe is the construct of many gods none of them would have an interest in the universe as a whole. Creighton University Philosophy professor William O. Stephens93 who has taught this concept suggests that C. D. Broad projected this concept94 in Broads 1925 article The Validity of Belief in a Personal God.95 Broad noted that the arguments for the existence of God only tend to prove that a designing mind had existed in the past not that it does exist now. It is quite compatible with this argument that God should have died long ago or that he should have turned his attention to other parts of the Universe and notes in the same breath that there is nothing in the facts to suggest that there is only one such being.96 Stephens contends that Broad in turn derived the concept from David Hume. Stephens states David Humes criticisms of the argument from design include the argument that for all we know a committee of very powerful but not omnipotent divine beings could have collaborated in creating the world but then afterwards left it alone or even ceased to exist. This would be polydeism. This use of the term appears to originate at least as early as Robert M. Bowman Jr.s 1997 essay Apologetics from Genesis to Revelation.97 Bowman wrote Materialism illustrated by the Epicureans represented today by atheism skepticism and deism. The materialist may acknowledge superior beings but they do not believe in a Supreme Being. Epicureanism was founded about 300 BC by Epicurus. Their world view might be called polydeism there are many gods but they are merely superhuman beings they are remote uninvolved in the world posing no threat and offering no hope to human beings. Epicureans regarded traditional religion and idolatry as harmless enough as long as the gods were not feared or expected to do or say anything. Sociologist Susan Starr Sered used the term in her 1994 book Priestess Mother Sacred Sister Religions Dominated by Women which includes a chapter titled No Father in Heaven Androgyny and Polydeism. She writes that she has chosen to gloss on polydeism a range of beliefs in more than one supernatural entity.98 Sered used this term in a way that would encompass polytheism rather than exclude much of it as she intended to capture both polytheistic systems and nontheistic systems that assert the influence of spirits or ancestors.98 This use of the term however does not accord with the historical misuse of deism as a concept to describe an absent creator god. See alsoedit Mythology portal Religion portal Animism Ethnic religion Hellenismos Henotheism Judgement of Paris Kathenotheism Monolatry Panentheism Pantheism Polytheistic reconstructionism Shirk polytheism West African Vodun Referencesedit  a b Polytheism. Oxford Reference. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 3 February 2023.  Polytheism. Cambridge Advanced Learners Dictionary. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 3 February 2023.  Polytheism. Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 3 February 2023.  Ulrich Libbrecht. Within the Four Seas... Introduction to Comparative Philosophy. Peeters Publishers 2007. ISBN 9042918128. p. 42.  Monotheism  Polytheism Dualism Henotheism. Britannica. Retrieved 26 December 2023.  Kimmerle Heinz 11 April 2006. The world of spirits and the respect for nature towards a new appreciation of animism. The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern Africa. 2 2 15. doi
10.4 1
02 td.v
2 i
2.2 77. ISSN 24152005.  Schmidt Francis 1987. The Inconceivable Polytheism Studies in Religious Historiography. New York Gordon  Breach Science Publishers. p. 10. ISBN 9783718603671.  Galtsin Dmitry 21 June 2018. Modern Pagan religious conversion revisited. Sacra. 14 2 717. Retrieved 5 February 2019.  a b c Hoff Kraemer Christine 2012. Seeking the mystery  an introduction to Pagan theologies. Englewood CO Patheos Press. ISBN 9781939221186. OCLC 855412257.cite book CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  Negedu I. A. 1 January 2014. The Igala traditional religious belief system Between monotheism and polytheism. OGIRISI A New Journal of African Studies. 10 1 116129. doi
10.4 3
14 og.v
10 i
1.7 . ISSN 15974
74 X.  Sallustius On the Gods and the World 4  Eugenie C. Scott Evolution Vs. Creationism An Introduction 2009 p. 58.  Greek mythology. Encyclopedia Americana. Vol. 13. 1993. p. 431.  Dodekatheon Twelve Olympians. Papyrus Larousse Britannica in Greek. 2007.  Apollodorus Library book 3 chapter 5 section 3.  Pausanias Description of Greece.  George Edward Rines ed. 1919. Encyclopedia Americana Vol. 13. Vol. 13. Americana Corp. pp. 408411.  Stoll Heinrich Wilhelm R.B. Paul trans. 1852. Handbook of the religion and mythology of the Greeks. Francis and John Rivington. p. 8. The limitation of the number of Olympians to twelve seems to have been a comparatively modern idea  On the Epicurean Gods. Society of Friends of Epicurus. 2020. Archived from the original on 15 December 2021.  Folk Religionists. Pew Forum. Pew Research Center. 18 December 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2021.  Gries P. Su J. Schak D. December 2012. Toward the scientific study of polytheism beyond forcedchoice measures of religious belief. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion. 51 4 623637. doi
10.1 1
11 j.146859
06.2 0
12.0 1683.x. Retrieved 31 March 2021.  a b van Baaren Theodorus P. Monotheism. Britannica. Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved 12 April 2021.  Folk Religionists. Pew Forum. Pew Research Center. 18 December 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2021.  Trainor Kevin 2004. Buddhism The Illustrated Guide. Oxford University Press. p. 62.  OBrien Barbara. The Role of Gods and Deities in Buddhism. Learn Religions. Retrieved 31 March 2021.  Buddhism and Shinto The Two Pillars of Japanese Culture. Japanology. 20 June 2016. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 14 April 2021.  Woodhead Linda 2004. Christianity A Very Short Introduction. Oxford Oxford University Press. pp. n.p.  Monotheism  Definition Types Examples  Facts. 24 May 2023.  Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church 1974 art. Monotheism  Typical Jewish Misunderstandings of Christianity. Council of Centers on JewishChristian Relations. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 8 June 2018.  Muslims reject the Trinity because they do understand it. thedebateinitiative. Retrieved 8 June 2018.  Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church 1974 art. Trinity Doctrine of the  Jordan Paper The Deities are Many. A Polytheistic Theology. Albany State University of New York Press 2005 pp. 112 and 133.  Royal S. Milton A. 2020. Lollards in the English Reformation History radicalism and John Foxe. Politics Culture and Society in Early Modern Britain. Manchester University Press. p. 44. ISBN 9781526128829. Retrieved 23 February 2023.  Dahl Paul E. 1992 Godhead in Ludlow Daniel H ed. Encyclopedia of Mormonism New York Macmillan Publishing pp. 552553 ISBN 0028796020 OCLC 24502140  Bowen K. 2005. Christians in a Secular World The Canadian Experience. McGillQueens Studies in the History of Religion. McGillQueens University Press. p. 26. ISBN 9780773527126. Retrieved 13 November 2022.  Pope Margaret McConkie Exaltation Encyclopedia of Mormonism p. 479 archived from the original on 19 October 2017 retrieved 12 November 2014  Cannon Elaine Anderson Mother in Heaven Encyclopedia of Mormonism p. 961 archived from the original on 19 October 2017 retrieved 26 March 2014  Religions An explanation of Mormon beliefs about God BBC 2 October 2009 retrieved 28 October 2014.  Riess Jana Bigelow Christopher Kimball 2005 Chapter 3 Heavenly Parents Savior and Holy Ghost Mormonism for Dummies John Wiley  Sons ISBN 9780764571954  Hoekema Anthony 1969 1963 The Four Major Cults Christian Science Jehovahs Witnesses Mormonism SeventhDay Adventism Exeter England Paternoster Press p. 34 ISBN 0853640947 OCLC 127354
25 unreliable source  Crane S.A. 2010. Is Mormonism Now Christian. Wipf  Stock Pub. p. 63. ISBN 9781608992515. Retrieved 23 February 2023.  Haddad J.F. Groothuis D. 2011. Leaving Dirt Place Love as an Apologetic for Christianity. Wipf  Stock Publishers. p. 57. ISBN 9781610972178. Retrieved 23 February 2023.  Parrish S.E. 2019. Atheism A Critical Analysis. Wipf  Stock Publishers. p. 65. ISBN 9781532672668. Retrieved 23 February 2023.  Morley B.K. 2015. Mapping Apologetics Comparing Contemporary Approaches. InterVarsity Press. p. 277. ISBN 9780830897049. Retrieved 23 February 2023.  Ankerberg J. Weldon J. 2019. Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Mormonism. ATRI. p. 122. ISBN 9781937136512. Retrieved 23 February 2023.  Tsoukalas S. 2022. Knowing Christ in the Challenge of Heresy A Christology of the Cults A Christology of the Bible. Wipf  Stock Publishers. p. 37. ISBN 9781666737868. Retrieved 23 February 2023.  Holland Jeffrey R. November 2007 The Only True God and Jesus Christ Whom He Hath Sent Ensign  Bickmore Barry R. 2001 Does God Have a Body In Human Form PDF Foundation for Apologetic Information  Research  Draper Richard R. April 1994 The Reality of the Resurrection Ensign  Webb Steven H. 2012 Jesus Christ Eternal God Heavenly Flesh and the Metaphysics of Matter Oxford University Press archived from the original on 14 February 2020 retrieved 24 October 2016  God Is Truly Our Father Liahona January 2010  Lindsay Jeff ed.. Relationships Between Man Christ and God. LDS FAQ Mormon Answers. If you believe the Father and the Son are separate beings doesnt that make you polytheistic. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014.  The Glory of God is Intelligence  Lesson 37 Section 93 Doctrine and Covenants Instructors Guide Religion 324325 PDF Institutes of Religion Church Educational System 1981  Smith Brian. Hinduism. New Dictionary of the History of Ideas. 2005. Retrieved May 22 2013 from Encyclopedia.com httpwww.encyclopedia.comdoc
1 G23424300342.html  Goel Sita Ram 1987. Defence of Hindu Society. New Delhi India Voice of India. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 23 August 2011. In the Vedic approach there is no single God. This is bad enough. But the Hindus do not have even a supreme God a fuhrerGod who presides over a multiplicity of Gods.  Ram Swarup  Goel Sita Ram 1987. Defence of Hindu Society. New Delhi India Voice of India. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 23 August 2011.  Goel Sita Ram 1982. How I became a Hindu. New Delhi India Voice of India. p. 92.  RigVeda. The Sacred Books. Retrieved 22 May 2013.  Richard Foltz Religions of Iran From Prehistory to the Present Oneworld Publications 2013 p. xiv  Prods Oktor Skjrv 2006 Introduction to Zoroastrianism 2005 Harvard University Archives p. 15 with footnote 1  Brian Arthur Brown 2016. Four Testaments Tao Te Ching Analects Dhammapada Bhagavad Gita Sacred Scriptures of Taoism Confucianism Buddhism and Hinduism. Rowman  Littlefield Publishers. pp. 347349. ISBN 9781442265783.  Schmidt Wilhelm 194952. Der Ursprung der Gottes The Origin of the Idea of God in German. Vol. 910.  Doerfer Gerhard 1965. Turkische und Mongolische Elemente im Neupersischen in German. Vol. 2. Wiesbaden. p. 580.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Pettazzoni 1956 p. 2
61 f sfnm error no target CITEREFPettazzoni1956 help Gumilyov 1967 ch. 7 sfnm error no target CITEREFGumilyov1967 help Tanyu 1980 sfnm error no target CITEREFTanyu1980 help Alici 2011 sfnm error no target CITEREFAlici2011 help.  Roux 1956 sfnm error no target CITEREFRoux1956 help Roux 1984 sfnm error no target CITEREFRoux1984 help RnaTas 1987 pp. 3345 sfnm error no target CITEREFRnaTas1987 help Kodar 2009 sfnm error no target CITEREFKodar2009 help.  Meserve R. Religions in the central Asian environment. In History of Civilizations of Central Asia Vol. 4 Archived 20160303 at the Wayback Machine The age of achievement A.D. 750 to the end of the fifteenth century Part Two The achievements p. 68 The imperial religion was more monotheistic centred around the allpowerful god Tengri the sky god.  Fergus Michael Jandosova Janar. Kazakhstan Coming of Age Stacey International 2003 p. 91 ... a profound combination of monotheism and polytheism that has come to be known as Tengrism.  Bira 2011 p. 14. sfn error no target CITEREFBira2011 help  Roux 1956 p. 242. sfn error no target CITEREFRoux1956 help  Stebleva 1971 sfnm error no target CITEREFStebleva1971 help Klyashtornyj 2008 sfnm error no target CITEREFKlyashtornyj2008 help.  Laruelle 2006 pp. 34. sfn error no target CITEREFLaruelle2006 help  Adler 2006 p. xiii. sfn error no target CITEREFAdler2006 help  Lewis 2004 p. 13. sfn error no target CITEREFLewis2004 help  Hanegraaff 1996 p. 84. sfn error no target CITEREFHanegraaff1996 help  Carpenter 1996 p. 40. sfn error no target CITEREFCarpenter1996 help  Gerald Gardner Blue plaque for father of witchcraft  BBC News. BBC News. 13 June 2014. Retrieved 22 February 2023.  Hodge B. 2016. World Religions and Cults Volume 2 Moralistic Mythical and Mysticism Religions. World of Religions and Cults. New Leaf Publishing Group Incorporated. p. 183. ISBN 9781614585046. Retrieved 22 February 2023.  Fortune Dion Knight Gareth 30 June 2003. The Sea Priestess. Weiser. p. 169. ISBN 9781578632909. All gods are one god and all goddesses are one goddess and there is one initiator.  Alexander T.J. 2007. Hellenismos Today. Lulu.com. p. 14. ISBN 9781430314271. Retrieved 23 August 2015.  Gardner Gerald 1982. The Meaning of Witchcraft. Llewellyn Pubns. pp. 165166. ISBN 0939708027.  a b c d Hutton Ronald 2003. The Triumph of the Moon A History of Modern Pagan Witchcraft. Oxford Paperbacks. ISBN 0192854496.  a b c d Lamond Frederic 2005. Fifty Years of Wicca. Green Magic. ISBN 0954723015.  Bracelin J 1999. Gerald Gardner Witch. Pentacle Enterprises. p. 199. ISBN 1872189083.  Gardner Gerald 1982. The Meaning of Witchcraft. Llewellyn Pubns. pp. 260261. ISBN 0939708027.  Gardner Gerald 1982. The Meaning of Witchcraft. Llewellyn Pubns. pp. 2122 2829 69 116. ISBN 0939708027.  Gardner Gerald 1982. The Meaning of Witchcraft. Llewellyn Pubns. ISBN 0939708027.  a b in French Gravrand Henry La civilisation Sereer  Pangool Les Nouvelles Editions Africaines du Senegal 1990 ISBN 2723610551. pp 9 20 77  a b in English Kellog Day Otis and Smith William Robertson The Encyclopdia Britannica latest edition. A dictionary of arts sciences and general literature Volume 25 p 64 Werner 1902  in French Ndiaye Ousmane Smou Diversit et unicit srres  lexemple de la rgion de This thiopiques no. 54 vol. 7 
2 e semestre 1991 1 Archived 20200630 at the Wayback Machine  Callimachi Rukmini Coker Margaret 2018. ISIS Claims Responsibility for Baghdad Bombings. The New York Times. ISSN 03624331. Retrieved 21 January 2018. The second refers to the groups view that Shiites have strayed from Islams monotheistic creed because of the reverence they show for historical figures like Imam Ali.  Institute T.P. 2013. Newman and the Intellectual Tradition Portsmouth Review. Sheed  Ward. p. 58. ISBN 9781580512497. Retrieved 3 May 2023.  Article on Bill Stephens. Archived from the original on 29 November 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2018.  article on C. D. Broads concept projection. Archived from the original on 21 June 2006. Retrieved 7 July 2018.  C. D. Broad The Validity of Belief in a Personal God reprinted in C. D. Broad Religion Philosophy and Psychical Research 1953 159174.  Id. at 171.  Apologetics  From Genesis to Revelation PDF. Archived from the original PDF on 31 August 2006. Retrieved 7 July 2018.  a b Susan Starr Sered Priestess Mother Sacred Sister Religions Dominated by Women 1994 p. 169. Further readingedit Assmann Jan Monotheism and Polytheism in Sarah Iles Johnston ed. Religions of the Ancient World A Guide Harvard University Press 2004 ISBN 0674015177 pp. 1731. Burkert Walter Greek Religion Archaic and Classical Blackwell 1985 ISBN 0631156240. Greer John Michael A World Full of Gods An Inquiry Into Polytheism ADF Publishing 2005 ISBN 0976568101 Iles Johnston Sarah Ancient Religions Belknap Press September 15 2007 ISBN 0674025482 Paper Jordan The Deities are Many A Polytheistic Theology State University of New York Press March 3 2005 ISBN 9780791463871 Penchansky David Twilight of the Gods Polytheism in the Hebrew Bible 2005 ISBN 0664228852. Swarup Ram  Frawley David 2001. The word as revelation Names of gods. New Delhi Voice of India. ISBN 9788185990682 External linksedit Wikiquote has quotations related to Polytheism. Look up polytheism in Wiktionary the free dictionary. Media related to Polytheism at Wikimedia Commons The Association of Polytheist Traditions  APT a UKbased community of Polytheists archived 9 September 2015 International Year Of Polytheism Philosophical project promoting polytheism by group monochrom archived 7 September 2015 Integrational Polytheism archived 8 September 2008 v t e God Deity Divinity Goddess List Conceptions of God Existence Gender of God Agnostic theism Animism Antitheism Apatheism Atheism Agnostic atheism Christian atheism Implicit and explicit atheism Jewish atheism Negative and positive atheism New Atheism State atheism Binitarianism Classical theism Deism Ceremonial deism Christian deism Pandeism Polydeism Dipolar theism Dystheism Egotheism Misotheism Henotheism Ietsism Kathenotheism Liberal theism Monolatry Monotheism Ethical monotheism Postmonotheism Mysticism Nontheism Posttheism Nontrinitarianism Open theism Panentheism Pantheism Classical pantheism Hylotheism Naturalistic pantheism Philosophical theism Physitheism Euhemerism Polytheism Skeptical theism Spiritualism Theism Theistic finitism Transtheism Trinitarianism Tritheism Unitarianism Religion portal v t e Paganism and modern paganism Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions existing and extinct Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi TibetoBurmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese DonyiPolo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic AngloSaxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic PaleoBalkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele GalloRoman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Scythian Slavic Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Sami MiddleEastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Mori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan SubSaharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern pagan movements Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturba Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu ItaloRoman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic TurkoMongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochranes Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blt Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and Paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Aesthetics Applied philosophy Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphilosophy Metaphysics Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of mind Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Antirealism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism GrecoRoman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mms jvika Ajana Crvka Jain Anekantavada Sydvda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvstivad Pudgalavada Sautrntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika nyat Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen NeoConfucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita NavyaNyya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism Ilm alKalm Sufi Jewish JudeoIslamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neoConfucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neoscholasticism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism  Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Metaethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics NeoMarxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Poststructuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism more... By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Philosophy of religion Concepts in religion Afterlife Euthyphro dilemma Faith or religious belief Intelligent design Miracle Problem of evil Soul Spirit Theodicy Theological veto Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Bah Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Consciousness Cosmological Kalam Contingency Degree Desire Experience Finetuning of the universe Love Miracles Morality Necessary existent Ontological Pascals wager Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Reason Teleological Natural law Watchmaker analogy Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheists Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occams razor Omnipotence Poor design Russells teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism more... Religious language Eschatological verification Language game Logical positivism Apophatic theology Verificationism Problem of evil Augustinian theodicy Best of all possible worlds Euthyphro dilemma Inconsistent triad Irenaean theodicy Natural evil Theodicy Philosophers of religion by date active Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet Ren Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron dHolbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Sren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Hffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Marchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber Ren Gunon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue JeanLuc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality more... Portal Category v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Bah Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Sustainer Time Good Ahura Mazda Father of Greatness Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven  Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity  in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philos view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan Religion portal Authority control databases National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePolytheismoldid1221734530 Categories Polytheism Philosophy of religion Hidden categories CS1 maint multiple names authors list CS1 Greeklanguage sources el All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2014 CS1 abbreviated year range CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 maint location missing publisher Harv and Sfn notarget errors Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles lacking reliable references from July 2022 All articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from July 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 All articles with selfpublished sources Articles with selfpublished sources from February 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 1 May 2024 at 1756 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width