Meritaten - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 
2.1 Early years in Thebes 
2.2 Amarna princess 
2.3 Great Royal Wife 
3 Death and burial 
4 References 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents Meritaten 34 languages  Asturianu Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Ripoarisch   Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Great Royal Wife Kings Daughter Meritaten Great Royal Wife Kings Daughter Bust of a daughter of Akhenaten and Nefertiti perhaps the young Meritaten in the Louvre Paris Born Possibly Thebes Spouse Smenkhkare Issue Meritaten Tasherit Egyptian name Dynasty 
18 th of Egypt Father Akhenaten Mother Nefertiti Religion Ancient Egyptian religion and Atenism Meritaten also spelled Merytaten Meritaton or Meryetaten Ancient Egyptian mrii.titn1 
14 th century BC was an ancient Egyptian royal woman of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt. Her name means She who is beloved of Aten Aten being the sundeity whom her father Pharaoh Akhenaten worshipped. She held several titles performing official roles for her father and becoming the Great Royal Wife to Pharaoh Smenkhkare who may have been a brother or son of Akhenaten. Meritaten also may have served as pharaoh in her own right under the name Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten.2 Familyedit Meritaten was the first of six daughters born to Pharaoh Akhenaten and his Great Royal Wife Nefertiti. Her sisters are Meketaten Ankhesenpaaten Neferneferuaten Tasherit Neferneferure and Setepenre.3 Meritaten is mentioned in diplomatic letters by the name Mayati.2 She is mentioned in a letter from Abimilki of Tyre. The reference usually is thought to date to the period when Meritatens position at court became more important during the latter part of the reign of Akhenaten. It is possible however that the letter refers to the birth of Meritaten.4 She was married to Akhenatens successor the Pharaoh Smenkhkare. Inscriptions mention a young princess named Meritaten Tasherit who may be the daughter of Meritaten and Smenkhkare.25 Inscriptions from Ashmunein suggest that Meritatentasherit is the daughter of Meritaten. The scene dates to the reign of Akhenaten and this means the father of the young princess could be Akhenaten. If so this means Akhenaten took his own daughters as wives. Another princess named Ankhesenpaaten Tasherit had been suggested as an additional daughter of Meritaten but it is more likely that she is a daughter of Ankhesenpaaten.4 Biographyedit Early years in Thebesedit Meritaten most likely was born in Thebes early in her fathers marriage to Nefertiti perhaps before he assumed the throne as she is shown officiating during year five of his reign. The royal family first lived in Thebes and the royal palace may have been part of the Temple Complex of Akhenaten at Karnak. The exact use of the buildings in Karnak is not known but the scenes decorating the Tenimenu suggest it may have served as a residence.4 Meritaten is depicted beside her mother Nefertiti in reliefs carved into the HutBenben.5 The HutBenben was a structure associated with Nefertiti who is the main officiant in the scenes the great royal wife being the highest priestess. Meritaten appears behind her mother shaking a sistrum. Her younger sisters Meketaten and Ankhesenpaaten also appear in some of the scenes but not so often as Meritaten.4 Amarna princessedit Amarna Princess  Museum in Berlin Alabaster sunken relief depicting Akhenaten Nefertiti and daughter Meritaten with early Aten cartouches on kings arm and chest from Amarna Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London In year five of her father Akhenatens reign Meritaten appears on the boundary stelae designating the boundaries of the new capital to which her father moved the royal family and his administrators.25 During Akhenatens reign she was the most frequently depicted and mentioned of the six daughters. Her figure appears on paintings in temples tombs and private chapels. Not only is she shown among images showing the family life of the pharaoh which were typical of the Amarna Period but on those depicting official ceremonies as well.2 The two structures most associated with Meritaten at Amarna are the Northern Palace and the MaruAten. The MaruAten was located to the south of the city limits of Amarna. The structure consisted of two enclosures containing pools or lakes and pavilions set in an area planted with trees. An artificial island contained a pillared construction that held a painted pavement showing scenes from nature.6 Meritatens name seems to replace that of another royal lady in several places among them in the Northern Palace and in the MaruAten. This had been misinterpreted as evidence of Nefertitis disgrace and banishment from the royal court but more recently the erased inscriptions turned out to be the name of Kiya one of Akhenatens secondary wives disproving that interpretation.2 Smenkhare and Meritaten shown in the tomb of Meryre II Great Royal Wifeedit Inscription mentioning Akhenaten Neferneferuaten and Meritaten from the tomb of Tutankhamen At some point Meritaten married Smenkhkare and became his Great Royal Wife. She is depicted with him in the tomb of Meryre II bestowing honors and gifts upon Meryre.7 The chronology of the final years of the Amarna Period is unclear however Smenkhkare is believed to have served as a coregent to Akhenaten. Meritaten was the Great Royal Wife to Smenkhkare while Nefertiti continued as the Great Royal Wife of Akhenaten.5 Nefertiti still held the Great Royal Wife title in year 16 hence Smenkhkare must have been a coregent at that time or otherwise ruled with his wife Meritaten sometime after year 16 of Akhenaten.8 Meritaten is mentioned on gold daisies that decorated a garment found in Tutankhamens tomb. She also is mentioned on a wooden box meant to contain linen garments. The box mentions two kings NeferkheperureWaenre Akhenaten and Ankhkheperuremrwaenre Neferneferuatenmrwaenre and the Great Royal Wife Meritaten.7 According to some scholars such as J.P. Allen Ankhkheperure Smenkhkare ruled together with Meritaten but in the year following Akhenatens death Smenkhkare died. The theory is that Meritaten was the kings daughter Akenkeres who is recorded in Manethos Epitome to have assumed the throne next in her own right as king and bearing the name Neferneferuaten.9 Neferneferuaten is assigned a reign of two years and one month and is placed in Manethos account as the immediate predecessor of the king Rathothis who is believed to be Tutankhamun her halfbrother by another unnamed wife of Akhenaten. Archaeologist Alain Zivie asserts that Meritaten also became a foster mother to Tutankhamun referred to as Maia in some ancient records. Zivie noted that Thutmose the sculptor appointed vizier by Akhenaten and who was found to be the creator of the famous bust of Nefertiti also created one of Maa Bubasteion I.20 the foster mother of Tutankhamun and who in fact was Merytaten the elder daughter of Akhenaten who sat briefly on the throne.10 Death and burialedit The texts of its boundary stele mention that Meritaten was meant to be buried at AkhetAten modern Amarna.5 Let a tomb be made for me in the eastern mountain of Akhetaten. Let my burial be made in it in the millions of jubilees which the Aten my father has decreed for me. Let the burial of the Great Kings Wife Nefertiti be made in it in the millions of years which the Aten my father decreed for her. Let the burial of the Kings Daughter Meritaten be made in it in these millions of years.11 The royal tomb in Amarna was used for the burial of Meketaten Tiye and Akhenaten and likely was closed after the death and burial of Akhenaten. After that Meritatens burial may have been planned for one of the other royal tombs in Amarna. Referencesedit  Ranke Hermann 1935. Die gyptischen Personennamen Bd. 1 Verzeichnis der Namen PDF. Glckstadt J.J. Augustin. p. 161. Retrieved 24 July 2020.  a b c d e f J. Tyldesley Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt 2006 Thames  Hudson pg 136137  Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson 2004 ISBN 0500051283 p.142157  a b c d Dodson Aidan Amarna Sunrise Egypt from Golden Age to Age of Heresy The American University in Cairo Press 2014  a b c d e Aldred Cyril Akhenaten King of Egypt Thames and Hudson 1991 paperback ISBN 0500276218  Kemp Barry The City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti Amarna and its People Thames and Hudson 2012  a b Dodson Aidan Amarna Sunset Nefertiti Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb and the Egyptian Counterreformation The American University in Cairo Press 2009  Seyfried Friederike Editor In the Light of Amarna 100 Years of the Nefertiti Discovery Michael Imhof Verlag 2013  Ertman Earl L. and Hoffmeier James K. A new fragmentary relief of King Ankhkheperure from Tell elBorg Sinai JEA Vol 94 2008  Zivie Alain Pharaohs Man Abdiel the vizier with a Semitic name Biblical Archaeological Review JulyAugust 2018 edition p. 25  Murnane William J. 1995. Texts from the Amarna Period in Egypt. Atlanta Georgia Scholars Press. p. 78. ISBN 1555409652. External linksedit Head Case King Tut Photograph Gallery National Geographic Magazine online Archived 20071204 at the Wayback Machine v t e Queens of Ancient Egypt Protodynastic Period to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Neithhotep Benerib Khenthap Herneith Nakhtneith Penebui Merneith Seshemetka Semat Serethor Betrest II Menka Nimaathap Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Hetephernebti Djeseretnebti Djefatnebti Meresankh I IV Hetepheres I Meritites I Henutsen Khentetka Meresankh II Hetepheres II Meresankh III Khamerernebty I Persenet Hekenuhedjet Khamerernebty II Rekhetre Bunefer V Khentkaus I Neferhetepes Meretnebty Khentkaus II Khentkaus III Reptynub Khuit I Meresankh IV Setibhor Nebet Khenut Nimaethap II VI Iput I Khuit II Ankhesenpepi I Ankhesenpepi II Nubwenet Meritites IV InenekInti Nedjeftet Neith Iput II Udjebten Ankhesenpepi III Ankhesenpepi IV Nitocris Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Neferu I Neferukayet Iah Tem Neferu II Ashayet Henhenet Sadeh Kawit Kemsit XII Neferitatjenen Neferu III Keminub Senet Khenemetneferhedjet I Nofret II Khenmet Khenemetneferhedjet II Neferthenut Meretseger Aat Khenemetneferhedjet III Sobekneferu 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Nofret Nubhetepti Senebhenas Neni Senebsen Tjan Ineni Nubkhaes Aya Abetni Satsobek XIV Tati XVI Mentuhotep XVII Nubemhat Sobekemsaf Haankhes Tetisheri Ahhotep I Ahmose Inhapy Sitdjehuti Ahhotep II New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII AhmoseNefertari AhmoseSitkamose AhmoseHenuttamehu AhmoseMeritamun Ahmose Mutnofret Hatshepsut Iset Satiah MerytreHatshepsut Nebtu Menhet Menwi and Merti Nebsemi Tiaa Nefertari Iaret Mutemwiya Tiye Gilukhipa Sitamun Iset Tadukhipa  Kiya Nefertiti Meritaten Neferneferuaten Ankhesenamun Tey Mutnedjmet Nebetnehat XIX Sitre Tuya Tanedjemet Nefertari Isetnofret Henutmire Maathorneferure Meritamen Bintanath Nebettawy Merytre Isetnofret II Takhat Twosret Tiaa Anuketemheb XX TiyMerenese Iset TaHemdjert Tyti Tiye Duatentopet Henutwati Tawerettenru Nubkhesbed Baketwernel Tentamun 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Tentamun Mutnedjmet Karimala XXII Karomama Penreshnes Maatkare Tashedkhonsu Nesitaudjatakhet Nesitanebetashru Kapes Karomama I Tadibast III XXIII Karomama II XXV Pebatjma Tabiry Abar Khensa Peksater Arty Qalhata Tabekenamun Takahatenamun Naparaye Atakhebasken Malaqaye Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Mehytenweskhet Khedebneithirbinet I Takhuit Tentkheta Nakhtubasterau Ladice XXVII Atossa Artystone Parmys Amestris Damaspia Parysatis XXXI Stateira I Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Roxana Stateira II Parysatis II Eurydice II of Macedon Ptolemaic Eurydice Berenice I Arsinoe I Arsinoe II Berenice II Arsinoe III Cleopatra I Syra Cleopatra II Cleopatra III Cleopatra IV Cleopatra Selene Berenice III Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Berenice IV Cleopatra VII Arsinoe IV Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Ptolemaic v t e Amarna Period Pharaohs Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Royal family Tiye Nefertiti Kiya The Younger Lady Tey Children Meritaten Meketaten Ankhesenamun Neferneferuaten Tasherit Neferneferure Setepenre Meritaten Tasherit Ankhesenpaaten Tasherit Nobles Officials Aperel Bek Huya Ipy Mahu Maia May Meryneith Meryre Meryre II Mutbenret Nakhtpaaten Neferkheperuhersekheper Paatenemheb Panehesy Parennefer Penthu Ramose Thutmose Locations Akhetaten Karnak KV55 KV62 Amarna Tombs Other Amarna letters Amarna succession Aten Atenism Dakhamunzu Amarna Art Style Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMeritatenoldid1175175721 Categories Queens consort of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Princesses of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt 
14 thcentury BC Egyptian women Children of Akhenaten Nefertiti People from Thebes Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 13 September 2023 at 0727 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width