Amarna Period - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Religious developments 
2 Royal women 
3 Art 
4 Tutankhamun and the Amarna succession 
5 Foreign relations Toggle Foreign relations subsection 
5.1 The Great Powers 

5.1.1 Babylon EA 111 

5.1.2 Assyria EA 1516 

5.1.3 Mittani EA 1730 

5.1.4 Hatti EA 4144 
5.2 Amarna Letters 

5.2.1 The opening statement 

5.2.2 Brotherhood 
6 Gallery 
7 See also 
8 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 
8.1 References 
9 Further reading 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Amarna Period 19 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol  Franais Galego Lietuvi Magyar  Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Suomi   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia It has been suggested that Amarna Era be merged into this article. Discuss Proposed since March 2024. 13581336 BC period of the Egyptian Eighteenth Dynasty This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Amarna Period  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR July 2010 Learn how and when to remove this message The Amarna Period was an era of Egyptian history during the later half of the Eighteenth Dynasty when the royal residence of the pharaoh and his queen was shifted to Akhetaten Horizon of the Aten in what is now Amarna. It was marked by the reign of Amenhotep IV who changed his name to Akhenaten 13531336 BC in order to reflect the dramatic change of Egypts polytheistic religion into one where the sun disc Aten was worshipped over all other gods. The Egyptian pantheon was restored under Akhenatens successor Tutankhamun. Religious developmentsedit Akhenaten instigated the earliest verified expression of a form of monotheism although the origins of a pure monotheism are the subject of continuing debate within the academic community. Some state that Akhenaten restored monotheism while others point out that he merely suppressed a dominant solar cult by the assertion of another while never completely abandoning several other traditional deities. Scholars believe that Akhenatens devotion to his deity Aten offended many in power below him which contributed to the end of this dynasty he later suffered damnatio memoriae. Although modern students of Egyptology consider the monotheism of Akhenaten the most important event of this period the later Egyptians considered the socalled Amarna period an unfortunate aberration. The period saw many innovations in the name and service of religion. Egyptians of the time viewed religion and science as one and the same. Previously the presence of many gods explained the natural phenomena but during the Amarna period there was a rise in monotheism. With people beginning to think of the origins of the universe AmunRe was seen as the sole creator and Sungod. The view of this god is seen through the poem entitled Hymn to the Aten When your movements disappear and you go to rest in the Akhet the land is in darkness in the manner of death... darkness a blanket the land in stillness with the one who makes them at rest in his Akhet. The land grows bright once you have appeared in the Akhet shining in the sun disk by day. When you dispel darkness and give your rays the Two Lands are in a festival of light. From the poem one can see that the nature of the gods daily activity revolves around recreating the earth on a daily basis. It also focuses on the present life rather than on eternity. After the Amarna reign these religious beliefs fell out of favor. It has been argued that this was in part because only the king and his family were allowed to worship AmunRe directly while others were permitted only to worship the king and his family.1 Royal womenedit The royal women of Amarna have more surviving text about them than any other women from ancient Egypt. It is clear that they played a large role in royal and religious functions. These women were frequently portrayed as powerful in their own right. Queen Nefertiti was said to be the force behind the new monotheist religioncitation needed. Nefertiti whose name means the beautiful one is here bore six of Akhenatens daughters. Many of Akhenatens daughters were as influential as or more so than his wives. There is a debate whether the relationship between Akhenaten and his daughters was sexual. Although there is much controversy over this topic there is no evidence that any of them bore his childrenaccording to whom Akhenaten did give many of his daughters titles of queen.1 Artedit Main article Amarna art A relief of a royal couple in the Amarnaperiod style figures may be Akhenaten and Nefertiti Smenkhkare and Meritaten or Tutankhamen and Ankhesenamun Egyptian Museum of Berlin. During Akhenatens reign royal portraiture underwent dramatic change. Sculptures of Akhenaten deviate from conventional portrayal of royalty. Akhenaten is depicted in an androgynous and highly stylized manner with large thighs a slim torso drooping belly full lips and a long neck and nose.2 Some believe that the break with convention was due to the presence at Amarna of new people or groups of artists whose background and training were different from those of the Karnak sculptors.1 The events following Akhenatens death are unclear and the identity and policies of his coregent and immediate successor are the matter of ongoing scholarly debate. Tutankhamun and the Amarna successionedit Main article Amarna succession Tutankhamun among the last of his dynasty and the Amarna kings died before he was twenty years old and the dynastys final years clearly were shaky. The royal line of the dynasty died out with Tutankhamun. Two babies found buried in his tomb were his infant daughters who would have continued the royal lineage.3 An unidentified Egyptian queen Dakhamunzu widow of King Nibhururiya is known from Hittite annals. She is often identified as Ankhesenamun royal wife of Tutankhamun although Nefertiti and Meritaten have also been suggested as possible candidates. This queen wrote to Suppiluliuma I king of the Hittites asking him to send one of his sons to become her husband and king of Egypt. In her letters she expressed fear and a reluctance to take as husband one of her servants. Suppiluliumas sent an ambassador to investigate and after further negotiations agreed to send one of his sons to Egypt. This prince named Zannanza was however murdered probably en route to Egypt. Suppiluliumas reacted with rage at the news of his sons death and accused the Egyptians. Then he retaliated by going to war against Egypts vassal states in Syria and Northern Canaan and captured the city of Amki. Unfortunately Egyptian prisoners of war from Amki carried a plague which eventually would ravage the Hittite Empire and kill both Suppiluliumas I and his direct successor.45 The last two members of the eighteenth dynasty  Ay and Horemheb  became rulers from the ranks of officials in the royal court although Ay may have married the widow of Tutankhamun in order to obtain power and she did not live long afterward. Ays reign was short. His successor was Horemheb a general in the Egyptian army who had been a diplomat in the administration of Tutankhamun and may have been intended as his successor by Tutankhamun who had no surviving children. Horemheb may have taken the throne away from Ay in a coup. He also died without surviving children and appointed his successor Paramessu who under the name Ramesses I ascended the throne in 1292 BC and was the first pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty. Foreign relationsedit Map of the ancient Near East during the Amarna period showing the great powers of the period Egypt green Hatti yellow the Kassite kingdom of Babylon purple Assyria grey and Mittani red. Lighter areas show direct control darker areas represent spheres of influence. The extent of the AchaeanMycenaean civilization is shown in orange. The Amarna Letters feature correspondence among the rulers of several empires dubbed by modern historians The Club of Great Powers6 Babylon Assyria Mitanni and Hatti viz. the major powers in Mesopotamia the Levant and Anatolia during the Late Bronze Age. The Great Powersedit Babylon EA 1
11 edit The extent of the Babylonian Empire during the Kassite dynasty The Babylonians were conquered by an outside group of people and were referred to in the letters as Karaduniyas.7 Babylon was ruled by the Kassite dynasty which would later on assimilate to the Babylonian culture. The letters of correspondence between the two deal with various trivial things but it also contained one of the few messages from Egypt to another power. It was the pharaoh responding to the demands of King KasashmanEnlil who initially inquired about the whereabouts of his sister who was sent for a diplomatic marriage. The king was hesitant to send his daughter for another diplomatic marriage until he knew the status of his sister. The pharaoh responds by politely telling the king to send someone who would recognize his sister.8 Then later correspondence dealt with the importance of exchanging of gifts namely the gold which is used in the construction of a temple in Babylonia. There was also a correspondence where the Babylonian king was offended by not having a proper escort for a princess. He wrote that he was distraught by how few chariots there were to transport her and that he would be shamed by the responses of the great kings of the region.9 Assyria EA 15
16 edit By the time of the Amarna letters the Assyrians who were originally a vassal state had become an independent power. The two letters were from king Assuruballit I. The first dealt with him introducing himself and sending a messenger to investigate Egypt He should see what you are like and what your country is like and then leave for here. EA 15 The second letter dealt with him inquiring as to why Egypt was not sending enough gold to him and arguing about profit for the king Then let him a messenger stay out and let him die right there in the sun but for but for the king himself there must be a profit.10 Mittani EA 17
30 edit Once enemies by the time of the Amarna letters the Mittanni had become an ally of Egypts.11 These letters were written by the King Tuiseratta and dealt with various topics such as preserving and renewing marriage alliances and sending in various gifts. For example EA 22 and EA 25 in the Amarna letters are an inventory of the gifts from the Mittani king Tusratta to the pharaoh. Other correspondences of note dealt with a gold statue that was addressed in EA 26 and EA 27. Akhenaten married a Mittani princess in order to create stronger ties between the two nations. Hatti EA 41
44 edit Hatti was a kingdom in central Anatolia that would later make Mitanni their vassal state. The correspondence from the Hatti comes from a king called Suppiluliuma. The subjects of the letters varied from discussing past alliances to giftgiving and dealing with honor. In EA 42 the tablet stated how the Hittite king was offended by the name of the pharaoh written over his name. Although the ending of the text was very fragmented it was discerned as saying that he will blot out the name of the pharaoh.12 Amarna Lettersedit Main article Amarna letters This section may contain material not related to the topic of the article. Please help improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page. October 2012 Learn how and when to remove this message The opening statementedit The opening statement  Say to Nibmuareya the king of Egypt my brother Thus Tuiseratta the King of Mittani your brother. For me all goes well. For you may all go well. For KeluHeba may all go well. For your household for your wives for your sons for your magnates for your warriors for your horses for your chariots and in your country may all go very well. William Moran discussed how the first line in these documents followed a consistent formula of Say to PN. Thus PN. There are variations of this but was found common among all the tablets. The other is a salutation which is one a report of the monarchs wellbeing and then the second which is a series of good wishes toward the monarch.13 Indeed this seems to be part of the style of Akkadian style of writing which helped facilitate foreign correspondence for the long term. As scholars argued this aided in filtering out the chauvinistic domestic ideology at home to the other monarch. This allowed diplomacy to flourish which aided to the relative peace of the time.14 Brotherhoodedit Despite the great distances between the rulers the concept of a global village reigned. As is seen in EA 7  From the time the messenger of my brother arrived here I have not been well and so on no occasion has his messenger eaten food and drunk spirits in my company. If you ask... your messenger he will tell you that I have not been well and that as far as my recovery is concerned I am still by no means restored to health.... I for my part became angry with my brother saying has my brother not heard that I am ill Why has he shown me no concern Why has he sent no messenger here and visited me The importance of this in EA 7 is that it demonstrates the mindset of the rulers in the Near East world at the time. The enlarged village which scholars like to term permeated their thoughts where they took the idea of brotherhood. They were related through the political marriages but is an idea of a village of clans which gives reason to the good wishes and update on the health of the monarchs themselves. The monarchs seem to have very little concept of the time of travel between each other and at most likely saw that the village worldview they lived in was applicable for the long distant correspondence of the Amarna letters.6 Indeed there is a constant demonstration of love as seen in these letters. Scholars pointed out that to demonstrate good friendship it had to be on the practical level of constant stream of gift giving. This request for gifts is constant with the various correspondence with the Great Kings.15 Galleryedit Queen Tiye matriarch of the Amarna Dynasty. She was the mother of Akhenaten and wife of Amenhotep III. She mainly ran Egypts affairs of state for her son. Akhenaten born Amenhotep IV began a religious revolution in which he declared Aten was a supreme god and turned his back on the old traditions. He moved the capital to Akhetaten. Queen Nefertiti the daughter of Ay married Akhenaten. Her role in daily life at the court soon extended from Great Royal Wife to that of a coregent. It is also possible that she may have ruled Egypt in her own right as pharaoh Neferneferuaten. Smenkhkare was a coregent of Akhenaten who ruled after his death. It was believed that Smenkhkare was a male guise of Nefertiti. However it is accepted that Smenkhkare was a male. He took Meritaten Queen Nefertitis daughter as his wife. Queen Meritaten was the oldest daughter of Akhenaten and Nefertiti. She was the wife of Smenkhkare. She also may have ruled Egypt in her own right as pharaoh and is one of the possible candidates for being the pharaoh Neferneferuaten. Neferneferure and Neferneferuaten Tasherit. Shown here as children they were two of six daughters born to Akhenaten and Nefertiti. It is possible that Neferneferuaten Tasherit was the one who may have been her fathers coregent and may have ruled as the female pharaoh Neferneferuaten. Canopic jar lid of Kiya. She was one of Akhenatens secondary wives. It was once believed that she was the mother of Tutankhamun but that was proven not the case when DNA revealed it not so. The Younger Lady mummy of KV35 was by DNA matching Tutankhamuns mother. Originally thought to be Nefertiti DNA showed that she was the sister of Akhenaten. Princess Nebetah or Beketaten are considered candidates. Maia was the wet nurse of the Crown Prince Tutankhamun. Having lost his mother at a young age she helped rear the young prince. Maia was later allowed to have a grand tomb at Saqqara. Here the young prince holds her hand. Tutankhamun formerly Tutankhaten was Akhenatens son through an incestuous relationship with his sister. As pharaoh he instigated policies to restore Egypt to its old religion and moved the capital back to Thebes. Ankhesenamun born Ankhesenpaaten was the wife of Tutankhamun and daughter of Akhenaten. After her husbands death she was married to her maternal grandfather Ay. Ay served as vizier to Akhenaten and Tutankhamun. He was the father of Nefertiti. After the death of Tutankhamun Ay lay a claim to the throne by burying him and by marrying his granddaughter Ankhesenamun. After the death of Ay Horemheb assumed the throne. A commoner he had served as vizier to both Tutankhamun and Ay. Horemheb instigated a policy of damnatio memoriae against everyone associated with the Amarna period. He was married to Nefertitis sister Mutnodjmet who died in child birth. With no heir he appointed his own vizier Paramessu as his successor. The ruins of Akhetaten. Now commonly called Amarna Akhenatens capital city was abandoned by Tutankhamun. It survived several years before being torn apart by Horemhebs orders. See alsoedit Amarna Era Notesedit  a b c Arnold Dorothea James P. Allen and L. Green. The Royal Women of Amarna Images of Beauty from Ancient Egypt. New York The Metropolitan Museum of Art 1996. Print.  Cothren Michael and Stokstad Marilyn Art History. Prentice Hall 2011.  Hawass Zahi. Scanning the Pharaohs CT Imaging of the New Kingdom Royal Mummies. pp. 107116.  Cline Eric H 2014. SUPPILULIUMA AND THE ZANNANZA AFFAIR. 1177 B.C.  the year civilization collapsed. Princeton Princeton University Press. pp. 6870. ISBN 9780691140896. OCLC 861542115.  Norrie Philip 2016. How Disease Affected the History of the Hittite Empire. A History of Disease in Ancient Times. Cham Springer International Publishing. pp. 4955. doi
10.1 00797833192893734. ISBN 9783319289366.  a b Liverani Mario The Great Powers Club in Cohen  Westbrook 2000 pp. 1819  Moran 1992 p. 7  Moran 1992 pp. 13  Moran. Amarna Diplomacy. 21  Moran 1992 pp. 4142  Cohen  Westbrook 2000 p. 6  Moran. Amarna Diplomacy. 116  Moran 1992 p. xxiixxiii  Cohen  Westbrook 2000 pp. 235236  Zaccagnini Carlos The Interdependence of the Great Powers in Cohen  Westbrook 2000 p. 145 Referencesedit Cohen Raymond Westbrook Raymond 2000. Amarna Diplomacy the Beginnings of International Relations. Baltimore MD Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0801861993. Moran William L. 1992. The Amarna Letters. Baltimore MD Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0801842514. Further readingedit Library resources about Amarna Period Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Arnold Dorothea James P. Allen and L Green. 1996. The Royal Women of Amarna Images of Beauty From Ancient Egypt. New York The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Freed Rita A. Yvonne Markowitz and Sue H. dAuria eds. 1999. Pharaohs of the Sun Akhenaten Nefertiti Tutankhamun. London Thames  Hudson. Hari Robert. 1985. New Kingdom Amarna Period The Great Hymn to Aten. Leiden E.J. Brill. Hornung Erik. 1999. Akhenaten and the Religion of Light. Translated by David Lorton. Ithaca NY Cornell University Press. Kemp Barry J. 2012. The City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti Amarna and Its People. London Thames  Hudson. Martin Geoffrey Thorndike. 1991. A Bibliography of the Amarna Period and Its Aftermath The Reigns of Akhenaten Smenkhkare Tutankhamun and Ay c. 13501321 BC. London Kegan Paul International. Murnane William J. 1995. Texts from the Amarna Period in Egypt. Edited by Edmund S. Meltzer. SBL Writings from the Ancient World 5. Atlanta Scholars. Redford Donald B. 1984. Akhenaten The Heretic King. Princeton NJ Princeton University Press. Thomas Angela P. 1988. Akhenatens Egypt. Shire Egyptology 10. Princes Risborough UK Shire. External linksedit Media related to Amarna Period at Wikimedia Commons v t e Amarna Period Pharaohs Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Royal family Tiye Nefertiti Kiya The Younger Lady Tey Children Meritaten Meketaten Ankhesenamun Neferneferuaten Tasherit Neferneferure Setepenre Meritaten Tasherit Ankhesenpaaten Tasherit Nobles Officials Aperel Bek Huya Ipy Mahu Maia May Meryneith Meryre Meryre II Mutbenret Nakhtpaaten Neferkheperuhersekheper Paatenemheb Panehesy Parennefer Penthu Ramose Thutmose Locations Akhetaten Karnak KV55 KV62 Amarna Tombs Other Amarna letters Amarna succession Aten Atenism Dakhamunzu Amarna Art Style Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAmarnaPeriodoldid1216477165 Categories Amarna Period Historical eras Amarna Hidden categories Articles to be merged from March 2024 All articles to be merged Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2010 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 All articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from June 2020 Wikipedia articles that may have offtopic sections from October 2012 All articles that may have offtopic sections Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 March 2024 at 0705 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width