Neferneferuaten - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 General chronology Toggle General chronology subsection 
1.1 Manetho 
2 Key evidence 
3 Female king Toggle Female king subsection 
3.1 Possible sole reign 
4 Identity of Neferneferuaten Toggle Identity of Neferneferuaten subsection 
4.1 Nefertiti 
4.2 Meritaten 
4.3 Neferneferuatentasherit 
5 Reuse of Neferneferuatens funerary equipment for Tutankhamuns burial 
6 Summary 
7 Online Presentation 
8 References 
9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Neferneferuaten 25 languages  Azrbaycanca Deutsch  Espaol Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Polski   Slovenina Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian ruler coregent For other uses see Neferneferuaten disambiguation. Neferneferuaten Pharaoh Reign c 13341332 BC Predecessor Smenkhkare Successor Tutankhamun Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Ankhkheperure plus ephithet Nomen Neferneferuaten plus ephithet Consort if Nefertiti Akhenaten if Meritaten Smenkhkare Died c. 1332 BC Dynasty Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt AnkhkheperureMeritNeferkheperureWaenreAten Neferneferuaten Ancient Egyptian nfrnfrwjtncitation needed was a name used to refer to a female king who reigned toward the end of the Amarna Period during the Eighteenth Dynasty. Her gender is confirmed by feminine traces occasionally found in the name and by the epithet Akhetenhyes Effective for her husband incorporated into one version of her nomen birth name cartouche.123 She is distinguished from the king Smenkhkare who used the same throne name Ankhkheperure by the presence of epithets in both cartouches. She is suggested to have been either Smenkhkares wife Meritaten or his predecessors widow Nefertiti. If this person is Nefertiti ruling as sole king it has been theorized by Egyptologist and archaeologist Zahi Hawass that her reign was marked by the fall of Amarna and relocation of the capital back to the traditional city of Thebes.4 General chronologyedit This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. October 2019 Learn how and when to remove this message Further information Amarna succession There is no broad consensus as to the succession order of Smenkhkare and Neferneferuaten. The period from the 
13 th year of Akhenatens reign to the ascension of Tutankhaten is very murky. The reigns of Smenkhkare and Neferneferuaten were very brief and left little monumental or inscriptional evidence to draw a clear picture of political events. Adding to this Neferneferuaten shares her prenomen throne name with Smenkhkare and her nomen birth name with NefertitiNeferneferuaten Nefertiti making identification very difficult at times. With little dated evidence to fix their reigns with any certainty the order depends on how the evidence is interpreted. Many encyclopedic sources and atlases will show Smenkhkare succeeding Akhenaten on the basis of a research tradition dating back to 1845 and some still conflate Smenkhkare with Neferneferuaten. The lack of unique names continues to cause problems in books and papers written before the early 19
80 s an object might be characterized as bearing the name of Smenkhkare when if in fact the name being translated is Ankhkheperure it could be related to one of two people. Advocates for Smenkhkare as the direct successor of Akhenaten make the case that since she is attested as Great Royal Wife what we would associate with queen just before the start of Akhenatens final regnal year then Smenkhkare is more likely to be Akhenatens direct successor. Prior to 2014 Neferneferuaten was sometimes thought to have ruled between Akhenaten and Smenkhkare as illustrated in a 2011 Metropolitan Museum of Art5 symposium on Horemheb the general chronology of the late Eighteenth Dynasty is King Approx years Akhenaten 17 years Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten 2 years Ankhkheperure Smenkhkare 2 years TutankhatenTutankhamun 9 years Ay 4 years Horemheb 14 years Aidan Dodson proposes that Smenkhkare did not have an independent reign and thus Neferneferuaten must have come after him the result being that Smenkhkares reign is entirely that of a coregent ending about a year later in Year 14 or 15 of Akhenatens reign with little firm evidence to argue against it.6 Gabolde cites the Smenkhkare wine docket to support the idea that Smenkhkare must have succeeded Akhenaten. Finally Allen has used the wine docket and strong association of Neferneferuaten with Akhenaten in her epithets and on stelae to speculate that both may have succeeded Akhenaten with one as a rival king. An AllenDodson hybrid could see Tutankhamun succeeding Akhenaten directly as rival to Neferneferuaten. There are almost as many theories and putative chronologies as there are Egyptologists interested in the period. The 2014 publication of an inscription for Nefertiti as Great Royal Wife in Regnal Year 16 of Akhenaten makes it clear Nefertiti was still alive and still Great Royal Wife in Akhenatens second last year which could be seen as supporting her candidacy as the female king Neferneferuaten and the direct successor to Akhenaten.7 In this situation Akhenaten had chosen Smenkhkare as his successor in his Year 12 but Smenkhkare predeceased Akhenaten which forced Akhenaten to elevate Nefetiti to the throne as Neferneferuaten to secure his legacy. Nozomu Kawai writes ...it can be suggested that Akhenaten appointed Nefertiti as his coregent after the demise of his male coregent Smenkhkare. Smenkhkares widowed queen Meritaten seems to have kept her title as his great royal wife. Simultaneously Neferneferuaten obtained another epithet AxtnHjs One Who is Beneficial for Her Husband which Gabolde used to prove this kings female identity beyond doubt... However it is worth noting that this coregency does not seem to have lasted a long time. After Akhenatens death Neferneferuaten continued in power as sole ruler for approximately three years. During her sole reign Neferneferuaten also obtained new epithets. She replaced the name of Akhenaten with references to the Aten in her prenomen and nomen. The epithet of her prenomen was then mryItn Beloved of Aten while the epithet of her nomen became HoAmAat Ruler of Truth.8 The fact that most of Tutankhamuns funerary equipment was originally made or inscribed for the female king Neferneferuaten strongly suggests that Tutankhamun in fact directly succeeded Neferneferuaten on the throne after the female king died. This rather suggests this revised Eighteenth Dynasty chronology table below is closer to the truth since it agrees with the historical facts.9 King Approx years Akhenaten 17 years Ankhkheperure Smenkhkare coregent 2 years Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten 2 years TutankhatenTutankhamun 9 years Ay 4 years Horemheb 14 years Regardless of the order of succession Neferneferuatens successor seems to have denied her a kings burial based on items originally inscribed with her name but used for the burial of Tutankhamun. In the reign of Horemheb the reigns of the Amarna Period kings from Akhenaten to Ay were expunged from history as these kings total regnal years were assigned to Horemheb. The result is that 3300 years later scholars would have to piece together events and even resurrect the players bit by bit with the evidence sometimes limited to palimpsest. Manethoedit Manetho was an Egyptian priest who lived in the third century BC during the time of the Ptolemies a thousand years after the Amarna Period of the Eighteenth Dynasty when this woman would have been king. He wrote during a Hellenistic period in Ancient Egypt when it was being ruled by a Greek dynasty rather than a native dynasty. His lost work Aegyptiaca History of Egypt now known only in fragmentary form from later writers quoting his work is the sole ancient record available. Because of the deliberate suppression of histories of the Amarna kings by succeeding rulers following them which was unknown to him the sources Manetho used for his history were not accurate about the Amarna Period. Manethos Epitome a summary of his work describes the late Eighteenth Dynasty succession as Orus or Amenophis for 30 years 10 months.10 After Orus who is most likely Amenhotep III comes his daughter Acencheres for 12 years 1 month then her brother Rathotis for 9 years. According to Marc Gabolde Acencheres is Ankhkheperure 11 with a transcription error converting 2 years 1 month into the 12 years 1 month reported Africanus and Eusebius cite 32 and 16 years for this person. Akhenaten is not even mentioned in the most accurate 
18 th dynasty king list of Manethos Epitome of Aegyptiaca compiled by Josephus in Contra Apionem.12 Most agree that Rathotis refers to Tutankhamun therefore the succession order also supports Acencheres as Ankhkheperure. Inexplicably Manetho states that Rathotis is followed by his son Acencheres for 12 years 5 months his son Acencheres II for 12 years 3 months13 which demonstrates the limits to which Manetho may be relied upon for accuracy about the Amarna Period. Key evidenceedit Inscription from the Carter 0
01 k artifact a box from Tutankhamuns tomb attesting King Neferneferuaten Unlike Smenkhkare there are no known named depictions of Neferneferuaten she is only securely attested in inscriptions. Of particular interest is the lid of a box Carter 0
01 k inscribed with the following King of Upper and Lower Egypt Living in Truth Lord of the Two Lands NeferkheperureWaenre Son of Re Living in Truth Lord of Crowns Akhenaten Great in his duration King of Upper and Lower Egypt Lord of the Two Lands Ankhkheperure MeryNeferkheperre Son of Re Lord of Crowns Neferneferuaten MeryWaenre Great Royal Spouse Meritaten May she Live Forever The most definitive inscription attesting to Neferneferuaten is a long hieratic inscription or graffito in the tomb of Pairi TT139 written by a scribe named Pawah Regnal year 3 third month of Inundation day 10. The King of Upper and Lower Egypt Lord of the Two Lands Ankhkheperure Beloved of Aten the Son of Re Neferneferuaten Beloved of Waenre. Giving worship to Amun kissing the ground to Wenennefer by the lay priest scribe of the divine offerings of Amun in the Mansion temple of Ankhkheperure in Thebes Pawah born to Yotefseneb. He says My wish is to see you O lord of persea trees May your throat take the north wind that you may give satiety without eating and drunkenness without drinking. My wish is to look at you that my heart might rejoice O Amun protector of the poor man you are the father of the one who has no mother and the husband of the widow. Pleasant is the utterance of your name it is like the taste of life... etc. Come back to us O lord of continuity. You were here before anything had come into being and you will be here when they are gone. As you caused me to see the darkness that is yours to give make light for me so that I can see you... O Amun O great lord who can be found by seeking him may you drive off fear Set rejoicing in peoples hearts. Joyful is the one who sees you O Amun he is in festival every day For the Ka of the lay priest and scribe of the temple of Amun in the Mansion of Ankhkheperure Pawah born to Yotefseneb For your Ka Spend a nice day amongst your townsmen. His brother the outline draftsman Batchay of the Mansion of Ankhkheperure.14 Nicholas Reeves sees this graffito as a sign of a new phase of the Amarna revolution with Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten taking a decidedly softer line toward the Amun priesthood.15 Therefore Neferneferuaten might have been the Amarnaera ruler who first reached an accommodation with the Amun priests and reinstated the cult of Amunrather than Tutankhamun as previously thoughtsince her own mortuary temple was located in Thebes the religious capital of the Amun priesthood and Amun priests were now working within it. However Egypts political administration was still situated at Amarna rather than Thebes under Neferneferuatens reign. Two crowned kings are depicted on Berlin Stele 17813 a female king left is caressing Akhenaten gyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung Neues Museum Berlin There are several stele depicting two kingswith each wearing a different traditional kings crownin various familiar almost intimate scenes. All of them are unfinished or uninscribed and some are defaced. These include An unfinished stele 17813 Berlin depicts two royal figures in a familiar if not intimate pose. One figure wears the double crown while the other wears a headpiece which is similar to that from the familiar Nefertiti bust but is the Khepresh or blue crown worn by a king. Aidan Dodson cites this stele to support the idea that Nefertiti may have acted as coregent as indicated by the crown but not entitled to full pharaonic honors such as the double cartouche. A female king right usually identified as Nefertiti wearing the blue crown while affectionately pouring water for Akhenaten gyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung Altes Museum Berlin Berlin 25574 depicts what clearly seems to be Akhenaten and Nefertiti wearing her flat top headpiece. They are accompanied by four empty cartouchesenough for two kings one of which seems to have been squeezed in. Reeves sees this as an important item in the case for Nefertiti. When the stele was started she was great royal wife and thus portrayed with the flat top headpiece. She was elevated to coregent shortly afterward and a fourth cartouche was squeezed in to accommodate two kings.16 Flinders Petrie discovered seven limestone fragments of a private stele in 1891 now in the Petrie Museum U.C.410 sometimes called the Coregency Stela.17 One side bears the double cartouche of Akhenaten alongside that of Ankhkheperure meryWaenre Neferneferuaten Akhetenhyes effective for her husband which had been carved over the single cartouche of Nefertiti.18 The clues may point to a female coregent but the unique situation of succeeding kings using identical throne names may have resulted in a great deal of confusion. A number of items in Tutankhamuns tomb KV62 were originally inscribed for Neferneferuaten. Among them Carter 2
61 p1 a stunning gold pectoral depicting the goddess Nut. Other items include the stone sarcophagus mummy wrappings royal figurines canopic items chest coffinettes and jar stoppers various bracelets and even shabti figures. Some items are believed to have been at least originally intended for a woman based on the style even when a name cannot be restored. Egyptologist Nicholas Reeves has suggested that even the famous gold mask may have originally been intended for Neferneferuaten since her royal name in a cartouche Ankhkheperure was found partly erased on Tutankhamuns funerary mask.1920 Female kingedit The prenomen left column and nomen right column forms for Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten 2212223 For some time the accepted interpretation of the evidence was that Smenkhkare served as coregent with Akhenaten beginning about year 15 using the throne name Ankhkheperure. At some point perhaps to start his sole reign he changed his name to Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten. An alternative view held that Nefertiti was King Neferneferuaten in some versions she is also masquerading as a male using the name Smenkhkare. Things remained in this state of interpretation until the early 19
70 s when English Egyptologist John Harris noted in a series of papers the existence of versions of the first cartouche that seemed to include feminine indicators.24 These were linked with a few items including a statuette found in Tutankhamuns tomb depicting a king whose appearance was particularly feminine even for Amarna art that seems to favor androgyny.25 In 1988 James P. Allen proposed that it was possible to separate Smenkhkare from Neferneferuaten. He pointed out the name Ankhkheperure was rendered differently depending on whether it was associated with Smenkhkare or Neferneferuaten. When coupled with Neferneferuaten the prenomen included an epithet referring to Akhenaten such as desired of Wa en Re. There were no occasions where the long version of the prenomen Ankhkheperure plus epithet occurred alongside the nomen Smenkhkare nor was the short prenomen without epithet ever found associated with the nomen Neferneferuaten. Additionally a feminine t glyph is often present in the prenomen nomen or epithets.18 Later the French Egyptologist Marc Gabolde noted that several items from the tomb of Tutankhamun originally inscribed for Neferneferuaten and initially thought to read ...desired of Akhenaten when translated correctly were inscribed as Akhetenhyes or effective for her husband.26 His reading was later confirmed by James Allen. The use of epithets or lack of them to identify the king referenced in an inscription eventually became widely accepted among scholars and regularly cited in their work 27 although a case for exempting a particular inscription or instance will occasionally be argued to support a larger hypothesis. Possible sole reignedit Allen later showed that Neferneferuatens epithets were of three types or sets. They were usually in the form of desired of ... but were occasionally replaced by effective for her husband. In a few cases the names can be followed by justified using feminine attributes.2 The term justified maet kheru is a common indicator that the person referenced is dead a similar reference associated with Hatshepsut in the tomb of Penyati is taken to indicate she had recently died.28 Finally a few of Neferneferuatens cartouches bear unique epithets not associated with Akhenaten at all. These include desired of the Aten and The Ruler.2 Allen concluded that the strong affiliation with Akhenaten in the epithets and the number of them made it likely that Neferneferuaten had been his coregent and therefore preceded Smenkhkare.2 The effective... epithets then represent a period during which Akhenaten was incapacitated but may also date from a time after Akhenatens death.29 Finally the less common Akhenatenless versions represented a period of sole reign for Neferneferuaten. Allen offers a possible explanation for the use of the same throne name by two successive kings. He suggested that the almost constant references to Akhenaten may be proclamations of legitimacy on the part of Neferneferuaten with the epithets functioning to assert her as Akhenatens chosen successor or coregent. This implies there may have been resistance to the choice of Neferneferuaten resistance was anticipated. This appears to be supported by her funerary items being usurped to deny her a kings burial.2 He suggests that adoption of the throne name Ankhkheperure by Smenkhkare was to emphasize the legitimacy of Smenkhkares claim against that of Akhenatons chosen mr coregent.2 That is a division in the royal house put Smenkhkare on the throne as a rival king to Neferneferuaten. This was offered as a simple and logical reading of the evidence to explain the nature of the epithets the use of identical prenomens by successive kings and that she was denied a royal burial. With no dated evidence of rival or contemporaneous kings although it remains conjecture. However since Smenkhkare disappears from the political scene late in Akhenatens reign and Neferneferuaten instead appears the most likely explanation is that Smenkhkarewho is attested in an unfinished durbar scene from the Tomb of Meryre II TA2 at Amarna dated to Year 12 of Akhenatenmust have died perhaps 1 or 2 years after since this relief scene was never finished by the craftsman.30 Athena Van der Perre observes that After the death of Semenkhkare the royal family had to face the problem of succession again. Akhenaten was left with two royal wives Nefertiti and Meritaten and one possible future successor who was still too young to reign Tutankhaten. At some point after Semenkhkares disappearance Akhenaten must have decided that there was only one person capable of reigning and tutoring Tutankhaten after his death. The new regent would use the name Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten. The reign of king Neferneferuaten is actually better documented than that of Semenkhkare. Several attestations were found revealing some interesting facts about this kings reign. The name is attested in Amarna Thebes and Tell elBorg. Mud jar sealings referring to the wine of the estate of Neferneferuaten beloved of Waenra were also discovered in Saqqara. Nefertiti who already played an important role in Amarna and already bore the name Neferneferuaten is in my view the most likely candidate for this function....After her husbands death Nefertiti would reign the country herself..31 The Egyptologists Rolf Krauss32 and Nozomu Kawai both assign the female king Neferneferuaten an independent reign of between 2 and 3 years between Akhenaten and Tutankhamun.33 Athena Van Der Perre writes The attestations of the name confirm the reign of Neferneferuaten which if this was Nefertiti could not have started until after the 
1 st month of the 
16 th year of Akhenaten as has been shown in the quarry inscription at Dayr Ab innis. So far no evidence has been found about the queens demise. The most likely possibility is that she died after reigning at least 3 years. After her death Tutankhatennow a boy approximately 8 years oldwould start his own reign. With no queenmother left to guide him the actual power came into the hands of a small group of high officials at the court.34 Identity of Neferneferuatenedit By the late twentieth century there was a fair degree of consensus35 that Neferneferuaten was a female king and Smenkhkare a separate male king particularly among specialists of the period.36 Many Egyptologists believe she also served as coregent on the basis of the stela and epithets although a sole reign seems very likely given that the Pairi inscription is dated using her regnal years. Opinion is more divided on the placement and nature of the reign of Smenkhkare in relation to her. Most Egyptologists see the two names to indicate two separate individuals and consider this as the simplest and more likely view.3738 Most name changes in the Amarna period involved people incorporating Aten into their name or removing an increasingly offensive Amun element. The focus now shifts to the identity of Neferneferuaten with each candidate having its own advocates a debate that may never be settled to the satisfaction of all. Nefertitiedit Nefertiti depicted in familiar scene of a king smiting Egypts enemy Even among Egyptologists who advocate for the identification of Nefertiti as Neferneferuaten the exact nature of her reign can vary. Nefertiti was an early candidate for King Neferneferuaten first proposed in 1973 by J. R. Harris.39 The apparent use of a portion of her name made her an obvious candidate even before Neferneferuatens gender was firmly established. Remains of painted plaster bearing the kingly names of Neferneferuaten found in the Northern Palace long believed to be the residence of Nefertiti supports the association of Nefertiti as the king.40 Nefertiti was in the forefront during her husbands reign and even depicted engaging in kingly activities such as smiting the enemies of Egypt.41 The core premise is that her prominence and power in the Amarna Period was almost unprecedented for a great royal wife which makes her the most likely and most able female to succeed Akhenaten.164243 Until 2012 Nefertitis last dated depiction was from Year 12 of Akhenatens reign suggesting that she died shortly after. However she is now known to have still been alive in the second to last year of Akhenatens reign and still bearing the title of Great Royal Wife based on an ink inscription dated explicitly to Year 16 III Akhet day 15 in a limestone quarry at Dayr Ab innis.44 This inscription would argue against a coregency of more than about a year if at all as the inscription attests to Nefertitis position as Akhenatens great royal wife just before the start of his final year. This affects theories proposed by some Egyptologists such as Aidan Dodson who see Neferneferuaten as both a coregent of Akhenaten a sole ruler and regent or coregent of Tutankhamun.45 Despite her highest attested year being Year 3 he suggests she counted her regnal years only after Akhenatens death a view put forth by Murnane to account for the lack of double dates in the New Kingdom even when a coregency is known to exist.46 Dodson then speculates that she may later have shared Tutankhamuns regnal dating in effect deferring senior status at least nominally to him.47 He proposes that Neferneferuaten helped guide the reformation in the early years of Tutankhaten and conjectures that the return to the dominence of the Amun priesthood is the result of her rapid adjustment to political reality. To support the NefertitiTutankhamun coregency he cites jar handles bearing her cartouche and others bearing those of Tutankhaten from Northern Sinai.48 This is not a view shared by the excavators who note that sealings and small objects such as bezel rings from many Eighteenth Dynasty royals including Akhenaten Ay Queen Tiye and Horemheb were found49 and that linking Tutankhamun and Neferneferuaten politically based on the discovery of their names on amphorae at Tell elBorg is unwarranted.50 Gabolde likewise considered a coregency or regency unlikely.51 Van der Perre considers it likely Nefertiti assumed the royal office using the name Neferneferuaten adopting the throne name briefly used by Smenkhkare in combination with her own name but that the chance of a coregency period is slim.52 References to Akhenaten that were added to her names as epithets confirm her legitimacy. The epithets changed over time initially conferring legitimacy then linking to the deified deceased king before finally changing to Beloved of Aten and the ruler late in her reign.53 Furthermore it has been suggested that Smenkhkare may also be Neferneferuaten54 a view still held by a few such as Nicholas Reeves 16 and until 2004 by Dodson.55 The Coregency Stela UC 410 mentioned earlier might resolve the question if it were not so badly damaged. The name Neferneferuaten replaced Nefertitis name on it. How the image of Nefertiti was changed to match the new inscription could settle matters if her image was not missing. If her entire image was replaced it would mean Nefertiti was replaced by someone else called King Neferneferuaten and perhaps that she died. If just a new crown was added to her image it would argue quite strongly that Nefertiti adopted a new name and title.56 As it is the scene seems to be another of the royal family including at least Meritaten. Replacing the name Nefertiti with the name King Neferneferuaten in a depiction of the royal family still seems to favor Nefertiti as the new king. The primary argument against Nefertiti had been that she likely died sometime after Year 12 which was the last known dated depiction of her until 2012. However an inscription discovered in 2012 showed that she was still alive in Year 16 of her husbands reign.57 Evidence put forward to suggest she predeceased Akhenaten includes pieces of an ushabti indicating her title at death was Great Royal Wife wine dockets from her estate declining and ceasing after Year 1358 Meritatens title as Great Royal Wife alongside Akhenatens name on items from Tutankhamuns tomb indicating she likely replaced Nefertiti in that role the floor of the tomb intended for her shows signs of cuts being started for the final placement of her sarcophagus.42 A single ushabti for Nefertiti seems scant evidence for her death given there are about 200 shabti for Akhenaten.59 It is possible the two pieces belonged instead to two separate shabtis one of Nefertiti and the other of Meritaten.60 Alternately it may have been a votive placed in the burial of a family member such as Meketaten at a time before she was elevated.16 Meritatenedit Meritaten as a candidate for the identity of Neferneferuaten seems to be the most fluid taking many forms depending on the views of the Egyptologist. She had been put forth by Rolf Krauss in 1973 to explain the feminine traces in the prenomen and epithets of Ankhkheprure and to conform to Manethos description of a Akenkheres as a daughter of Oros.1 He speculated Meritaten might have ruled with the feminine prenomen Ankhetkheperure after Akhenatens death and before Smenkhkares accession.1 In his argument Smenkhkare then takes the masculine form of her prenomen upon gaining the throne through marriage. Although few Egyptologists endorsed the whole hypothesis many did accept Meritaten at times as the probable or possible candidate for a female Ankhkheprure ruling for a time after Smenkhkares death and perhaps as regent to Tutankhaten.61 The primary argument against Meritaten either as Krausss pro tempore Ankhetkheprure before marriage to Smenkhkare or as Akhenatens coregent King Neferneferuaten is that she is well attested as wife and great royal wife to Smenkhkare. For her to have later ruled as king means necessarily and perhaps incredibly for her subjects that she stepped down from King to the role of Kings Wife.62 This view places Smenkhkare after Neferneferuaten which requires the Meryre depiction to be drawn 56 years after the Durbar depiction it is alongside and several years after work on tombs had stopped. The counter to this argument comes from Marc Gabolde who offers political necessity as the reason for Meritatens demotion.63 He sees the inscribed box Carter 0
01 k tomb naming her alongside Akhenaten and Neferneferuaten as depicting Meritaten in simultaneous roles using the name Neferneferuaten as coregent and using her birth name in the role of royal wife to Akhenaten.64 He has also proposed that the Meryre drawing was executed in advance of an anticipated coronation that ended up not taking place due to his death.51 Most recently Gabolde has proposed that Meritaten was raised to coregent of Akhenaten during the final years of his reign and that she succeeds him as interregnum regent using the name Ankhkheprure. He also identifies her as the subject of the Dakhamunzu affair with the Hittite prince Zannanza ascending the throne as Smenkhkare. As there is no evidence as to when or where he died nor that he was murdered Gabolde believes that he completed the trip and died only after becoming king. The proposal continues that after his death she adopts full pharoanic prerogatives to continue to rule as King Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten. Since Tutankamun was alive and of royal lineage Gabolde aegues that Meritatens actions almost certainly must be taken as intending to prevent his ascension to king.65 The SmenkhkareZannanza version garners little support among Egyptologists. With the presence of Tutankhamun Miller points out Meritaten would presumably have needed the backing of some powerful supporters to carry out such a scheme as the tahamunzu episode one is left with the question of why this supporter would have chosen to throw his weight behind such a daring scheme.66 Since Nefertiti has been confirmed to be living as late as Year 16 of Akhenatens reign however the Meritaten theory becomes less likely because she would no longer be the most senior living person to be at court using either the name Neferneferuaten nor be identified as Effective for her husband as the epithet of a ruling female pharaoh. Secondly both Aidan Dodson and the late Bill Murnane have stressed their opinions that the female ruler Neferneferuaten and Meritaten cannot be the same person. As Dodson writes ...the next issue is clearly her i.e. Neferneferuatens origins. Cases have been made for her being the former Nefertiti Harris Samson and others Meryetaten Krauss 1978 Gabolde 1998 and most recently Neferneferuatentasherit the fourth daughter of Akheneten Allen 2006. Of these Meryetatens candidature seems fatally undermined by the existence of the KV62 box fragment JE61500 which gives the names and titles of Akhenaten Neferneferuaten and Meryetaten as clearly separate individuals.6768 Neferneferuatentasheritedit In 2009 James Allen proposed a new reading of events suggesting that Neferneferuaten was Akhenaten and Nefertitis fourth daughter Neferneferuatentasherit.62 Tasherit meaning the lesser. The evidence presented in favour of this identification was solely based on her name. The primary element in the nomen of a pharaoh always corresponds to the name he or she bore before coming to the throne from the Eighteenth Dynasty onward epithets were usually added to this name in the pharaohs cartouche but Akhenaten provides the only example of a complete and consistent change of the nomens primary element and even he used his birth name Amenhotep at his accession. The evidence of this tradition argues that the coregent bore the name Neferneferuaten before her coronation and since it now seems clear that the coregent was not Nefertiti she must have been the only other woman known by that name Akhenatens fourth daughter Neferneferuaten Jr.69 Allen explains the tasherit portion of her name may have been dropped either because it would be unseemly to have a King using the lesser in their name or it may have already been dropped when Nefertiti died.69 This theory is the only one that does not rely on someone changing their name in some awkward fashion to assume the role of Neferneferuaten. Akhenatens choice of her as coregent remains a mystery. She is a less attractive candidate now that the Year 16 graffito for Nefertiti has been verified. Neferneferuatentasherits age is the first objection often raised to this argument. She is thought to have been about ten at the time of Akhenatens death70 but Allen suggests that some daughters may have been older than generally calculated based on their first depicted appearance. Their first appearance may have been on the occasion of being weaned at age three Neferneferuatentasherit may have been as old as 13 by the end of Akhenatens reign.71 The later use of the effective... epithets may indicate that she too was eventually old enough to act as wife to her father supporting the older age. However a younger age need not disqualify her since Tutankhaten ascended the throne at a similar age but yet a tenyearold female seems unlikely to many researchers. However in a newer 2016 article James Allen has now repudiated his previous opinion that Neferneferuatentasherit was the female pharaoh Neferneferuaten he now agrees that this female king was indeed Nefertiti himself with the publication of the Year 16 date showing that Nefertiti was still alive in Akhenatens second last year of rule.72 Reuse of Neferneferuatens funerary equipment for Tutankhamuns burialedit The faces of the canopic jars of Tutankhamun have distinctively female features rather than the traditional images of the dead king many scholars argue they originally were created for a female king and repurposed for Tutankhamun.73 According to Nicholas Reeves almost 80 of Tutankhamuns burial equipment was derived from Neferneferuatens original funerary goods including the famous gold mask middle coffin canopic coffinettes several of the gilded shrine panels the shabtifigures the boxes and chests the royal jewelry etc.7475 and adapted for use after his unexpected early death. In 2015 Reeves published evidence showing that an earlier cartouche on Tutankhamuns famous gold mask reads Ankheperure meryNeferkheperure or Ankheperure beloved of Akhenaten therefore the mask originally was made for Nefertiti Akhenatens great royal wife who used the royal name Ankheperure when she assumed the throne after her husbands death.76 This development implies that either Neferneferuaten was deposed in a struggle for power possibly deprived of a royal burial as a kingor that she was buried with a different set of kings funerary equipmentpossibly Akhenatens own funerary equipmentby Tutankhamuns officials since Tutankhamun succeeded her as king77 and that possibly following Tutankhamuns death officials under his successor Ay did not follow traditional burial practices for the burial that as successor he had to oversee. That Ay refused to follow many traditions is well documented. One researcher notes that Tutankhamuns tomb follows a traditional architectural design feature that suggests to him that the tomb had been built for a female king78 and that with other evidence supports that the tomb was adapted for a burial of Tutankhamun along with the reuse of her artifacts. The traditional feature he considers as significant when discussing possible reuse is that tombs for male kings have a left turn from the entrance that leads to the burial chamber those of female kings turn to the right.79 As these issues continue to be researched interpretations also are evolving. Summaryedit There is also little that can be said with certainty about the life and reign of Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten. Most Egyptologists accept that she was a woman and likely an individual apart from the male king Smenkhkare. Many specialists in the period believe the epigraphic evidence strongly indicates that she acted for a time as Akhenatens coregent.164362 Whether she reigned before or after Smenkhkare depends on the underlying theory as to her identity. Based on the Pairi or Pawah inscription dated to her third regnal year it appears she enjoyed a sole reign. How much of her reign was as coregent and how much as sole ruler is a matter of debate and speculation. The same tomb inscription mentions an Amun temple in Thebes perhaps a mortuary complex which would seem to indicate that the Amun proscription had abated and the traditional religion was being restored toward the end of her reign.2380 62 Since much of her funeral equipment was used in Tutankhamens burial it seems fairly certain she was denied a pharaonic burial by her successor.238162 The reasons for this remain speculation as does a regency with Tutankhaten. With so much evidence expunged first by Neferneferuatens successor then the entire Amarna Period by Horemheb and later in earnest by the kings of the Nineteenth Dynasty the exact details of events may never be known. The highly equivocal nature of the evidence often renders it suggestive of some interpretation while falling short of proving it. The various steles for instance strongly suggest a female coregent but offer nothing conclusive as to her identity. Online Presentationedit King Neferneferuaten from Tutankhamuns Tomb Revisited by Nozomu Kawai Kanazawa University at an ARCE 2022 Presentation on Vimeo Referencesedit  a b c Krauss Rolf. Das Ende der Amarnazeit The End of the Amarna Period 1978 Hildesheim pp. 4347  a b c d e f g Allen James P. 1994. Nefertiti and Smenkhkare. Gttinger Miszellen 141. pp. 717.  M. Gabolde Under a Deep Blue Starry Sky in P. Brand ed. Causing His Name to Live Studies in Egyptian Epigraphy and History in Memory of William J. Murnane. Leiden E. J. Brill Academic Publishers pp. 1721  Badger Utopia 11 August 2017 Nefertiti  Mummy Queen of Mystery retrieved 30 October 20
17 dead YouTube link  A Syposium of Horemhab General and King of Egypt See the first 8 minutes of this 2011 Metropolitan Museum of Art presentation. As the video notes the order and dates are under discussion.  Dodson Amarna Sunset 2009 pp. 2729  Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1. Retrieved 22 November 2023.  Nozomu Kawai Neferneferuaten from the Tomb of Tutankhamun Revisited in Wonderful Things Essays in Honor of Nicholas Reeves Lockwood Press 2023 p. 121  Ancient Egyptian Chronology CONCLUSIONS by Rolf Krauss and David Alan Warburton in pp. 492493 Editors Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss and David A. Warburton. Brill 2006.  Josephus  20112023 by Peter Lundstrm  Some Rights Reserved  V. 
4.0   Gabolde Marc. DAkhenaton  Toutnkhamon 1998 pp. 145185  Josephus  20112023 by Peter Lundstrm  Some Rights Reserved  V. 
4.0   Manetho The Loeb Classical Library 1940 English translation by W. G. Waddell p 102103  Murnane W Texts from the Amarna Period Atlanta Scholars Press 1995. Note Gardiner JEA 14 1928 pp. 1011 and pls. 56 Reeves False Prophet 2001. p.163 and Murnane all give the date as 
10 th Day Month 3 Akhet. Dodson 2009 reports the date as unequivocally 
3 rd day Month 4 Akhet. The difference is 23 days.  Reeves C. Nicholas Akhenaten Egypts False Prophet 2001. p.164  a b c d e Reeves C. Nicholas Akhenaten Egypts False Prophet 2001 Thames and Hudson  Pendlebury J. Samson J. et al City of Akhenaten Part III 1951  a b Allen James P.  Two Altered Inscriptions of the Late Amarna Period Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 25 1988 pp. 117121.  Reeves 2014 p. 511.  James Seidel Tutankhamuns mask Evidence of an erased name points to the fate of heretic queen Nefertiti 26 November 2015 News Corp  Dodson A Amarna Sunset 2009 appendix 3  Allen James P. The Amarna Succession 2006 in P. Brand ed. Causing His Name to Live Studies in Egyptian Epigraphy and History in Memory of William J. Murnane Archived from the original  a b c Giles 2001  J. R. Harris Neferneferuaten Gttinger Miszellen 4 1973 1517 Neferneferuaten Rediviva Acta Orientalia 35 1973 513 Neferneferuaten Regnans Acta Orientalia 36 1974 1121 Akhenaten or Nefertiti Acta Orientalia 38 1977 510.  Burton Harry Photographer. Statuette of the king upon a leopard. Tutankhamun Anatomy of an Excavation The Howard Carter Archives. Griffith Institute. Retrieved 23 September 2012.  Gabolde Marc 1998. DAkhenaton  Toutnkhamon. pp. 14762 213219. ISBN 2911971027.  Allen 1994 Gabolde 1998 EatonKrauss and Krauss2001 Hornung 2006 von Beckerath 1997 Allen 2006 Krauss 2007 Murnane 2001 They otherwise hold very different views on the succession chronology and identity of Neferneferuaten.  Murnane W 1977 p.42  Gabolde Marc. DAkhenaton  Toutnkhamon 1998 pp. 156157 This involves Isis relationship with Osiris.  A. Dodson Amarna Sunset The American University in Cairo Press 2009 pp2731  Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1 95. Retrieved 22 November 2023.  Ancient Egyptian Chronology CONCLUSIONS by Rolf Krauss and David Alan Warburton in pp. 492493 Editors Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss and David A. Warburton. Brill 2006.  Nozomu Kawai Neferneferuaten from the Tomb of Tutankhamun Revisited in Wonderful Things Essays in Honor of Nicholas Reeves 2023 p.121 Kawai writes on page 121 After Akhenatens death Neferneferuaten continued in power as sole ruler for approximately three years.  Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1 101. Retrieved 22 November 2023.  Miller J Amarna Age Chronology and the Identity of Nibhururiya in Altoriental. Forsch. 34 2007 p. 272  e.g. Murnane J. The End of the Amarna Periode Once Again 2001 Allen J 1998 2006 Gabolde M. Das Ende der Amarnazeit 2001 Hornung E The New Kingdom in Ancient Egyptian Chronology 2006 Miller J. Amarna Age Chronology 2007 Dodson A. Amarna Sunset 2009  Allen James P. The Amarna Succession in Causing His Name to Live Studies in Egyptian Epigraphy and History in Memory of William J. Murnane p.2  Murnane W. The End of the Amarna Period Once Again 2001  Harris J. R. Neferneferuaten Rediviva 1973 in Acta Orientalia 35 pp. 513 Harris J. R. Neferneferuaten Regnans 1973 in Gttinger Miszellen 4 pp. 1517  Dodson A Amarna Sunset 2009 p. 43  Giles Frederick. J. Ikhnaton Legend and History 1970 Associated University Press 1972 US p 59  a b Giles F 1972  a b Dodson A Amarna Sunset The American University in Cairo Press 2009  Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1. Retrieved 22 November 2023.  Dodson A 2009 p. 50  Murnane W. Ancient Egypt Coregencies 1977 p 3132  Dodson Amarna Sunset 2009 pp. 4546  Dodson Amarna Sunset 2009 p. 51 4546  Hoffemeir Van Dijk. New Light on the Amarna Period from North Sinai.  Hoffemeir Van Dijk New Light on the Amarna Period 2010 pp. 201202  a b Gabolde M Ancient Near East Forum Dec 2007  Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1 8386  101102. Retrieved 22 November 2023.  Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1 101102. Retrieved 22 November 2023.  Samson J City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti Aris  Phillips Ltd 1972 ISBN 9780856680007  Dodson  Hilton 2004 p 285  Dodson A Amarna Sunset 2009 p.43  Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1 95. Retrieved 22 November 2023.  Aldred Cyril 1988. Akhenaten King of Egypt. Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0500276218.  Martin G. T. The Rock Tombs of ElAmarna. Part VII. The Royal Tomb at ElAmarna 1974. The Objects. Vol. I. London Egypt Exploration Society.  Bovot J.L. 1999. Un chaouabti pour deux reines amarniennes. gypte Afrique et Orient 13. pp. 3134.  J. Tyldesley Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt 2006 Thames  Hudson pp. 136137 also Gabolde M Under a Deep Blue Starry Sky P. Brand ed. in Causing His Name to Live Studies in Egyptian Epigraphy and History in Memory of William J. Murnane 2006 pp. 1721  a b c d e Allen James P. The Amarna Succession 2006 in P. Brand ed. Causing His Name to Live Studies in Egyptian Epigraphy and History in Memory of William J. Murnane Archived from the original Archived 30 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine  Gabolde Marc. DAkhenaton  Toutnkhamon 1998 pp. 178183  Gabolde Marc. DAkhenaton  Toutnkhamon 1998 pp. 187226  Miller J Amarna Age Chronology 2007 p.275 to wit Gabolde 1998 2001 2002  Miller J. The Amarna Age Chronology 2007 p.275 n104  Aidan Dodson Amarna Sunsetthe lateAmarna succession revisited in Beyond the Horizon. Studies in Egyptian Art Archaeology and History and history in Honour of Barry J. Kemp ed. S Ikram and A. Dodson p.32 Cairo Supreme Council of Antiquites 2009.  William J. Murnane The End of the Amarna Period Once Again Orientalistische Literaturzeitung OLZ Vol. 96 2001 p.21  a b Allen Amarna Succession p15  Tyldesley Joyce. Nefertiti Egypts Sun Queen Penguin 1998 ISBN 0670869988  Allen James P. The Amarna Succession in Causing His Name to Live Studies in Egyptian Epigraphy and History in Memory of William J. Murnane  James Allen The Amarna Succession Revised GM 249 2016 pp.913  Was King Tuts Tomb Built for a Woman archived from the original on 25 October 2017 retrieved 24 October 2017  Nicholas Reeves Tutankhamuns Mask Reconsidered BES 19 2014 pp. 511522  Peter Hessler Inspection of King Tuts Tomb Reveals Hints of Hidden Chambers National Geographic 28 September 2015  Nicholas Reeves The Gold Mask of Ankhkheperure Neferneferuaten Journal of Ancient Egyptian Interconnections Vol. 7 No. 4 December 2015 pp. 7779  click download this PDF file  Nicholas ReevesTutankhamuns Mask Reconsidered BES 19 2014 pp.523524  Was King Tuts Tomb Built for a Woman archived from the original on 25 October 2017 retrieved 24 October 2017  Was King Tuts Tomb Built for a Woman archived from the original on 25 October 2017 retrieved 24 October 2017  Dodson Amarna Sunset 2009 pp. 4446  Dodson Amarna Sunset 2009 pp. 5152 Further readingedit Each of the leading candidates have their own proponents among Egyptologists whose work can be consulted for more information and many more details for a given candidate. Several of the works of Nicholas Reeves and Aidan Dodson advocate for Nefertiti as Neferneferuaten. Marc Gabolde has written several papers and at least one book in French supporting Meritaten. James Allens previous work in this area primarily dealt with establishing the female gender of Neferneferuaten and then as an individual apart from Smenkhkare. His paper on The Amarna Succession is his first theory as to identity of King Neferneferuaten having previously cited Nefertiti or Meritaten as the probable or possible identity depending on the state of the evidence. Aldred Cyril Akhenaten King of Egypt Thames  Hudson 1988. Aldred Cyril 1973. Akhenaten and Nefertiti. London Thames  Hudson. Aldred Cyril 1984. The Egyptians. London Thames  Hudson. Allen James P. 2006. The Amarna Succession PDF. Archived from the original on 1 July 2013. Retrieved 23 June 2008.cite web CS1 maint unfit URL link Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2004. ISBN 0500051283 Dodson Aidan. Amarna Sunset Nefertiti Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb and the Egyptian CounterReformation. The American University in Cairo Press. 2009 ISBN 9789774163043 Freed Rita E. Markowitz Yvonne J. DAuria Sue H. eds. 1999. Pharaohs of the Sun Akhenaten  Nefertiti  Tutankhamen. Bulfinch Press. ISBN 0821226207. Gabolde Marc Under a Deep Blue Starry Sky in Causing His Name to Live Studies in Egyptian Epigraphy and History in Memory of William J. Murnane Gabolde  Starry Sky Giles Frederick. J. Ikhnaton Legend and History 1970 Associated University Press 1972 US Giles Frederick. J. The Amarna Age Egypt Australian Centre for Egyptology 2001 Hornung Erik Akhenaten and the Religion of Light translated by David Lorton Cornell University Press 1999 ISBN 0801436583 Miller Jared Amarna Age Chronology and the Identity of Nibhururiya in the Light of a Newly Reconstructed Hittite Text 2007 Altoriental. Forsch. 34 2007 2 252293 Redford Donald B. Akhenaten The Heretic King Princeton University Press 1984 ISBN 0691035679 Redford Donald B.Akhenaten The Heretic King 1984 Princeton University Press Reeves C. Nicholas. Akhenaten Egypts False Prophet Thames  Hudson 2001. Reeves C. Nicholas. The Complete Tutankhamun The King the Tomb the Royal Treasure. London Thames  Hudson 1 November 1990 ISBN 0500050589 hardcover ISBN 0500278105 paperback Reeves Nicholas 2014. Tutankhamuns Mask Reconsidered. In A. Oppenheim O. Goelet eds.. The Art and Culture of Ancient Egypt. Studies in Honor of Dorothea Arnold. Theis Christoffer Der Brief der Knigin Daamunzu an den hethitischen Knig uppiluliuma I. im Lichte von Reisegeschwindigkeiten und Zeitablufen in Thomas R. Kmmerer Hrsg. Identities and Societies in the Ancient EastMediterranean Regions. Comparative Approaches. Henning Graf Reventlow Memorial Volume  AAMO 1 AOAT 3901. Mnster 2011 S. 301331 Tyldesley Joyce. Nefertiti Egypts Sun Queen. Penguin. 1998. ISBN 0670869988 Van der Perre Athena 2014. The Year 16 Graffito of Akhenaten in Dayr Abu Hinnis. A Contribution to the Study of the Later Years of Nefertiti. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 1 94102. Retrieved 22 November 2023. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Queens of Ancient Egypt Protodynastic Period to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Neithhotep Benerib Khenthap Herneith Nakhtneith Penebui Merneith Seshemetka Semat Serethor Betrest II Menka Nimaathap Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Hetephernebti Djeseretnebti Djefatnebti Meresankh I IV Hetepheres I Meritites I Henutsen Khentetka Meresankh II Hetepheres II Meresankh III Khamerernebty I Persenet Hekenuhedjet Khamerernebty II Rekhetre Bunefer V Khentkaus I Neferhetepes Meretnebty Khentkaus II Khentkaus III Reptynub Khuit I Meresankh IV Setibhor Nebet Khenut Nimaethap II VI Iput I Khuit II Ankhesenpepi I Ankhesenpepi II Nubwenet Meritites IV InenekInti Nedjeftet Neith Iput II Udjebten Ankhesenpepi III Ankhesenpepi IV Nitocris Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Neferu I Neferukayet Iah Tem Neferu II Ashayet Henhenet Sadeh Kawit Kemsit XII Neferitatjenen Neferu III Keminub Senet Khenemetneferhedjet I Nofret II Khenmet Khenemetneferhedjet II Neferthenut Meretseger Aat Khenemetneferhedjet III Sobekneferu 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Nofret Nubhetepti Senebhenas Neni Senebsen Tjan Ineni Nubkhaes Aya Abetni Satsobek XIV Tati XVI Mentuhotep XVII Nubemhat Sobekemsaf Haankhes Tetisheri Ahhotep I Ahmose Inhapy Sitdjehuti Ahhotep II New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII AhmoseNefertari AhmoseSitkamose AhmoseHenuttamehu AhmoseMeritamun Ahmose Mutnofret Hatshepsut Iset Satiah MerytreHatshepsut Nebtu Menhet Menwi and Merti Nebsemi Tiaa Nefertari Iaret Mutemwiya Tiye Gilukhipa Sitamun Iset Tadukhipa  Kiya Nefertiti Meritaten Neferneferuaten Ankhesenamun Tey Mutnedjmet Nebetnehat XIX Sitre Tuya Tanedjemet Nefertari Isetnofret Henutmire Maathorneferure Meritamen Bintanath Nebettawy Merytre Isetnofret II Takhat Twosret Tiaa Anuketemheb XX TiyMerenese Iset TaHemdjert Tyti Tiye Duatentopet Henutwati Tawerettenru Nubkhesbed Baketwernel Tentamun 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Tentamun Mutnedjmet Karimala XXII Karomama Penreshnes Maatkare Tashedkhonsu Nesitaudjatakhet Nesitanebetashru Kapes Karomama I Tadibast III XXIII Karomama II XXV Pebatjma Tabiry Abar Khensa Peksater Arty Qalhata Tabekenamun Takahatenamun Naparaye Atakhebasken Malaqaye Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Mehytenweskhet Khedebneithirbinet I Takhuit Tentkheta Nakhtubasterau Ladice XXVII Atossa Artystone Parmys Amestris Damaspia Parysatis XXXI Stateira I Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Roxana Stateira II Parysatis II Eurydice II of Macedon Ptolemaic Eurydice Berenice I Arsinoe I Arsinoe II Berenice II Arsinoe III Cleopatra I Syra Cleopatra II Cleopatra III Cleopatra IV Cleopatra Selene Berenice III Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Berenice IV Cleopatra VII Arsinoe IV Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Ptolemaic v t e Amarna Period Pharaohs Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Royal family Tiye Nefertiti Kiya The Younger Lady Tey Children Meritaten Meketaten Ankhesenamun Neferneferuaten Tasherit Neferneferure Setepenre Meritaten Tasherit Ankhesenpaaten Tasherit Nobles Officials Aperel Bek Huya Ipy Mahu Maia May Meryneith Meryre Meryre II Mutbenret Nakhtpaaten Neferkheperuhersekheper Paatenemheb Panehesy Parennefer Penthu Ramose Thutmose Locations Akhetaten Karnak KV55 KV62 Amarna Tombs Other Amarna letters Amarna succession Aten Atenism Dakhamunzu Amarna Art Style Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNeferneferuatenoldid1220415576 Categories 13
30 s BC deaths 
14 thcentury BC births 
14 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
14 thcentury BC Egyptian women Atenism Historical negationism in ancient Egypt Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Female pharaohs Nefertiti Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension All articles with dead YouTube links Articles with dead YouTube links from February 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles needing additional references from October 2019 All articles needing additional references CS1 maint unfit URL This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 1707 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width