Atenism - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History of Aten before Akhenaten 
2 Atenist Egypt 
3 Contrast with traditional Egyptian religion 
4 Amarna art 
5 Decline 
6 Link to Abrahamic monotheism 
7 In popular culture 
8 See also 
9 References Toggle References subsection 
9.1 Sources 
10 Further reading 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Atenism 26 languages  Azrbaycanca   Catal etina  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Malagasy  Bahasa Melayu Norsk nynorsk Portugus  Simple English Tagalog Trke   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Religion founded by Egyptian pharaoh Akhenaten Not to be confused with Atheism. This article includes a list of general references but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. December 2007 Learn how and when to remove this message Limestone relief at Amarna depicting Akhenaten Nefertiti and their children adoring Aten c.13721355 BC Atenism also known as the Aten religion1 the Amarna religion2 and the Amarna heresy was a religion in ancient Egypt. It was founded by Akhenaten a pharaoh who ruled the New Kingdom under the Eighteenth Dynasty.3 The religion is described as monotheistic or monolatristic although some Egyptologists argue that it was actually henotheistic.4 Atenism was centred on the cult of Aten a god depicted as the disc of the Sun. Aten was originally an aspect of Ra Egypts traditional solar deity though he was later asserted by Akhenaten as being the superior of all deities.5 In the 
14 th century BC Atenism was Egypts state religion for around 20 years and Akhenaten met the worship of other gods with persecution he closed many traditional temples instead commissioning the construction of Atenist temples and also suppressed religious traditionalists. However subsequent pharaohs toppled the movement in the aftermath of Akhenatens death thereby restoring Egyptian civilizations traditional polytheistic religion. Largescale efforts were then undertaken to remove from Egypt and Egyptian records any presence or mention of Akhenaten Atenist temples and assertions of a uniquely supreme god. History of Aten before Akhenatenedit The word Aten Ancient Egyptian jtn meaning circle disc and later sun disc is first found in the 
24 th century BC Abusir Papyri discovered in the mortuary temple of the Fifth Dynasty pharaoh Neferirkare Kakai.6 Aten the god of Atenism first appears as a god in texts dating to the Twelfth Dynasty in the Story of Sinuhe.7 During the Middle Kingdom Aten as the sun disk...was merely one aspect of the sun god Re.5 It was a relatively obscure sun god without the Atenist period it would barely have figured in Egyptian history. Although there are indications that it was becoming slightly more important during the eighteenth dynasty notably Amenhotep IIIs naming of his royal barge as Spirit of the Aten it was Amenhotep IV who introduced the Atenist revolution in a series of steps culminating in the official installment of the Aten as Egypts sole god. Although each line of kings prior to the reign of Akhenaten5 had previously adopted one deity as the royal patron and supreme state god there had never been an attempt to exclude other deities and the multitude of gods had always been tolerated and worshipped. During the reign of Thutmose IV it was identified as a distinct solar god and his son Amenhotep III established and promoted a separate cult for the Aten. However there is no evidence that Amenhotep III neglected the other gods or attempted to promote the Aten as an exclusive deity.citation needed Atenist Egyptedit This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Atenism  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR October 2020 Learn how and when to remove this message Amenhotep IV initially introduced Atenism in the fifth year of his reign 13481346 BC raising Aten to the status of supreme god initially permitting continued worship of the traditional gods.8 Later Akhenaten forbade the worship of other gods a radical departure from the centuries of Egyptian religious practice.910 To emphasise the change Atens name was written in the cartouche form normally reserved for Pharaohs an innovation of Atenism. The religious reformation appears to coincide with the proclamation of a Sed festival a sort of royal jubilee intended to reinforce the Pharaohs divine powers of kingship. Traditionally held in the thirtieth year of the Pharaohs reign it possibly was a festival in honour of Amenhotep III. Some Egyptologists think that he had a coregency with Amenhotep IV of 212 years. The name of god Amun was erased probably during the Amarna era of Akhenaten. Detail of stela of Djeserka a doorkeeper of the Amun temple at Thebes. From Thebes Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Hieroglyphs on the backpillar of Amenhotep IIIs statue. There are 2 places where Akhenatens agents erased the name Amun later restored on a deeper surface. The British Museum London The fifth year is believed to mark the beginning of Amenhotep IVs construction of a new capital Akhetaten Horizon of the Aten at the site known today as Amarna. Evidence appears on three of the boundary stelae used to mark the boundaries of this new capital. Then Amenhotep IV officially changed his name to Akhenaten Spirit of the Aten as evidence of his new worship. The date given for the event has been estimated to fall around January 2 of that year. In the seventh year of his reign 13461344 BC the capital was moved from Thebes to Akhetaten but construction of the city seems to have continued for two more years. In shifting his court from the traditional ceremonial centres he was signalling a dramatic transformation in the focus of religious and political power. The move separated the Pharaoh and his court from the influence of the priesthood and from the traditional centres of worship but his decree had deeper religious significance too. Taken in conjunction with his name change it is possible that the move to Amarna was also meant as a signal of Akhenatens symbolic death and rebirth. It may also have coincided with the death of his father and the end of the coregency. In addition to constructing a new capital in honor of Aten Akhenaten also oversaw the construction of some of the most massive temple complexes in ancient Egypt including one at Karnak and one at Thebes close to the old temple of Amun. Detail of funerary stela of Amenemhat. The name of God Amun was erased by Akhenatens agents. Limestone painted. From Egypt early 
18 th Dynasty. The Burrell Collection Glasgow In the ninth year of his reign 13441342 BC Akhenaten declared a more radical version of his new religion declaring Aten not merely the supreme god of the Egyptian pantheon but the only God of Egypt with himself as the sole intermediary between the Aten and the Egyptian people. Key features of Atenism included a ban on idols and other images of the Aten with the exception of a rayed solar disc in which the rays commonly depicted ending in hands appear to represent the unseen spirit of Aten. Aten was addressed by Akhenaten in prayers such as the Great Hymn to the Aten O sole God beside whom there is none. Atens name is also written differently after the ninth year of the Pharaohs rule to emphasise the radicalism of the new regime. Aten instead of being written with the symbol of a rayed solar disc now became spelled phonetically. The details of Atenist theology are still unclear. The exclusion of all but one god and the prohibition of idols was a radical departure from Egyptian tradition but some scholars see Akhenaten as a practitioner of monolatry or henotheism rather than monotheism as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods. He simply refrained from worshipping any but Aten. These reforms were later reversed by his successor Pharaoh Tutankhamen.911 Some historians argue that only Akhenaten and Nefertiti could worship Aten directly.10 Contrast with traditional Egyptian religionedit Main article Ancient Egyptian religion Akhenaten carried out a radical program of religious reform. For about twenty years he largely supplanted the ageold beliefs and practices of the Egyptian state religion and deposed its religious hierarchy headed by the powerful priesthood of Amun at Thebes. For fifteen centuries the Egyptians had worshiped an extended family of gods and goddesses each of which had its own elaborate system of priests temples shrines and rituals. A key feature of the cults was the veneration of images and statues of the gods which were worshipped in the dark confines of the temples. The pinnacle of the religious hierarchy was the Pharaoh both king and living god. The administration of the Egyptian kingdom was thus inextricably bound up with and largely controlled by the power and influence of the priests and scribes. Akhenatens reforms cut away both the philosophical and economic bases of priestly power abolishing the cults of all other deities and with them the large and lucrative industry of sacrifices and tributes that the priests controlled. At the same time he strengthened the role of the Pharaoh. Dominic Montserrat analyzing the various versions of the hymns to the Aten argues that all versions of the hymns focus on the king he suggests that the real innovation is to redefine the relationship of god and king in a way that benefited Akhenaten quoting a statement of Egyptologist John Baines Amarna religion was a religion of god and king or even of king first and then god.1213 Initially Akhenaten presented Aten to the Egyptian people as a variant of the familiar supreme deity AmunRa itself the result of an earlier rise to prominence of the cult of Amun resulting in Amun becoming merged with the sun god Ra in an attempt to put his ideas in a familiar religious context. Aten is the name given to the solar disc and the gods full title on boundary steles of the new capital was RaHorus who rejoices in the horizon in his name of the light which is in the sun disc. However in the ninth year of his reign Akhenaten declared a more radical version of his new religion by declaring Aten not merely the supreme god but the only god and Akhenaten as the son of Aten was the only intermediary between the Aten and his people.14 He ordered the defacing of Amuns temples throughout Egypt. Key features of Atenism included a ban on idols and other images of the Aten with the exception of a rayed solar disc in which the rays commonly depicted as ending in hands appear to represent the unseen spirit of Aten. Later still even this was done away with.1516 Amarna artedit Main article Amarna art Relief depicting Akhenaten and Nefertiti with three of their daughters under the rays of Aten. Styles of art that flourished during the brief period are markedly different from other Egyptian art. They bear a variety of affectations from elongated heads to protruding stomachs exaggerated ugliness and the beauty of Nefertiti. Significantly for the only time in the history of Egyptian royal art Akhenatens family was depicted in a decidedly naturalistic manner. It is clearly shown displaying affection. Images of Akhenaten and Nefertiti usually depict the Aten prominently above that pair with the hands of the Aten closest to each offering Ankhs. Unusually for New Kingdom art the Pharaoh and his wife are depicted as approximately equal in size with Nefertitis image used to decorate the lesser Aten temple at Amarna. That may suggest that she also had a prominent official role in Aten worship. Artistic representations of Akhenaten usually give him an unusual appearance with slender limbs a protruding belly and wide hips. Other leading figures of the Amarna period both royal and otherwise are also shown with some of these features suggesting a possible religious connotation especially as some sources suggest that private representations of Akhenaten as opposed to official art show him as quite normal. It is also suggested by Brier17 that the family suffered from Marfans syndrome which is known to cause elongated features which may explain Akhenatens appearance. Declineedit Aten The collapse of Atenism began during Akhenatens late reign when a major plague spread across the ancient Near East. This pandemic appears to have claimed the lives of numerous royal family members and highranking officials possibly contributing to the decline of Akhenatens government. The events of this period are not well known due to the paucity and fragmentary nature of surviving sources. According to the most likely scenario the widespread deaths due to the plague caused Akhenaten to appoint two coregents in quick succession Smenkhkare and Neferneferuaten. The origin of both is not attested though it has been speculated that Smenkhkare was a younger brother of Akhenaten whereas Neferneferuaten was in fact Queen Nefertiti. Smenkhkare died after a short reign eventually leaving Neferneferuaten as the acting regent of Egypt.18 Though Akhenatens last years saw possibly the most aggressive repression of Amun and less likely other gods his death quickly resulted in the resurgence of the old cults. Neferneferuaten appears to have attempted to reach some accommodation with the Amun priesthood while still preserving a less exclusive form of Atenism.19 After a few years however Neferneferuaten disappeared and her successor Tutankhaten with Akhenatens old vizier Ay as regent changed his name to Tutankhamun in the third year of his reign c. 1330 BC restored power to the Amun priesthood and moved the capital away from Akhetaten perhaps to Memphis or less likely Thebes.19 The following two decades saw Atenisms terminal decline. Most of the temples that Akhenaten had built from talatat blocks including the temple at Thebes were disassembled reused as a source of building materials and decorations for other temples and inscriptions to Aten were defaced. Though Akhetaten was not fully abandoned and the local Aten temple continued to function most residents left over time. After Ays short rule as pharaoh in his own right following Tutankhamuns death his general Horemheb a nonroyal came to power. He ordered a purge of the Amarna Period rulers removing Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun and Ay from the official lists of Pharaohs and destroying their monuments including most remaining Aten temples.20 Nevertheless the Aten temple in Akhetaten was still in use during Horemhebs first years suggesting that the purge was not universal perhaps leaving some small pockets of Atenism in Egypt.21 Though this marked the de facto end of Atenism the revolutionary cult left some lasting impact on ancient Egyptian religion. For example some changes in funerary rites during the Amarna Period remained in place under Horemheb and his successors.22 Link to Abrahamic monotheismedit See also Akhenaten  Akhenaten and monotheism in Abrahamic religions Because of the monolatristic or monotheistic character of Atenism a link to Judaism or other monotheistic religions has been suggested by various writers. For example psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud assumed Akhenaten to be the pioneer of monotheistic religion and Moses as Akhenatens follower in his book Moses and Monotheism. The modern Druze regard their religion as being descended from and influenced by older monotheistic and mystic movements including Atenism.23 In particular they attribute the Tawhids first public declaration to Akhenaten.24 In popular cultureedit British writer Agatha Christie wrote the play Akhnaton in 1937. The story involves Pharaoh Akhenaten his wife Nefertiti and his successor Tutankhnaton later to take the name Tutankhamun. Christie was assisted in her research by Egyptologist Stephen Glanville.25 American composer Philip Glass composed a grand opera about Akhenaten which sets texts from the Amarna letters and Hymn to the Aten. Finnish author Mika Waltari used the idea of Aten and Atenism in his historical novel The Egyptian. The Egyptian is a 1954 movie based on Waltaris novel depicting a fictionalized account of Atenism and Akhenaten. New ZealandCanadian author Pauline Gedge did the same in her 1984 historical novel The Twelfth Transforming. Son of the Sun a song by the symphonic metal band Therion is critical of Atenism and monotheism. In the video game The Secret World the Aten is a malevolent supernatural force that wants to destroy Egypt and Akhenaten is a victim of its mind control. In The Message in Our Time a 1978 text by the Chishti Sufi Pir Vilayat Inayat Khan the author asks in the context of theodicy Why did Akhenatons religion fail Nefertiti Queen of the Nile is a 1961 movie depicting Atenism as a peaceful religion preached by a Chaldean captured by Amenophis. The pharaoh increasingly accepts it leading to conflict with the Amon priests. American author Ishmael Reed develops a blend of real and imagined history involving an ancient monotheistic Atonist order throughout his 1972 novel Mumbo Jumbo. In the video game Assassins Creed Origins The Curse of the Pharaohs features the realm of Aten with a solar disc styled on the traditional depiction. Mahfouz Naguib Akhenaten Dweller in Truth ISBN 0385499094 Prokopiou Angelos Pharaoh Akhenaton Theatr. Play. 
1 st ed. 1961 Athens. ISBN 9607327667 See alsoedit Joseph and His Brothers Osarseph Referencesedit  Dodson 2016 p. 204.  Assmann 2004 p. 180.  Ridley 2019.  Darnell J. C.  Manassa C. 2007. Tutankhamuns Armies Battle and conquest during ancient Egypts Late Eighteenth Dynasty. John Wiley  Sons.  a b c David 1998 p. 124.  Redford 1976 p. 47.  Petrie William Matthew Flinders 2013 The Adventures of Sanehat Egyptian Tales Cambridge Cambridge University Press pp. 97142 doi
10.1 0
17 cbo97811073252
03.0 05 ISBN 9781107325203 retrieved 20210309  David 1998 p. 125.  a b Brewer Douglas j. Emily Teeter 22 February 2007. Egypt and the Egyptians 
2 nd ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 105. ISBN 9780521851503.  a b Hart George 2005. The Routledge dictionary of Egyptian gods and goddesses 
2 nd ed.. Routledge. p. 39. ISBN 9780415344951.  Simson Najovits Egypt the Trunk of the Tree. A Modern Survey of an Ancient Land II New York 2004 pp. 132136.  Montserrat Dominic 2002. Akhenaten History fantasy and ancient Egypt. Routledge. p. 40. ISBN 9780415301862.  Baines John 1998. The Dawn of the Amarna Age. In OConnor David Cline Eric eds.. Amenhotep III Perspectives on his reign. University of Michigan Press. p. 281.  Reeves Nicholas 2005. Akhenaton Egypts false prophet. Thames  Hudson. p. 146. ISBN 0500285527.  Brewer Douglas J. Teeter Emily 22 February 2007. Egypt and the Egyptians 
2 nd ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 105. ISBN 9780521851503.  Najovits Simson 2004. Egypt the Trunk of the Tree. A modern survey of an ancient land. Vol. II. New York NY. pp. 132136.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Brier Bob. The Murder of Tutankhamen.full citation needed  Dodson 2016 pp. 143146.  a b Dodson 2016 pp. 144146.  Dodson 2016 pp. 146150.  Dodson 2016 p. 150.  Dodson 2016 p. 151.  Obeid  Ubayd 2006 p. 96.  Obeid  Ubayd 2006 pp. 96 139.  Akhnaton  Play by Agatha Christie. www.agathachristie.com. Retrieved 20221013. Sourcesedit Assmann Jan 2004. Theological responses to Amarna. In Knoppers Gerald Neal Hirsch Antoine eds.. Egypt Israel and the Ancient Mediterranean World. Studies in honor of Donald B. Redford PDF. Probleme der gyptologie. Vol. 20. Leiden Boston Brill. pp. 179191. doi
10.1 15
88 propylaeumdok.00002354. ISBN 9789004138445. S
2 CID 192690633. Archived PDF from the original on May 18 2020. Retrieved May 25 2020. David Rosalie 1998. Handbook to Life in Ancient Egypt. Facts on File. ISBN 9780816033126. Dodson Aidan 2016 2014. Amarna Sunrise. Egypt from the golden age to the age of heresy. Cairo New York City American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 9781617975608. Redford Donald B. 1976. The Sundisc in Akhenatens Program Its Worship and Antecedents I. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 13. Alexandria Virginia Cairo American Research Center in Egypt 4761. doi
10.2 30740001118. ISSN 00659991. JSTOR 40001118. Ridley Ronald Thomas 2019. Akhenaten A Historians View. The AUC History of Ancient Egypt. Cairo New York The American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 9789774167935. Obeid Anis Ubayd Anis 2006. The Druze and Their Faith in Tawhid. Syracuse New York Syracuse University Press. ISBN 9780815630975. Further readingedit Aldred Cyril Akhenaten King of Egypt 1988 Thames  Hudson. ISBN 9780500050484 Assmann Jan 1995. Egyptian Solar Religion Re Amun and the Crisis of Polytheism. Routledge. ISBN 9780710304650 Hornung Erik 1999. Akhenaten and the Religion of Light. Cornell University Press. ISBN 9780801487255 Redford Donald B. 1984. Akhenaten The Heretic King. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691002170 External linksedit Works related to Great Hymn to Aten at Wikisource v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Church Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian ProtoProtestantism HussitesMoravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neocharismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Nondenominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible StudentsJehovahs Witnesses British Israelism Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunni Asharism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shia Twelver Shiism Zaydism Ismailism Alawis Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ahmadi Mahdawi movement Quranism Milah Abraham Nondenominational list Other AliIllahism Bbism Bah Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian IlmeKhshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Yazdnism Ishikism Shabakism Yarsanism Yazidism Other AssianismUatsdin Roshani Chinese Manichaeism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japanese Shinto list Shugend Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion o Mu Caodaism Hoahaoism o Bu Sn K Hng Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Sauraism rauta Sant Mat NeoHinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana ChanZenThin Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan NeoBuddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara vetmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Srilankan Vedda Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic TurkoMongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Traditional Sabahan religions Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Mori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Anishinaabe Blackfoot Californian Miwok Ohlone Pomo Cherokee Chilote Choctaw Creek Guarani Haida HoChunk Hopi Iroquois Longhouse Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakawakw Lakota Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Olmec Purpecha Midewiwin Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuuchahnulth Pawnee Tsimshian Ute Zuni Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi TibetoBurmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba DonyiPolo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church SubSaharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba If Diasporic Candombl Bantu Jej Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santera Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Brahmoism Falun Gong Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy NeoTheosophy Agni Yoga Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturba Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism modern religion ItaloRoman Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Romanian Slavic Uralic Estonian Modern Finnish paganism Hungarian Mari religion Erzyan native religion Smi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Ralism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Arabian Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selknam Georgian Germanic AngloSaxon Continental Frankish paganism Norse Greek Gnosticism GrecoBuddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan Indigenous religion Olmec PaleoBalkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian ProtoIndoIranian Iranian Vedic Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater GalloRoman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Semitic Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy  Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Clergy Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Ethnic Faith Fire Folk religion God Goddess Indigenous Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clergy  Laity Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Happiness Homosexuality Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism Science State Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea GuineaBissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda So Tom and Prncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Paganism and modern paganism Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions existing and extinct Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi TibetoBurmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese DonyiPolo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic AngloSaxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic PaleoBalkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele GalloRoman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Scythian Slavic Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Sami MiddleEastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Mori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan SubSaharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern pagan movements Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturba Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu ItaloRoman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic TurkoMongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochranes Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blt Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and Paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal v t e Amarna Period Pharaohs Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Royal family Tiye Nefertiti Kiya The Younger Lady Tey Children Meritaten Meketaten Ankhesenamun Neferneferuaten Tasherit Neferneferure Setepenre Meritaten Tasherit Ankhesenpaaten Tasherit Nobles Officials Aperel Bek Huya Ipy Mahu Maia May Meryneith Meryre Meryre II Mutbenret Nakhtpaaten Neferkheperuhersekheper Paatenemheb Panehesy Parennefer Penthu Ramose Thutmose Locations Akhetaten Karnak KV55 KV62 Amarna Tombs Other Amarna letters Amarna succession Aten Atenism Dakhamunzu Amarna Art Style Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAtenismoldid1222847924 Categories Atenism 
14 th century BC in Egypt Ancient Egyptian religion Historical negationism in ancient Egypt 
2 nd millennium BC in religion Monotheistic religions Solar deities Hidden categories CS1 maint location missing publisher All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking intext citations from December 2007 All articles lacking intext citations Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles needing additional references from October 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 8 May 2024 at 0804 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width