Monolatry - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Atenism 
2 In ancient Israel 
3 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints 
4 References 
5 Further reading 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Monolatry 32 languages Azrbaycanca  etina Dansk Deutsch Espaol Esperanto  Franais Frysk  Bahasa Indonesia  Lietuvi Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Malagasy Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Simple English   srpski Suomi Svenska Trke   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Belief in the existence of many gods but with the consistent worship of only one deity Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme Being Sustainer The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Bah Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism IndoIranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil theodicy Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e Monolatry Ancient Greek  romanized monos lit.single and  latreia worship is the belief in the existence of many gods but with the consistent worship of only one deity.1 The term monolatry was perhaps first used by Julius Wellhausen.2 Monolatry is distinguished from monotheism which asserts the existence of only one god and henotheism a religious system in which the believer worships one god while accepting that others for example in different areas may worship different gods with equal validity.3 Atenismedit Main article Atenism Pharaoh Akhenaten and his family adoring the Aten The pharaoh Akhenaten who was initially enthroned as Amenhotep IV initially introduced Atenism in the fifth year approximately 13481346 BCE of his reign during the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt. He raised Aten once a relatively obscure solar deity representing the disk of the Sun to the status of supreme deity in ancient Egyptian religion.4 The fifth year of his reign marked the beginning of his construction of a new capital Akhetaten Horizon of the Aten at the site known today as Amarna. Amenhotep IV officially changed his name to Akhenaten Agreeable to the Aten as evidence of his new worship. In addition to constructing a new capital in honor of Aten Akhenaten also oversaw the construction of some of the most massive temple complexes of ancient Egypt including one at Karnak and one at Thebes close to the old temple of Amun. In his ninth year of rule approximately 13441342 BCE Akhenaten declared a more radical version of his new religion declaring Aten not merely the supreme god of the Egyptian pantheon but the only god of Egypt with himself as the sole intermediary between the Aten and the Egyptian people. Key features of Atenism included a ban on idols and other images of the Aten with the exception of a rayed solar disc in which the rays commonly depicted ending in hands appear to represent the unseen spirit of Aten. Aten was addressed by Akhenaten in prayers such as the Great Hymn to the Aten. The details of Atenist theology are still unclear. The exclusion of all but one god and the prohibition of idols was a radical departure from Egyptian tradition but most scholars see Akhenaten as a practitioner of monolatry rather than monotheism as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods he simply refrained from worshiping any but Aten. It is known that Atenism did not solely attribute divinity to the Aten. Akhenaten continued the imperial cult proclaiming himself the son of Aten and encouraging the people to worship him.5 The people were to worship Akhenaten only Akhenaten and the pharaohs wife Nefertiti could worship Aten directly.6 Under Akhenatens successors Egypt reverted to its traditional religion and Akhenaten himself came to be reviled as a heretic. In ancient Israeledit This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. April 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message Josiah Hearing the Book of the Law 1873 Some historians have argued that ancient Israel originally practiced a form of monolatry or henotheism.7 Old Testament scholar John Day suggests that angels in Judaism are what became of the other gods once monotheism took over Israel.8 John McKenzie has stated In the ancient Near East the existence of divine beings was universally accepted without questions. ... The question was not whether there is only one elohim but whether there is any elohim like Yahweh.9 Some scholarswho claim the Torah Pentateuch shows evidence of monolatry in some passages. The argument is normally based on references to other gods such as the gods of Egypt in the Book of Exodus Exodus 12
12.1 0 The Egyptians are also attributed powers that suggest the existence of their gods in Exodus 7111311 after Aaron transforms his staff into a snake Pharaohs sorcerers do likewise. In the ancient Near East magic was generally believed to exist12 although the Israelites viewed magic as being malign in origin and were forbidden from it. The Ten Commandments have been interpreted by some as evidence that the Israelites originally practiced monolatry.
13 page needed Exodus 20314 reads you shall have no other gods before me15 and they argue that the addition of before me at the end of the commandment indicates not only that other gods may exist but also that they may be respected and worshiped so long as less than Yahweh. In the creation story of Genesis 322 Yahweh says The man has now become like one of us knowing good and evil. He must not be allowed to reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life and eat and live forever. There is evidence that the Israelites before the Babylonian captivity in the 
6 th century BCE did not adhere to monotheism. Much of this evidence comes from the Bible itself which records that many Israelites chose to worship foreign gods and idols rather than Yahweh.16
17 original research During the 
8 th century BCE the monotheistic worship of Yahweh in Israel was in competition with many other cults described by the Yahwist faction collectively as Baals. The oldest books of the Hebrew Bible reflect this competition as in the books of Hosea and Nahum whose authors lament the apostasy of the people of Israel and threaten them with the wrath of God if they do not give up their polytheistic cults.1819
20 page needed On the other hand medieval Jewish scholars often interpreted ancient texts to argue that the ancient Israelites were monotheistic. The Shema Yisrael is often cited as proof that the Israelites practiced monotheism. It was recognized by Rashi in his 
11 th century commentary to Deuteronomy 6421 that the declaration of the Shema accepts belief in one god as being only a part of Jewish faith at the time of Moses but would eventually be accepted by all humanity.22 A similar statement occurs in Maimonides Thirteen Principles of Faiths second principle God the Cause of all is one. This does not mean one as in one of a pair nor one like a species which encompasses many individuals nor one as in an object that is made up of many elements nor as a single simple object that is infinitely divisible. Rather God is a unity unlike any other possible unity. This is referred to in the Torah Deuteronomy 64 Hear Israel the Lord is our God the Lord is one. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saintsedit Main articles God in Mormonism Plan of salvation Latter Day Saints and Exaltation Mormonism Beginning in 1838 Joseph Smith taught that he had seen two personages in the spring of 1820. In 1843 Smith taught that these personages God the Father and Jesus had separate tangible bodies. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints LDS Church teaches that God the Father Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost are three distinct beings belonging to one Godhead All three are united in their thoughts actions and purpose with each having a fullness of knowledge truth and power.23 Latterday Saints further believe that prayer should be directed to only God the Father in the name of Jesus Christ.24 Jeffrey R. Holland has stated We believe these three divine persons constituting a single Godhead are united in purpose in manner in testimony in mission. We believe Them to be filled with the same godly sense of mercy and love justice and grace patience forgiveness and redemption. I think it is accurate to say we believe They are one in every significant and eternal aspect imaginable except believing Them to be three persons combined in one substance.25 Latterday Saints interpret Jesus prayer in John 171126 Holy Father keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me that they may be one as we are to refer to the characteristics attributes and purpose that the Son shares with the Father in the hope that people can someday share in those as well. In Mormonism being one with God means gaining immortality perfection eternal life and the highest level in his kingdom. As D. Todd Christofferson states we may become one with God as Jesus did.27 Joseph Smith taught that humans can become jointheirs with Christ and thereby inherit from God all that Christ inherits if they are proven worthy by following the laws and ordinances of the gospel. This process of exaltation means that humans can literally become gods through the atonement thus god is a term for an inheritor of the highest kingdom of God.28 To the extent that monolatry is not considered monotheism the classification of Mormonism as monolatrous is strongly disputed among Latterday Saints. Bruce R. McConkie stated that if monotheism is properly interpreted to mean that the Father Son and Holy Ghosteach of whom is a separate and distinct godly personageare one God meaning one Godhead then true saints are monotheists.29 Referencesedit  Frank E. Eakin Jr. The Religion and Culture of Israel Boston Allyn and Bacon 1971 70.  Mackintosh Robert 1916. Monolatry and Henotheism. Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. VIII 810. Retrieved Jan 21 2016.  McConkie Bruce R. 1979 Mormon Doctrine 
2 nd ed. Salt Lake City Utah Bookcraft p. 351  Rosalie David op. cit. p.125  Ancient Egypt Gods The Aten. www.ancientegyptonline.co.uk. Retrieved 5 April 2018.  Hart George 2005. The Routledge Dictionary of Egyptian Gods and Goddesses 
2 nd ed.. Routledge. p. 39. ISBN 9780415344951.  Frank E. Eakin Jr. The Religion and Culture of Israel Boston Allyn and Bacon 1971 70 and 263.  John Day Canaan Religion of in David Noel Freedman ed. The Anchor Bible Dictionary six volumes New York Doubleday 1992 1835.  John L. McKenzie Aspects of Old Testament Thought in Raymond E. Brown Joseph A. Fitzmyer and Roland E. Murphy eds. The New Jerome Biblical Commentary New Jersey Prentice Hall 1990 1287 S.v. 7717.  Exodus 1212  Exodus 71113  Exodus 71113  Raymond F. Collins Ten Commandments in David Noel Freedman ed. The Anchor Bible Dictionary six volumes New York Doubleday 1992 6385.  Exodus 203  Zvi D. BarKochba Monolatrism or Monotheism in the Book of Exodus Chicago 1996 p. 2  Ezekiel 8916  Jeremiah 228  1 Kings 18 Jeremiah 2.  Othmar Keel Christoph Uehlinger Gods Goddesses and Images of God in Ancient Israel Fortress Press 1998  Mark S. Smith The Origins of Biblical Monotheism Israels Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic Texts Oxford University Press 2001  Deuteronomy 64  Scherman p.4
43 full citation needed  Dahl Paul E. 1992. Godhead. In Ludlow Daniel H ed.. Encyclopedia of Mormonism. New York Macmillan Publishing. pp. 552553. ISBN 0028796020. OCLC 24502140.  Blanch Mae 1992. Prayer. In Ludlow Daniel H ed.. Encyclopedia of Mormonism. New York Macmillan Publishing. pp. 11171120. ISBN 0028796020. OCLC 24502140.  Holland Jeffrey R. November 2007 The Only True God and Jesus Christ Whom He Hath Sent Ensign  John 1711  Christofferson D. Todd November 2002 That They May Be One in Us Ensign  Widmer Kurt 2000 Mormonism and the Nature of God A Theological Evolution 18301915 Jefferson NC McFarland p. 6 ISBN 9780786407767 OCLC 43615415.  Bickmore Barry R. 2003 Of Simplicity Oversimplification and Monotheism FARMS Review 15 1 Provo Utah Maxwell Institute 21558 doi
10.5 4
06 farmsreview.

15.1.0 215 S
2 CID 171475985 Further readingedit Robert Needham Cust 1895. Essay on the Common Features which Appear in All Forms of Religious Belief. Luzac  Co. Robert Wright journalist The Evolution of God 2009 esp. pages 132 et seq discussing conflict between Elijah and Jezebel. Mike Schroeder author of 85 Pages In The Bible Llumina Press 2005 External linksedit Moses and Monotheism by Jeffrey Tigay The Biblical Idea of Idolatry by Jose Faur differentiating the monolatry authorized by the Bible from the idolatryiconolatry which is proscribed therein v t e God Deity Divinity Goddess List Conceptions of God Existence Gender of God Agnostic theism Animism Antitheism Apatheism Atheism Agnostic atheism Christian atheism Implicit and explicit atheism Jewish atheism Negative and positive atheism New Atheism State atheism Binitarianism Classical theism Deism Ceremonial deism Christian deism Pandeism Polydeism Dipolar theism Dystheism Egotheism Misotheism Henotheism Ietsism Kathenotheism Liberal theism Monolatry Monotheism Ethical monotheism Postmonotheism Mysticism Nontheism Posttheism Nontrinitarianism Open theism Panentheism Pantheism Classical pantheism Hylotheism Naturalistic pantheism Philosophical theism Physitheism Euhemerism Polytheism Skeptical theism Spiritualism Theism Theistic finitism Transtheism Trinitarianism Tritheism Unitarianism Religion portal v t e Belief systems Abrahamism Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Deism Dharmism Dualism Esotericism Feminist theology Gnosticism Henotheism Immanence Monism Monolatry Monotheism Mysticism Neoplatonism New Age New Thought Nondualism Pandeism Pantheism Panentheism Polytheism Process theology Religious naturalism Shamanism Shramanism Taoic Theism Transcendence more v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Bah Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Sustainer Time Good Ahura Mazda Father of Greatness Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven  Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity  in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philos view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan Religion portal Authority control databases National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMonolatryoldid1219251293 Categories Polytheism Monotheism Theism Religion in ancient Israel and Judah Hidden categories All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from June 2013 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles that may contain original research from April 2024 All articles that may contain original research All articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from January 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2024 Articles that may contain original research from October 2023 Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 16 April 2024 at 1637 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width