Ay (pharaoh) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Origins and family 
2 Amarna Period 
3 Tutankhamun 
4 Rule as pharaoh 
5 Royal succession 
6 Aftermath 
7 In fiction 
8 References 
9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ay pharaoh 50 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn   Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara  Trke   Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Ay II Egyptian pharaoh of the late 
18 th Dynasty 
14 th century BCE This article is about 
18 th dynasty pharaoh. For an earlier pharaoh of that name see Merneferre Ay. Ay Ay II Aya citation needed Pharaoh Ay performing the Opening of the Mouth ceremony on his predecessor Tutankhamen. He is wearing the Leopard skin worn by Egyptian High Priests and a Khepresh a blue crown worn by Pharaohs. Pharaoh Reign 13231319 BC or 13271323 BC Predecessor Tutankhamun Grandnephew  grandsoninlaw Successor Horemheb Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Tekhenkhau The strong bull the one of glittering crowns Nebty name Sekhempehti dersetet Who is mighty of strength who subdues the Asiatics Golden Horus Heqamaat sekhepertawy The ruler of truth who creates the two lands Prenomen Praenomen KheperkheperureIrimaat Everlasting are the Manifestations of Re who does what is right Nomen Itinetjer Ay Divine father Ay Consort Iuy uncertain Tey Ankhesenamun Granddaughter  grandnieceinlaw Children Nakhtmin Nefertiti MutbenretMutnedjmet Died 1319 or 1323 BC Burial WV23 Monuments Amarna Tomb Dynasty 
18 th Dynasty Ay was the penultimate pharaoh of ancient Egypts 
18 th Dynasty. He held the throne of Egypt for a brief fouryear period in the late 
14 th century BC. Prior to his rule he was a close advisor to two and perhaps three other pharaohs of the dynasty. It is speculated that he was the power behind the throne during child ruler Tutankhamuns reign. His prenomen Kheperkheperure means Everlasting are the Manifestations of Ra while his nomen Ay itnetjer reads as Ay Father of the God.1 Records and monuments that can be clearly attributed to Ay are rare both because his reign was short and because his successor Horemheb instigated a campaign of damnatio memoriae against him and the other pharaohs associated with the unpopular Amarna Period. Origins and familyedit See also Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Ay is believed to have been from Akhmim. During his short reign he built a rockcut chapel in Akhmim and dedicated it to the local deity Min. He may have been the son of the courtier Yuya and his wife Thuya making him a brother of Tiye and Anen.2 This connection is based on the fact that both Yuya and Ay came from Akhmim and held the titles Gods Father and Master of Horses. A strong physical resemblance has been noted between the mummy of Yuya and surviving statuary depictions of Ay.2 The mummy of Ay has not been located although fragmentary skeletal remains recovered from his tomb may represent it3 so a more thorough comparison with Yuya cannot be made. Therefore the theory that he was the son of Yuya rests entirely on circumstantial evidence. Ays Great Royal Wife was Tey who was known to be the wetnurse to Nefertiti. It is often theorised that he was the father of Nefertiti as a way to explain his title Gods Father as it has been argued that the term designates a man whose daughter married the king. However nowhere are Ay and Tey referred to as the parents of Nefertiti.4 Nakhtmin Ays chosen successor was likely his son or grandson. Nakhtmins mother was Iuy a priestess of Min and Isis in Akhmim.4 She may have been Ays first wife. Amarna Periodedit A stone block shows Ay receiving the Gold of Honor award in his Amarna tomb from Akhenaten. All that is known for certain was that by the time he was permitted to build a tomb for himself Southern Tomb 25 at Amarna during the reign of Akhenaten he had achieved the title of Overseer of All the Horses of His Majesty the highest rank in the elite charioteering division of the army which was just below the rank of General.5 Prior to this promotion he appears to have been first a Troop Commander and then a regular Overseer of Horses titles which were found on a box thought to have been part of the original furnishings for his tomb.6 Other titles listed in this tomb include Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King Acting Scribe of the King beloved by him and Gods Father. The Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King was a very important position and is viewed as showing that the bearer had the ear of the ruler. The final Gods Father title is the one most associated with Ay and was later incorporated into his royal name when he became pharaoh.6 This title could mean that he was the fatherinlaw of the pharaoh suggesting that he was the son of Yuya and Thuya thus being a brother or halfbrother of Tiye brotherinlaw to Amenhotep III and the maternal uncle of Akhenaten. Instead the title may indicate that Ay was the tutor of Tutankhamun.4 If Ay was the son of Yuya who was a senior military officer during the reign of Amenhotep III then he likely followed in his fathers footsteps finally inheriting his fathers military functions upon his death. Alternatively it could also mean that he may have had a daughter that married the pharaoh Akhenaten possibly being the father of Akhenatens chief wife Nefertiti. Ultimately there is no evidence to definitively prove either hypothesis.7 The two theories are not mutually exclusive but either relationship would explain the exalted status to which Ay rose during Akhenatens Amarna interlude when the royal family turned their backs on Egypts traditional gods and experimented for a dozen years or so with an early form of monotheism an experiment that whether out of conviction or convenience Ay appears to have followed under the reign of Akhenaten. The Great Hymn to the Aten is also found in his Amarna tomb which was built during his service under Akhenaten. His wife Tey was born a commoner but was given the title Nurse of the Pharaohs Great Wife.7 If she were the mother of Nefertiti she would be expected to have the royal title Mother of the Pharaohs Great Wife instead had Ay been the father of Nefertiti then Tey would have been her stepmother.7 In several Amarna tomb chapels there is a woman whose name begins with Mut who had the title Sister of the Pharaohs Great Wife. This could also be a daughter of Ays by his wife Tey and it is known that his successor Horemheb married a woman with the name Mutnodjimet.8 Tutankhamunedit Main article Tutankhamun Ay with a leopard skin performing the opening of the mouth ceremony for Tutankhamun scene from Tutankhamuns tomb. Ays reign was preceded by that of Tutankhamun who ascended to the throne at the age of eight or nine at a time of great tension between the new monotheism and the old polytheism. He was assisted in his kingly duties by his predecessors two closest advisors Grand Vizier Ay and General of the Armies Horemheb. Tutankhamuns nineyear reign largely under Ays direction saw the return of the old gods  and with that the restoration of the power of the Amun priesthood who had lost their influence over Egypt under Akhenaten. Egyptologist Bob Brier suggested that Ay murdered Tutankhamun in order to usurp the throne a claim which was based on Xray examinations of the body done in 1968. He also alleged that Ankhesenamun and the Hittite prince she was about to marry were also murdered at his orders.9 This murder theory was not accepted by all scholars and further analysis of the xrays along with CT scans taken in 2005 found no evidence to suggest that Tutankhamun died from a blow to the head as Brier had theorized.1011 In 2010 a team led by Zahi Hawass reported that the young king had died from a combination of a broken leg malaria and Khler disease12 but another team from the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine in Hamburg believes his death was caused by sickle cell disease.13 Ay buried his young predecessor as depicted on the wall of Tutankhamuns burial chamber. The explicit depiction of a succeeding king conducting the Opening of the Mouth ceremony of another is unique the depictions are usually more generic.14 Ay was buried in the tomb intended for Tutankhamun in the West Valley of the Kings WV23 and Tutankhamun was interred in Ays intended tomb in the East Valley of the Kings KV62.citation needed Rule as pharaohedit Faience plate with the complete royal titulary of Ay Egyptian Museum. Depending on the chronology followed Ay served as pharaoh between 1323 and 1319 BC15 13271323 BC or 13101306 BC. Tutankhamuns death around the age of 18 or 19 together with the fact he had no living children left a power vacuum that his Grand Vizier Ay was quick to fill he is depicted conducting the funerary rites for the deceased monarch and assuming the role of heir. The grounds on which he based his successful claim to power are not entirely clear. The Commander of the Army Horemheb had actually been designated as the idnw or Deputy of the Lord of the Two Lands under Tutankhamun and was presumed to be the boy kings heir apparent and successor.16 It appears that Horemheb was outmaneuvered to the throne by Ay who legitimized his claim to the throne by burying Tutankhamun as well as possibly marrying Ankhesenamun Tutankhamuns widow. Fragment of a cartouche of Ay in the Petrie Museum Since Ay was already advanced in age upon his accession he ruled Egypt in his own right for only four years. During this period he consolidated the return to the old religious ways that he had initiated as senior advisor and constructed a mortuary temple at Medinet Habu for his own use. A stela of Nakhtmin Berlin 2074 a military officer under Tutankhamun who was Ays chosen successoris dated to Year 4 IV Akhet day 1 of Ays reign.17 Manethos Epitome assigns a reign length of four years and one month to Horemheb and this was usually assigned to him based on this Year 4 dated stela however it is now believed that figure should be raised by a decade to fourteen years and one month and attributed to Horemheb instead as Manetho intended. Hence Ays precise reign length is unknown and he could have ruled for as long as seven to nine years since most of his monuments and his funerary temple at Medinet Habu were either destroyed or usurped by his successor Horemheb.citation needed Royal successionedit Reproduction of a Portrait of Ay on display at Muse dArt et dHistoire of Geneva. Detail of a statue of the royal couple of king Ay and Queen Tey the fragment depicting Tey being a reproduction of a piece now located at the Hermitage in SaintPetersburg inv 18477. Prior to his death Ay attempted to sideline Horemheb from the royal succession. Horemheb who was the general in charge of Egypts armies and previously held the title of jrjpt or Hereditary Prince under Tutankhamun was replaced in the succession by General Nakhtmin under king Ay. In fact two separate men were designated jrjpt or Hereditary Prince under Ays short reign namely Nay and Nakhtmin.18 Nozomu Kawai writes that Nay built his TT271 tomb at the hill of Qurnat Murai facing Ays mortuary temple at Medinet Habu where he holds the titles of chief physician chamberlain overseer of the Kings private apartment and fan bearer on the right of the king suggesting that he was the highest palace official under King Ay. Moreover King Ay promoted Nay not only to Hereditary Prince but also to great chief in the entire land scribe of the elite troops and chief spokesman in the entire land indicating that he Nay outranked all other officials under the king. In fact these titles were previously held by Horemheb during Tutankhamuns reign. However it is not likely that Nay took over Horemhebs position. As I have already argued these titles including jrjpt could have just indicated the heads of the government not the designated successor or Crown Prince. In fact Nays tomb did not suffer from any damnatio memoriae. This suggests that Nay was not the designated successor and he could not have been Horemhebs rival.19 In contrast the case of general Nakhtmin is quite different than that of Nay. As Kawai writes Nakhtmin was a general probably a subordinate of Horemheb in the military under Tutankhamun but he had also a close relation to Ay. He is known to have dedicated five shabtis to Tutankhamuns funerary equipment. On these shabtis he was called General and fan bearer on the right of the king. Then he appears to have been promoted by King Ay to not only Hereditary Prince and Generalissimo but also even Kings Son znswt namely the Crown Prince of Ay who would succeed the throne. This title is undoubtedly superior to Horemhebs status. Therefore King Ay intended to relegate Horemheb to a less important position and replace him with Nakhtmin to carry out his functions. We do not know exactly when Nakhtmin was promoted but this must have created Horemhebs strong hostility against King Ay.20 Ays succession plans went awry as Horemheb became the last king of Egypts 
18 th Dynasty instead of Nakhtmin. The fact that Nakhtmin was Ays intended political heir is strongly implied by an inscription carved on a dyad funerary statue of Nakhtmin and his spouse which was presumably made during Ays reign. Nakhtmin is clearly given the titles Crown Prince jrjpt and Kings Son znswt.21 The only conclusion which can be drawn here is that Nakhtmin was either a son or an adopted son of Ays and that Ay was grooming Nakhtmin for the royal succession instead of Horemheb. The British Egyptologists Aidan Dodson and Dyan Hilton observe that the aforementioned statue ... is broken after the signs for Kings Son of and there has been considerable debate as to whether it continued to say Kush making Nakhtmin a Viceroy of Nubia or of his body making him an actual royal son. Since there is no other evidence for Nakhtmin as a Viceroywith another man Paser I22 attested in office at this period as wellthe latter suggestion seems the most likely. As Nakhtmin donated items to the burial of Tutankhamun without such a title it follows that he only became a Kings son subsequently presumably under Ay. This theory is supported by the evidence of intentional damage to Nakhtmins statue since Ay was amongst the Amarna pharaohs whose memories were execrated under later rulers.23 Aftermathedit The burial chamber of Ays tomb in the Valley of the Kings It appears that one of Horemhebs undertakings as Pharaoh was to eliminate all references to the monotheistic experiment a process that included expunging the name of his immediate predecessors especially Ay from the historical record. Horemheb desecrated Ays burial and had most of Ays royal cartouches in his WV23 tomb erased while his sarcophagus was smashed into numerous fragments.24 However the intact sarcophagus lid was discovered in 1972 by Otto Schaden. The lid had been buried under debris in this kings tomb and still preserved Ays cartouche.25 Horemheb also usurped Ays mortuary temple at Medinet Habu for his own use. Uvo Hlscher 18781963 who excavated the temple in the early 19
30 s provides these interesting details concerning the state of AyHoremhebs mortuary temple Wherever a cartouche has been preserved the name of Eye i.e. Ay has been erased and replaced by that of his successor Harmhab. In all but a single instance had it been overlooked and no change made. Thus the temple which Eye had begun and finished at least in the rear rooms with their fine paintings was usurped by his successor and was thenceforth known as the temple of Harmhab. Seals on stoppers of wine jars from the temple magazines read Wine from the temple of Harmhab.26 Nozomu Kawai describes Horemhebs actions as a damnatio memoriae since once he became king Horemheb started erasing all depictions of king Ay on the monuments of Tutankhamun as well as those on Ays royal monuments and those of his entourage. This action must be understood as damnatio memoriae. Horemheb desecrated Ays tomb KV 23 in the Western Valley of the Kings...and removed all other visible inscriptions and images of Ay.27 The rivalry which began when Ay attempted to sideline Horemheb from the royal succession ended in Horemhebs victory. In fictionedit Ay appears as a villain in the 
17 th book in Lucien de Gieters Papyrus comic book series Tutankhamun The Assassinated Pharaoh.citation needed Ay appears as a major character in Paul C. Dohertys trilogy of Ancient Egyptian novels An Evil Spirit Out of the West The Season of the Hyaena and The Year of the Cobra. citation needed Kerry Greenwoods novel Out of the Black Land features him as a greedy villain whose sole goal was accruing wealth.citation needed He is a character in Wolfgang Hohlbeins Die Prophezeihung The Prophecy.citation needed He is also a major character in Michelle Morans bestselling novel Nefertiti.citation needed Ay is the villain of Lucile Morrisons young adult novel The Lost Queen of Egypt 1937.citation needed He is also a character in Mika Waltaris historical novel The Egyptian again depicted as immoral and villainous.citation needed Ay serves as a central character in Tut portrayed by Ben Kingsley. Ay is a minor character in the time travel to the 
18 th dynasty in Mr. Peabody  Sherman Ay is a central character in Gwendolyn MacEwens novel King of Egypt King of Dreams where he is portrayed as one of Akhenatens closest confidants spiritual antagonists and supporters.28 The novel also presents Ay as Tiyes brother and one time lover and it is suggested that he rather than Amenhotep III may be Akhenatens father. Much of the novel is told from Ays perspective as he reluctantly attempts to navigate the changes of the Amarna period and the second to last chapter is his memoirconfession near the end of his pharaonic reign in which Ay admits to killing the ailing and blind Akhenaten at the dying pharaohs request. Ay is a major character in two novels about the Amarna period by Allen Drury. He is depicted as brother to Tiye and father to Nefertiti whose mother died in childbirth. This version of Ay is much less villainous than most cultural depictions instead being a royal advisor advocating moderation and reconciliation between the factions of Amun and Aten often in vain. A major theme of the novels is his complicated relationship with increasingly ambitious Horemheb who Drury depicts as Ays illegitimate son. Referencesedit  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. p136  a b Aldred Cyril December 1957. The End of the ElAmarna Period. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 43 33. doi
10.2 3073855276. JSTOR 3855276.  Schaden Otto J. 1984. Clearance of the Tomb of King Ay WV23. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 21 58. doi
10.2 30740000956. JSTOR 40000956.  a b c van Dijk J. 1996. Horemheb and the Struggle for the Throne of Tutankhamun PDF. Bulletin of the Australian Centre for Egyptology 3133. Retrieved 15 September 2019.  Hindley Marshall. Featured Pharaoh The Gods Father Ay Ancient Egypt AprilMay 2006. p. 2728.  a b Dodson Aidan. Amarna Sunset Nefertiti Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb and the Egyptian CounterReformation. p. 95 The American University in Cairo Press. 2009 ISBN 9789774163043  a b c Dodson Aidan. Amarna Sunset Nefertiti Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb and the Egyptian CounterReformation. p96 The American University in Cairo Press. 2009 ISBN 9789774163043  Dodson Aidan.Amarna Sunset Nefertiti Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb and the Egyptian CounterReformation. p. 98 The American University in Cairo Press. 2009 ISBN 9789774163043  Brier Bob 1998. The murder of Tutankhamen  a true story Hardcover ed.. Putnam. ISBN 0399143831.  Boyer RS Rodin EA Grey TC Connolly RC 2003. The skull and cervical spine radiographs of Tutankhamen a critical appraisal PDF. American Journal of Neuroradiology. 24 6 11427. PMC 8149017. PMID 12812942. Retrieved 15 September 2019.  Hawass Zahi Saleem Sahar N. 2016. Scanning the Pharaohs  CT Imaging of the New Kingdom Royal Mummies. The American University in Cairo. pp. 101102. ISBN 9789774166730.  Hawass Zahi 17 February 2010. Ancestry and Pathology in King Tutankhamuns Family PDF. JAMA. 303 7 63847. doi
10.1 0
01 jama.20
10.1 21. PMID 20159872. Retrieved 27 August 2019.  Timmann Christian 23 June 2010. King Tutankhamuns Family and Demise. JAMA. 303 24 2473 author reply 24735. doi
10.1 0
01 jama.20
10.8 22. PMID 20571010.  Dodson Aidan 2018. Amarna sunset  Nefertiti Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb and the Egyptian counterreformation Revised ed.. New York The American University in Cairo Press. p. 94. ISBN 9789774168598.  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 p. 493  Peter J. Brand The Monuments of Seti I Epigraphic Historical and Art Historical Analysis Brill NV Leiden 2000 p. 311  Urk IV 2110  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 p.286  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 p.286  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 pp.286287  Wolfgang Helck Urkunden der 18. Dynastie Texte der Hefte 2021 Berlin AkademieVerlag 1984 pp. 19081910  Ahmose. Archived from the original on 20070223. Retrieved 20061028.  Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 2004 p. 151  Bertha Porter Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyph Texts Vol 1 Part 2 Oxford Clarendon Press 1960 Tomb 23 pp. 550551  Otto Schaden Clearance of the Tomb of King Ay WV 23 JARCE 211984 pp.3964  Uvo Hlscher Excavations at Ancient Thebes 193031 pp. 5051  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 pp.288  MacEwen Gwendolyn 1971. King of Egypt King of Dreams. Toronto Macmillan. Further readingedit Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten MS 46 Philip von Zabern Mainz 1997 pp. 201 v t e Amarna Period Pharaohs Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Royal family Tiye Nefertiti Kiya The Younger Lady Tey Children Meritaten Meketaten Ankhesenamun Neferneferuaten Tasherit Neferneferure Setepenre Meritaten Tasherit Ankhesenpaaten Tasherit Nobles Officials Aperel Bek Huya Ipy Mahu Maia May Meryneith Meryre Meryre II Mutbenret Nakhtpaaten Neferkheperuhersekheper Paatenemheb Panehesy Parennefer Penthu Ramose Thutmose Locations Akhetaten Karnak KV55 KV62 Amarna Tombs Other Amarna letters Amarna succession Aten Atenism Dakhamunzu Amarna Art Style v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAypharaoholdid1220415639 Categories Ay 13
20 s BC deaths 
14 thcentury BC Pharaohs People from Sohag Governorate Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Historical negationism in ancient Egypt Viziers of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King Damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 1708 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width