Amun - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early history 
2 Temple at Karnak 
3 New Kingdom Toggle New Kingdom subsection 
3.1 Identification with Min and Ra 
3.2 Amarna Period 
3.3 Theology 
4 Third Intermediate Period Toggle Third Intermediate Period subsection 
4.1 Theban High Priests of Amun 
4.2 Decline 
5 Iron Age and classical antiquity Toggle Iron Age and classical antiquity subsection 
5.1 Nubia and Sudan 
5.2 Siwa Oasis and Libya 
5.3 Levant 
5.4 Greece 
6 See also 
7 Notes 
8 References 
9 Sources 
10 Further reading 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Amun 83 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch   Asturianu  Azrbaycanca     Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy     Bahasa Melayu     Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Taclit   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray   Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian god For other uses see Amun disambiguation. Amen Ra redirects here. For the Belgian band see Amenra. AmonRa redirects here. For the American football player see AmonRa St. Brown. Amun After the Amarna period Amun was painted with blue skin symbolizing his association with air and primeval creation. Amun was also depicted in a wide variety of other forms. Name in hieroglyphs Major cult center Thebes Hermopolis as a member of the Ogdoad Symbol two vertical plumes the ramheaded Sphinx Criosphinx Consort Amunet Wosret Mut Offspring Khonsu Equivalents Greek equivalent Zeus Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Cosmology Duat Maat Mythology Index Numerology Philosophy Soul Practices Funerals Offerings Offering formula Temples Priestess of Hathor Pyramids Deities list Ogdoad Amun Amunet Hauhet Heh Kauket Kek Naunet Nu Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun Duau god F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mandulis Medjed Mafdet Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nemty Nekhbet Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Locations Aaru Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Aani Abtu Ankh Atef Atet Book of Thoth Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Griffin Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Hieracosphinx Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Matet boat Medjed Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Serpopard Set animal Shen ring Sphinx Tyet Uraeus Ushabti Wassceptre Winged sun Texts Funerary texts Amduat  Books of Breathing  Book of Caverns  Book of the Dead  Book of the Earth  Book of Gates Related religions Atenism Hermeticism Thelema Kemeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy  Church of the Most High Goddess Ancient Egypt portal v t e Amun  US mn also Amon Ammon Amana Amen Ancient Egyptian jmn reconstructed as jamanuw Old Egyptian and early Middle Egyptian  aman later Middle Egyptian  amon Late Egyptian Coptic  romanized Amoun Greek  mmn  Hmmn Phoenician 1 romanized mn was a major ancient Egyptian deity who appears as a member of the Hermopolitan Ogdoad. Amun was attested from the Old Kingdom together with his wife Amunet. With the 
11 th Dynasty c. 
21 st century BC Amun rose to the position of patron deity of Thebes by replacing Montu.2 Initially possibly one of eight deities in the Hermapolite creation myth his worship expands. After the rebellion of Thebes against the Hyksos and with the rule of Ahmose I 
16 th century BC Amun acquired national importance expressed in his fusion with the Sun god Ra as AmunRa alternatively spelled AmonRa or AmunRe. On his own he was also thought to be the king of the gods.3 AmunRa retained chief importance in the Egyptian pantheon throughout the New Kingdom with the exception of the Atenist heresy under Akhenaten. AmunRa in this period 
16 th to 
11 th centuries BC held the position of transcendental selfcreated4 creator deity par excellence he was the champion of the poor or troubled and central to personal piety.5 With Osiris AmunRa is the most widely recorded of the Egyptian gods.5 Ras name simply means sun. Like most gods in Egyptian mythologies gods had multiple names his additional names were Re AmunRe Khepri RaHorakhty and Atum.6 As the chief deity of the Egyptian Empire AmunRa also came to be worshipped outside Egypt according to the testimony of ancient Greek historiographers in Libya and Nubia. As Zeus Ammon and Jupiter Ammon he came to be identified with Zeus in Greece and Jupiter in Rome. Early historyedit Amun and Amaunet are mentioned in the Old Egyptian Pyramid Texts.7 The name Amun written imn meant something like the hidden one or invisible8 which is also attested by epithets found in the Pyramid Texts O You the great god whose name is unknown.9 Amun rose to the position of tutelary deity of Thebes after the end of the First Intermediate Period under the 
11 th Dynasty. As the patron of Thebes his spouse was Mut. In Thebes Amun as father Mut as mother and the Moon god Khonsu as their son formed the divine family or the Theban Triad. Temple at Karnakedit Main articles Precinct of AmunRe Karnak and History of the Karnak Temple complex The history of Amun as the patron god of Thebes begins in the 
20 th century BC with the construction of the Precinct of AmunRe at Karnak under Senusret I. The city of Thebes does not appear to have been of great significance before the 
11 th Dynasty. Major construction work in the Precinct of AmunRa took place during the 
18 th Dynasty when Thebes became the capital of the unified ancient Egypt. Construction of the Hypostyle Hall may have also begun during the 
18 th Dynasty though most building was undertaken under Seti I and Ramesses II. Merenptah commemorated his victories over the Sea Peoples on the walls of the Cachette Court the start of the processional route to the Luxor Temple. This Great Inscription which has now lost about a third of its content shows the kings campaigns and eventual return with items of potential value and prisoners. Next to this inscription is the Victory Stela which is largely a copy of the more famous Merneptah Stele found in the funerary complex of Merenptah on the west bank of the Nile in Thebes.10 Merenptahs son Seti II added two small obelisks in front of the Second Pylon and a triple barkshrine to the north of the processional avenue in the same area. This was constructed of sandstone with a chapel to Amun flanked by those of Mut and Khonsu. The last major change to the Precinct of AmunRes layout was the addition of the first pylon and the massive enclosure walls that surrounded the whole Precinct both constructed by Nectanebo I. New Kingdomedit Further information High Priest of Amun Identification with Min and Raedit Amun depicted with Seti I in the temple and Chapel at Abydos When the army of the founder of the Eighteenth Dynasty expelled the Hyksos rulers from Egypt the victors city of origin Thebes became the most important city in Egypt the capital of a new dynasty. The local patron deity of Thebes Amun therefore became nationally important. The pharaohs of that new dynasty attributed all of their successes to Amun and they lavished much of their wealth and captured spoil on the construction of temples dedicated to Amun.11 The victory against the foreign rulers achieved by pharaohs who worshipped Amun caused him to be seen as a champion of the less fortunate upholding the rights of justice for the poor.5 By aiding those who traveled in his name he became the Protector of the road. Since he upheld Maat truth justice and goodness5 those who prayed to Amun were required first to demonstrate that they were worthy by confessing their sins. Votive stelae from the artisans village at Deir elMedina record Amun who comes at the voice of the poor in distress who gives breath to him who is wretched ... You are Amun the Lord of the silent who comes at the voice of the poor when I call to you in my distress You come and rescue me ... Though the servant was disposed to do evil the Lord is disposed to forgive. The Lord of Thebes spends not a whole day in anger His wrath passes in a moment none remains. His breath comes back to us in mercy ... May your ka be kind may you forgive It shall not happen again.12 Min in a relief from the reign of Thutmose III from Deir elBahari Kamutef Bull of His Mother as a ramheaded lion in the Avenue of Sphinxes at Karnak Temple Subsequently when Egypt conquered Kush they identified the chief deity of the Kushites as Amun. This Kush deity was depicted as ramheaded more specifically a woolly ram with curved horns. Amun thus became associated with the ram arising from the aged appearance of the Kush ram deity and depictions related to Amun sometimes had small rams horns known as the Horns of Ammon. A solar deity in the form of a ram can be traced to the preliterate Kerma culture in Nubia contemporary to the Old Kingdom of Egypt. The later Meroitic period name of Nubian Amun was Amani attested in numerous personal names such as Tanwetamani Arkamani and Amanitore. Since rams were considered a symbol of virility Amun also became thought of as a fertility deity and so started to absorb the identity of Min becoming AmunMin. This association with virility led to AmunMin gaining the epithet Kamutef meaning Bull of his mother8 in which form he was found depicted on the walls of Karnak ithyphallic and with a scourge as Min was. As the cult of Amun grew in importance Amun became identified with the chief deity who was worshipped in other areas during that period namely the sun god Ra. This identification led to another merger of identities with Amun becoming AmunRa. In the Hymn to AmunRa he is described as Lord of truth father of the gods maker of men creator of all animals Lord of things that are creator of the staff of life.13 Amun New Kingdoma Amun Post Amarnaa AmunRa AmunMin Amarna Periodedit Hieroglyphs on the backpillar of Amenhotep IIIs statue. There are two places where Akhenatens agents erased the name Amun later restored on a deeper surface. The British Museum London During the latter part of the Eighteenth dynasty the pharaoh Akhenaten also known as Amenhotep IV advanced the worship of the Aten a deity whose power was manifested in the sun disk both literally and symbolically. He defaced the symbols of many of the old deities and based his religious practices upon the deity the Aten. He moved his capital away from Thebes but this abrupt change was very unpopular with the priests of Amun who now found themselves without any of their former power. The religion of Egypt was inexorably tied to the leadership of the country the pharaoh being the leader of both. The pharaoh was the highest priest in the temple of the capital and the next lower level of religious leaders were important advisers to the pharaoh many being administrators of the bureaucracy that ran the country. The introduction of Atenism under Akhenaten constructed a monolatrist worship of Aten in direct competition with that of Amun. Praises of Amun on stelae are strikingly similar in language to those later used in particular the Hymn to the Aten When thou crossest the sky all faces behold thee but when thou departest thou are hidden from their faces ... When thou settest in the western mountain then they sleep in the manner of death ... The fashioner of that which the soil produces ... a mother of profit to gods and men a patient craftsman greatly wearying himself as their maker ... valiant herdsman driving his cattle their refuge and the making of their living ... The sole Lord who reaches the end of the lands every day as one who sees them that tread thereon ... Every land chatters at his rising every day in order to praise him.14 When Akhenaten died Akhenatens successor Smenkhkare became pharaoh and Atenism remained established during his brief 
2 year reign. When Smenkhkare died an enigmatic female pharaoh known as Neferneferuaten took the throne for a brief period but it is unclear what happened during her reign. After Neferneferuatens death Akhenatens 
9 yearold son Tutankhaten succeeded her. At the beginning of his reign the young pharaoh reversed Atenism reestablishing the old polytheistic religion and renaming himself Tutankhamun. His sisterwife then named Ankhesenpaaten followed him and was renamed Ankhesenamun. Worship of the Aten ceased for the most part and worship of AmunRa was restored. During the reign of Horemheb Akhenatens name was struck from Egyptian records all of his religious and governmental changes were undone and the capital was returned to Thebes. The return to the previous capital and its patron deity was accomplished so swiftly that it seemed this monolatrist cult and its governmental reforms had never existed. Theologyedit This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedias quality standards. The specific problem is unstructured various section. Put in chronological context. Please help improve this section if you can. October 2012 Learn how and when to remove this message Ra and Amun from the tomb of Ramses IV The god of wind Amun came to be identified with the solar god Ra and the god of fertility and creation Min so that AmunRa had the main characteristic of a solar god creator god and fertility god. He also adopted the aspect of the ram from the Nubian solar god besides numerous other titles and aspects. As AmunRa he was petitioned for mercy by those who believed suffering had come about as a result of their own or others wrongdoing. AmunRa who hears the prayer who comes at the cry of the poor and distressed...Beware of him Repeat him to son and daughter to great and small relate him to generations of generations who have not yet come into being relate him to fishes in the deep to birds in heaven repeat him to him who does not know him and to him who knows him ... Though it may be that the servant is normal in doing wrong yet the Lord is normal in being merciful. The Lord of Thebes does not spend an entire day angry. As for his anger  in the completion of a moment there is no remnant ... As thy Ka endures thou wilt be merciful15 In the Leiden hymns Amun Ptah and Re are regarded as a trinity who are distinct gods but with unity in plurality.16 The three gods are one yet the Egyptian elsewhere insists on the separate identity of each of the three.17 This unity in plurality is expressed in one text All gods are three Amun Re and Ptah whom none equals. He who hides his name as Amun he appears to the face as Re his body is Ptah.18 Henri Frankfort suggested that Amun was originally a wind god and speculating pointed out that the implicit connection between the winds and mysteriousness was paralleled in a passage from the Gospel of John The wind blows where it wishes and you hear the sound of it but do not know where it comes from and where it is going.1920 A Leiden hymn to Amun describes how he calms stormy seas for the troubled sailor The tempest moves aside for the sailor who remembers the name of Amon. The storm becomes a sweet breeze for he who invokes His name ... Amon is more effective than millions for he who places Him in his heart. Thanks to Him the single man becomes stronger than a crowd.21 Third Intermediate Periodedit This Third Intermediate Period amulet from the Walters Art Museum depicts Amun fused with the solar deity Re thereby making the supreme solar deity AmunRe. Theban High Priests of Amunedit Main article High Priest of Amun While not regarded as a dynasty the High Priests of Amun at Thebes were nevertheless of such power and influence that they were effectively the rulers of Egypt from 1080 to c. 943 BC. By the time Herihor was proclaimed as the first ruling High Priest of Amun in 1080 BCin the 
19 th Year of Ramesses XIthe Amun priesthood exercised an effective hold on Egypts economy. The Amun priests owned twothirds of all the temple lands in Egypt and 90 percent of her ships and many other resources.22 Consequently the Amun priests were as powerful as the pharaoh if not more so. One of the sons of the High Priest Pinedjem would eventually assume the throne and rule Egypt for almost half a century as pharaoh Psusennes I while the Theban High Priest Psusennes III would take the throne as king Psusennes IIthe final ruler of the 
21 st Dynasty. Declineedit In the 
10 th century BC the overwhelming dominance of Amun over all of Egypt gradually began to decline. In Thebes however his worship continued unabated especially under the Nubian Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt as Amun was by now seen as a national god in Nubia. The Temple of Amun Jebel Barkal founded during the New Kingdom came to be the center of the religious ideology of the Kingdom of Kush. The Victory Stele of Piye at Gebel Barkal 
8 th century BC now distinguishes between an Amun of Napata and an Amun of Thebes. Tantamani died 653 BC the last pharaoh of the Nubian dynasty still bore a theophoric name referring to Amun in the Nubian form Amani. Iron Age and classical antiquityedit Depiction of Amun in a relief at Karnak 
15 th century BC Nubia and Sudanedit In areas outside Egypt where the Egyptians had previously brought the cult of Amun his worship continued into classical antiquity. In Nubia where his name was pronounced Amane or Amani he remained a national deity with his priests at Meroe and Nobatia23 regulating the whole government of the country via an oracle choosing the ruler and directing military expeditions. According to Diodorus Siculus these religious leaders were even able to compel kings to commit suicide although this tradition stopped when Arkamane in the 
3 rd century BC slew them.24 In Sudan excavation of an Amun temple at Dangeil began in 2000 under the directorship of Drs Salah Mohamed Ahmed and Julie R. Anderson of the National Corporation for Antiquities and Museums NCAM Sudan and the British Museum UK respectively. The temple was found to have been destroyed by fire and accelerator mass spectrometry AMS and C14 dating of the charred roof beams have placed the construction of the most recent incarnation of the temple in the 
1 st century AD. This date is further confirmed by the associated ceramics and inscriptions. Following its destruction the temple gradually decayed and collapsed.25 Siwa Oasis and Libyaedit In Siwa Oasis located Western Egypt there remained a solitary oracle of Amun near the Libyan Desert.26 The worship of Ammon was introduced into Greece at an early period probably through the medium of the Greek colony in Cyrene which must have formed a connection with the great oracle of Ammon in the Oasis soon after its establishment. Iarbas a mythological king of Libya was also considered a son of Hammon. According to the 
6 th century AD author Corippus a Libyan people known as the Laguatan carried an effigy of their god Gurzil whom they believed to be the son of Ammon into battle against the Byzantine Empire in the 5
40 s AD.27 Levantedit Amun is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible as   Amon of No in Jeremiah 4625 also translated the horde of No and the horde of Alexandria and Thebes possibly is called   NoAmon in Nahum 38 also translated populous Alexandria. These texts were presumably written in the 
7 th century BC.28 The Lord of hosts the God of Israel said Behold I am bringing punishment upon Amon of Thebes and Pharaoh and Egypt and her gods and her kings upon Pharaoh and those who trust in him. Jeremiah 4625 KJV Greeceedit ZeusAmmon. Roman copy of a Greek original from the late 
5 th century BC. The Greeks of the lower Nile Delta and Cyrenaica combined features of supreme god Zeus with features of the Egyptian god AmunRa. Amun worshipped by the Greeks as Ammon or Heliopolis meaning city of the sun god 
29 had a temple and a statue the gift of Pindar d. 443 BC at Thebes30 and another at Sparta the inhabitants of which as Pausanias says31 consulted the oracle of Ammon in Libya from early times more than the other Greeks. At Aphytis Chalcidice Amun was worshipped from the time of Lysander d. 395 BC as zealously as in Ammonium. Pindar the poet honored the god with a hymn. At Megalopolis the god was represented with the head of a ram Paus. viii.32  1 and the Greeks of Cyrenaica dedicated at Delphi a chariot with a statue of Ammon. When Alexander the Great occupied Egypt in late 332 BC he was regarded as a liberator thus conquering Egypt without a fight.32 He was pronounced son of Amun by the oracle at Siwa.33 Amun was identified as a form of Zeus34 and Alexander often referred to ZeusAmmon as his true father and after his death currency depicted him adorned with the Horns of Ammon as a symbol of his divinity.35 The tradition of depicting Alexander the Great with the horns of Amun continued for centuries with Alexander being referred to in the Quran as Dhu alQarnayn The TwoHorned One a reference to his depiction on Middle Eastern coins36 and statuary as having horns of Ammon.37 Several words derive from Amun via the Greek form Ammon such as ammonia and ammonite. The Romans called the ammonium chloride they collected from deposits near the Temple of JupiterAmun in ancient Libya sal ammoniacus salt of Amun because of proximity to the nearby temple.38 Ammonia as well as being the chemical is a genus name in the foraminifera. Both these foraminiferans shelled Protozoa and ammonites extinct shelled cephalopods bear spiral shells resembling a rams and Ammons horns. The regions of the hippocampus in the brain are called the cornu ammonis  literally Amuns Horns due to the horned appearance of the dark and light bands of cellular layers. In Paradise Lost Milton identifies Ammon with the biblical Ham Cham and states that the gentiles called him the Libyan Jove. See alsoedit List of solar deities Notesedit  a b Originally Amun was depicted with redbrown skin during the New Kingdom with two plumes on his head the ankh symbol and the was sceptre. After the Amarna period Amun was instead painted with blue skin. Referencesedit  RS 367  David Warburton Architecture Power and Religion Hatshepsut Amun and Karnak in Context 2012 p. 211 ISBN 9783643902351  Stark Rodney 2007. Discovering God The Origins of the Great Religions and the Evolution of Belief 
1 st ed.. New York HarperOne. p. 405. ISBN 9780061173899.  Dick Michael Brennan 1999. Born in heaven made on earth the making of the cult image in the ancient Near East. Warsaw Indiana Eisenbrauns. p. 184. ISBN 1575060248.  a b c d Arieh Tobin Vincent 2003. Redford Donald B. ed.. Oxford Guide The Essential Guide to Egyptian Mythology. Berkley Books. p. 20. ISBN 0425190
96 X.  Ra. Mythopedia. Retrieved 20240507.  Die Altaegyptischen Pyramidentexte nach den Papierabdrucken und Photographien des Berliner Museums. 1908.  a b Hart George 2005. The Routledge Dictionary of Egyptian Gods and Goddesses. Abingdon England Routledge. p. 21. ISBN 9780415361163.  PT 2
76 c  Blyth Elizabeth 2006. Karnak Evolution of a Temple. Abingdon England Routledge. p. 164. ISBN 9780415404860.  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Griffith Francis Llewellyn 1911. Ammon. In Chisholm Hugh ed.. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 1 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 860861. This cites Erman Handbook of Egyptian Religion London 1907 Ed. Meyer art. Ammon in Roschers Lexikon der griechischen und rmischen Mythologie Pietschmann arts. Ammon Ammoneion in PaulyWissowa Realencyclopdie Works on Egyptian religion quoted in the encyclopdia under Egypt section Religion  Lichtheim Miriam 1976. Ancient Egyptian Literature Volume II The New Kingdom. Berkeley California University of California Press. pp. 105106. ISBN 0520036158.  Budge E.A. Wallis 1914. An Introduction to Egyptian Literature 1997 ed.. Minneola New York Dover Publications. p. 214. ISBN 0486295028..  Wilson John A. 1951. The Burden of Egypt 1963 ed.. Chicago Illinois University of Chicago Press. p. 211. ISBN 9780226901527.  Wilson 1951 p. 300  Morenz Siegried 1992. Egyptian Religion. Translated by Ann E. Keep. Ithaca New York Cornell University Press. pp. 144145. ISBN 0801480299.  Frankfort Henri Wilson John A. Jacobsen Thorkild 1960. Before Philosophy The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man. Gretna Louisiana Pelican Publishing Company. p. 75. ISBN 9780140201987.  Assmann Jan 2008. Of God and Gods. Madison Wisconsin University of Wisconsin Press. p. 64. ISBN 9780299225544.  John 38  Frankfort Henri 1951. Before Philosophy. Penguin Books. p. 18. ASIN B00
06 EUMNK.  Jacq Christian 1999. The Living Wisdom of Ancient Egypt. New York City Simon  Schuster. p. 143. ISBN 0671022199.  Clayton Peter A. 2006. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The Reignbyreign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. London England Thames  Hudson. p. 175. ISBN 9780500286289.  Herodotus The Histories ii.29  Griffith 1911.  Sweek Tracey Anderson Julie Tanimoto Satoko 2012. Architectural Conservation of an Amun Temple in Sudan. Journal of Conservation and Museum Studies. 10 2. London England Ubiquity Press 816. doi
10.5 3
34 jcms.1021202.  Pausanias Description of Greece x.13  3  Mattingly D.J. 1983. The Laguatan A Libyan Tribal Confederation in the Late Roman Empire PDF. Libyan Studies. 14. London England Society for Libyan Studies 9899. doi
10.1 0
17 S0263718900007810. S
2 CID 164294564.  Strongs Concordance  Gesenius Lexicon. Archived from the original on 20071013. Retrieved 20071010.  Ra. Mythopedia. Retrieved 20240507.  Pausanias. Description of Greece. ix.16  1.  Pausanias. Description of Greece. iii.18  2.  Ring Trudy Salkin Robert M Berney KA Schellinger Paul E eds. 1994. International dictionary of historic places. Chicago Fitzroy Dearborn 19941996. pp. 49 320. ISBN 9781884964046.  Bosworth A. B. 1988. Conquest and Empire The Reign of Alexander the Great. New York Cambridge University Press. pp. 7174.  Jeremiah. xlvi.25. cite book Missing or empty title help  Dahmen Karsten 2007. The Legend of Alexander the Great on Greek and Roman Coins. Taylor  Francis. pp. 1011. ISBN 9780415394512.  Recent Ancient Coin Acquisitions Focus on Alexander the Great  Ammonite to Ammolite  Eponyms. h
2 g2. BBC Online. 11 January 2003. Archived from the original on 2 November 2007. Retrieved 8 November 2007. 1 2 Sourcesedit David Klotz Adoration of the Ram Five Hymns to AmunRe from Hibis Temple New Haven 2006 David Warburton Architecture Power and Religion Hatshepsut Amun and Karnak in Context 2012 ISBN 9783643902351. E. A. W. Budge Tutankhamen Amenism Atenism and Egyptian Monotheism 1923 Further readingedit Assmann Jan 1995. Egyptian Solar Religion in the New Kingdom Re Amun and the Crisis of Polytheism. Kegan Paul International. ISBN 9780710304650. Ayad Mariam F. 2009. Gods Wife Gods Servant The Gods Wife of Amun c. 740525 BC. Routledge. ISBN 9780415411707. CruzUribe Eugene 1994. The Khonsu Cosmogony. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 31 169189. doi
10.2 30740000676. JSTOR 40000676. Gabolde Luc 2018. Karnak AmonR  La gense dun temple la naissance dun dieu in French. Institut franais darchologie orientale du Caire. ISBN 9782724706864. Guermeur Ivan 2005. Les cultes dAmon hors de Thbes Recherches de gographie religieuse in French. Brepols. ISBN 9789071201103. Klotz David 2012. Caesar in the City of Amun Egyptian Temple Construction and Theology in Roman Thebes. Association gyptologique Reine lisabeth. ISBN 9782503545158. Kuhlmann Klaus P. 1988. Das Ammoneion. Archologie Geschichte und Kultpraxis des Orakels von Siwa in German. Verlag Phillip von Zabern in Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. ISBN 9783805308199. Otto Eberhard 1968. Egyptian art and the cults of Osiris and Amon. Abrams. Roucheleau Caroline Michelle 2008. Amun temples in Nubia a typological study of New Kingdom Napatan and Meroitic temples. Archaeopress. ISBN 9781407303376. Thiers Christophe ed. 2009. Documents de thologies thbaines tardives. Universit PaulValry. Zandee Jan 1948. De Hymnen aan Amon van papyrus Leiden I. 350 in Dutch. E.J. Brill. Zandee Jan 1992. Der Amunhymnus des Papyrus Leiden I 344 Verso in German. Rijksmuseum van Oudheden. ISBN 9789071201103. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amun. Wim van den Dungen Leiden Hymns to Amun in Spanish Karnak 
3 D  Detailed 
3 Dreconstruction of the Great Temple of Amun at Karnak Marc Mateos 2007 Amun with features of Tutankhamun statue c. 13321292 BC Penn Museum v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal v t e Kushite religion Beliefs Afterlife Christianity Creation myths Egyptian religion Eye of Ra Flooding of the Nile Maat Mythology Philosophy Prophecy of Neferti Soul Practices Burials Execration texts Funerals Mortuary temple Pilgrimage Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Triads Elephantine Naqa A Aman Amanete Amesemi Anaka Apedemak Aqedise Arensnuphis Ariten B Bes Breith D Dedun H Heka Hemen K M Makedeke Mash Mehit Menhit Merul Miket N R S Sabomakal T W Wusa Cultures AGroup Alodia BGroup Blemmyes CGroup Kerma Kingdom of alAbwab Makuria Medja Mero Napata Nobatia XGroup Locations Aniba Ballana Bigeh Deir elBahari Dodekaschoinos Dotawo Elephantine Jebel Barkal Kawa Lisht Musawwarat esSufra Philae temple complex Qasr Ibrim Qustul Semna Temple of Amun Temple of Dendur Temple of Mut Throne Hall of Dongola Tombos Sacred animals Abtu Barbary lion Cattle Falcon Hieracosphinx Medjed Nile crocodile North African elephant Ram Serpopard Sphinx Taweret Uraeus Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Christian cross Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Gold Hafir Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Languages Blemmyes language Egyptian language Meroitic language Meroitic alphabet Nubian language Category Authority control databases International FAST VIAF National Israel United States Other IdRef  www.britannica.comtopicAmon. Amon. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 11 April 2024. cite web Check url value help  www.worldhistory.orgamun. Amun. World History Encyclopedia. Joshua J. Mark. Retrieved 22 April 2024. cite web Check url value help Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAmunoldid1222662244 Categories African deities African gods Amun Creator gods Deities in the Hebrew Bible Egyptian deities Egyptian gods Fertility gods Horned gods Solar gods Theban Triad Tutelary gods Wind gods Kings of the gods Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica CS1 errors missing title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely moveprotected pages Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Copticlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles needing cleanup from October 2012 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from October 2012 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from October 2012 Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 Dutchlanguage sources nl Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Spanishlanguage sources es Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers CS1 errors URL This page was last edited on 7 May 2024 at 0611 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width