Nakhtmin - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Crown Prince 
2 References Toggle the table of contents Nakhtmin 8 languages etina Deutsch Espaol  Franais Magyar Portugus  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia For other uses see Nakhtmin disambiguation. Nakhtmin Statue head of Nakhtmin Born Akhmim Upper Egypt Title Great overseer of troops overseer of the troops of the lord of the two lands overseer oftroops the true servant who is beneficial to his lord the kings scribe the servant beloved of his lord the fanbearer on the righthand of the king the servant who causes to live the name of his lord Parents Ay  father Iuy mother Nakhtmin also Minnakht held the position of generalissimo during the reign of pharaoh Tutankhamun of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Ancient Egypt. His titles during the reign of Tutankhamun included the true servant who is beneficial to his lord the kings scribe the servant beloved of his lord the Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King and the servant who causes to live the name of his lord.1 These titles were found on five ushabtis that Nakhtmin offered as funerary presents for pharaoh Tutankhamun.2 He was the heir to the throne during the reign of the pharaoh Ay though he never became a pharaoh. It is assumed by scholars that he died towards the end of the reign of Ay when he seemingly vanished from all records and Horemheb the designated heir of Tutankhamun became pharaoh instead.13 Crown Princeedit Nakhtmin in hieroglyphs Era New Kingdom 15501069 BC The identity of Nakhtmins father is not known with certainty. Some scholars suggest that he may have been the son of pharaoh Ay his mother being known from a statue to be the Adoratrix of Min Songstress of Isis Iuy.4 Nakhtmin appears to have been the chosen successor to Ay but died before he could succeed. On a beautiful statue of Nakhtmin and his wife in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo Nakhtmin was identified as the Crown Prince jrjpt and Kings Son. znswt3 This title could be completed as Kings Son of his own body which would make him the son of Ay or it could be completed as the Kings Son of Kush. There is no record of a Viceroy of Kush by the name of Nakhtmin and it seems that the nobleman Paser I was Viceroy during that time period. This has led to the identification of Nakhtmin as Ays son or adopted son.3 Stela of Nakhtmin The statue with the inscription has suffered extensive damage. Only two pieces remain the head and shoulders of Nakhtmin and the upper part of the body and head of his wife. Both statues look as though the eyes nose and mouth have been deliberately damaged. This has been interpreted as some form of persecution even after death.5 His stelaewhich had been set up at his and Ays native city of Akhmimwere defaced.6 It is assumed that his tomb which was never discovered has been given the same treatment as that of Ay.1 Another man called Nakhtmin was married to Mutemnub the sister of Ays wife Tey. They had a son named Ay who was High Priest of Mut and Second Prophet of Amun.7 Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nakhtmin.  a b c James Roger Black The Instruction of Amenemope A critical edition and commentary prolegomenon and prologue University of WisconsinMadison 2006  Howard Carter The Tomb of TutAnkhAmen Discovered by the Late Earl of Carnarvon and Howard Carter New York Cooper Square Publishers 1963  a b c Wolfgang Helck Urkunden der 18. Dynastie Texte der Hefte Berlin AkademieVerlag 1984  Jacobus Van Dijk Horemheb and the Struggle for the Throne of Tutankhamun Archived 20160304 at the Wayback Machine BACE 7 1996 p.33.  The Egyptian Museum Cairo Official Catalogue items 195196.  Christiane DesrochesNoblecourt Tutankhamen Life and Death of a Pharaoh New York N. Y. Graphic Society 1963  Dodson Aidan Hilton Dyan 2004. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500051283. pp.144145154156 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNakhtminoldid1216915445 Categories Ancient Egyptian scribes Officials of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Heirs to the ancient Egyptian throne Ancient Egyptian overseers of the troops Heirs apparent who never acceded Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles with hCards Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 April 2024 at 1832 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width