Horemheb - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early career and accession to kingship 
2 Internal reform 
3 Disputed reign length 
4 Cartouches and symbols 
5 Succession 
6 Tomb and excavation 
7 Cultural depictions Toggle Cultural depictions subsection 
7.1 Film 
7.2 Television 
7.3 Music 
7.4 Literature 
8 Footnotes 
9 References 
10 Bibliography 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Horemheb 48 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  Catal  etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn   Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Final Pharaoh of the 
18 th dynasty of Egypt Horemheb Horemhab Haremhab Haremheb Detail of a statue of Horemheb at the Kunsthistorisches Museum Vienna Pharaoh Reign x 13191292 BC Predecessor Ay Successor Ramesses I Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Sepedkheru K
3 ntSpdrw Strong bull whose plans are effective Nebty name WerbiawetemIpetsut Wrbj
3 wtmJptswt He who is great of miracles in Ipetsut Golden Horus Heruhermaat Sekhepertawy rwrm3.tsprt
3 wj He who is satisfied with the Maat he who makes the two lands come to existence Prenomen Praenomen Djeserkheperure Setepenre srprwRstpnR Holy are the manifestations of Ra the chosen one of Ra Nomen Horemheb Meryamun rmbmrjJmn Horus is in jubilation beloved of Amun Consort Amenia Mutnedjmet Children Possibly Tanodjmy Died 1292 BC Burial KV 57 Monuments Memphite Tomb Temple of Ay and Horemheb Dynasty 
18 th Dynasty Horemheb also spelled Horemhab or Haremhab Ancient Egyptian rmb meaning Horus is in Jubilation1 was the last pharaoh of the 
18 th Dynasty of Egypt 15501292 BC.2 He ruled for at least 14 years between 1319 BC and 1292 BC.3 He had no relation to the preceding royal family other than by marriage to Mutnedjmet who is thought though disputed to have been the daughter of his predecessor Ay he is believed to have been of common birth. Before he became pharaoh Horemheb was the commanderinchief of the army under the reigns of Tutankhamun and Ay. After his accession to the throne he reformed the Egyptian state and it was during his reign that official action against the preceding Amarna rulers began which is why he is considered the ruler who restabilized his country after the troublesome and divisive Amarna Period. Horemheb demolished monuments of Akhenaten reusing the rubble in his own building projects and usurped monuments of Tutankhamun and Ay. Horemheb presumably had no surviving sons as he appointed as his successor his vizier Paramesse who would assume the throne as Ramesses I.4 Early career and accession to kingshipedit A statue of Horemheb as a scribe Horemheb is believed to have originally come from Hnesa on the west bank of the Nile near the entrance to the Fayum since his coronation text formally credits the god Horus of Hnes for establishing him on the throne.5 A statue of Horemheb as a official His parentage is unknown but he is believed to have been a commoner. According to the French Egyptologist Nicolas Grimal Horemheb does not appear to be the same person as Paatenemheb Aten Is Present In Jubilation who was the commanderinchief of Akhenatens army.6 Grimal notes that Horemhebs political career began under Tutankhamun where he is depicted at this kings side in his own tomb chapel at Memphis.7242 In the earliest known stage of his life Horemheb served as the royal spokesman for Egypts foreign affairs and personally led a diplomatic mission to visit the Nubian governors.7242 This resulted in a reciprocal visit by the Prince of Miam Aniba to Tutankhamuns court an event that is depicted in the tomb of the Viceroy Huy.7242 Horemheb quickly rose to prominence under Tutankhamun becoming commanderinchief of the army and advisor to the pharaoh. Horemhebs specific titles are spelled out in his Saqqara tomb which was built while he was still only an official Hereditary Prince Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King and Chief Commander of the Army the attendant of the King in his footsteps in the foreign countries of the south and the north the Kings Messenger in front of his army to the foreign countries to the south and the north and the Sole Companion he who is by the feet of his lord on the battlefield on that day of killing Asiatics.8 Relief from Horemhebs tomb. Receiving gold of honour collars. Relief from KV62 showing court officials dragging Tutankhamuns coffin. Horemheb is possibly the person closest to Tutankhamuns mummy. When Tutankhamun died while a teenager Horemheb had already been officially designated as the rpat or irypat basically the hereditary or crown prince and idnw deputy of the king in the entire land by the child pharaoh these titles are found inscribed in Horemhebs then private Memphite tomb at Saqqara which dates to the reign of Tutankhamun since the child kings ... cartouches although later usurped by Horemheb as king have been found on a block which adjoins the famous gold of honour scene a large portion of which is in Leiden. The royal couple depicted in this scene and in the adjacent scene 76 which shows Horemheb acting as an intermediary between the king and a group of subject foreign rulers are therefore to be identified as Tutankhamun and Ankhesenamun. This makes it very unlikely from the start that any titles of honours claimed by Horemheb in the inscriptions in the tomb are fictitious.91718  PDF pp. 910 The title irypat Hereditary Prince was used very frequently in Horemhebs Saqqara tomb but not combined with any other words. When used alone the Egyptologist Alan Gardiner has shown that the irypat title contains features of ancient descent and lawful inheritance which is identical to the designation for a Crown Prince.10 This means that Horemheb was the openly recognised heir to Tutankhamuns throne and not Ay Tutankhamuns immediate successor. The Dutch Egyptologist Jacobus Van Dijk observes There is no indication that Horemheb always intended to succeed Tutankhamun obviously not even he could possibly have predicted that the king would die without issue. It must always have been understood that his appointment as crown prince would end as soon as the king produced an heir and that he would succeed Tutankhamun only in the eventuality of an early and  or childless death of the sovereign. There can be no doubt that nobody outranked the Hereditary Prince of Upper and Lower Egypt and Deputy of the King in the Entire Land except the king himself and that Horemheb was entitled to the throne once the king had unexpectedly died without issue. This means that it is Ays not Horemhebs accession that calls for an explanation. Why was Ay able to ascend the throne upon the death of Tutankhamun despite the fact that Horemheb had at that time already been the official heir to the throne for almost ten years94849  PDF pp. 4041 Nozomu Kawai however rejects Van Dijks interpretation that Tutankhamun had nominated Horemheb as his successor and reasons that If Horemheb was appointed as the Crown Prince at the beginning of Tutankhamuns reign this means that the end of the royal bloodline was already arranged. If this arrangement was made people like Ay who were closely connected to the royal family would not have accepted it. Although Horemheb had already boasted of his strength in his preroyal career the statements must have been exaggerated especially in his ie. Horemhebs coronation inscription which was undoubtedly intended to propagate his legitimacy as the king. Notably he called himself the Eldest son of Horus a title that regularly refers to the Crown Prince. For van Dijk this means that he was already the designated successor of Tutankhamun. Janssen however states that the Eldest Son was honorific and did not indicate the surviving heir to the throne. I would suggest that this expression seems to have been a propaganda title meaning the Eldest son of Horus of Hutnesu Horemhebs birthplace.11 Submission of West Asiatic foreigners on the tomb of Horemheb circa 1300 BC While no objects belonging to Horemheb were found in Tutankhamuns tomb and items among the tomb goods donated by other highranking officials such as Maya and General Nakhtmin were identified by Egyptologists. Nozomu Kawai maintains that Horemheb was an active participant at Tutankhamuns burial. Kawai writes Many scholars have suggested that Horemheb did not leave any evidence in Tutankhamuns tomb while prominent persons such as Ay Maya and Nakhtmin left either funerary items or iconographic images. However the wall scene of the tomb shows Tutankhmuns coffin dragged by a group of officials in a mourning procession that contains a man who seems to be Horemheb Fig. 3. The lone figure standing behind the two viziers must be Horemheb which also makes him situated closest to the mummy of Tutankhamun. This means that Horemheb acted as the leader of the funerary procession.12 Kawai maintains rather that both Ay and Horemheb held important high administrative roles during Tutankhamuns reign with Ay participating in royal cultic activities whereas Horemheb acted as a royal military leader and legislator.13 But after Ay became the pharaoh his relationship with Horemheb changed. The aged Vizier Ay initially succeeded Tutankhamun possibly because he made an arrangement with Horemheb. However during his brief 4 year reign Ay proceeded to nominate Nakhtmin as his successorwho Ay named as Kings Son znswt.14 rather than Horemheb. The title of Kings Son znswt was clearly meant to designate the kings successor and Ay therefore sidelined Horemhebs claim to the throne with this action. Ankhesenamun Tutankhamuns queen chose not to marry Horemheb a commoner and this also solidified Ays kingship.950515660  PDF pp. 42434852 Horemheb himself likely did not plot revenge on Ay probably because Ay was old and would likely die soon and merely kept his military power notes Kawai.15 After Ays reign which lasted for a little over four years Horemheb managed to seize power presumably thanks to his position as commander of the army and to assume what he must have perceived to be his reward for having ably served Egypt under Tutankhamun and Ay Horemheb resented Ays attempt to sideline him from the royal succession and acted to quickly removed Nakhtmins rival claim to the throne and arranged to have Ays WV 23 tomb desecrated by smashing the latters sarcophagus systematically chiselling Ays name and figure out of the tomb walls and probably destroying Ays mummy.16 Horemheb also usurped and enlarged Ays mortuary temple at Medinet Habu for his own use and erased Ays titulary on the back of a 17 foot colossal statue by carving his own titulary in its place. Horemhebs actions against Ay were a damnatio memoriae to remove the memory of his rival from the historical records. However he spared Tutankhamuns tomb from vandalism presumably because it was Tutankhamun who had overseen his rise to prominence in the first place and because he had no antagonism with Tutankhamun. Internal reformedit Horemheb with Amun at the Museo Egizio of Turin Italy. Upon his accession Horemheb initiated a comprehensive series of internal transformations to the power structures of Akhenatens reign due to the preceding transfer of state power from Amuns priests to Akhenatens government officials. Horemheb appointed judges and regional tribunes ... reintroduced local religious authorities and divided legal power between Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt between the Viziers of Thebes and Memphis respectively.7243 These deeds are recorded in a stela which the king erected at the foot of his Tenth Pylon at Karnak. Occasionally called The Great Edict of Horemheb17 it is a copy of the actual text of the kings decree to reestablish order to the Two Lands and curb abuses of state authority. The stelas creation and prominent location emphasizes the great importance which Horemheb placed upon domestic reform. Horemheb also reformed the Army and reorganized the Deir elMedina workforce in his 
7 th year while Horemhebs official Maya renewed the tomb of Thutmose IV which had been disturbed by tomb robbers in his 
8 th year. While the king restored the priesthood of Amun he prevented the Amun priests from forming a stranglehold on power by deliberately reappointing priests who mostly came from the Egyptian army since he could rely on their personal loyalty.18 Horemheb was a prolific builder who erected numerous temples and buildings throughout Egypt during his reign. He constructed the Second Ninth and Tenth Pylons of the Great Hypostyle Hall in the Temple at Karnak using recycled talatat blocks from Akhenatens own monuments here as building material for the first two Pylons.7243 303 Horemheb continued Tutankhamuns restoration of the old order that had been established before the Amarna period. He reintroduced the ancient cults particularly Amun thus proving himself a true pharaoh who established Maat world order.2 Because of his unexpected rise to the throne Horemheb had two tombs constructed for himself the first  when he was a mere nobleman  at Saqqara near Memphis and the other in the Valley of the Kings in Thebes in tomb KV 57 as king. His chief wife was Queen Mutnedjmet who may have been Nefertitis younger sister. They had no surviving children although examinations of Mutnedjmets mummy show that she gave birth several times and she was buried with an infant suggesting that she and her last child died in childbirth. Horemheb is not known to have any children by his first wife Amenia who died before Horemheb assumed power.19 Disputed reign lengthedit The sarcophagus of Horemheb and wall reliefs in his KV57 tomb. Scholars have long disputed whether Horemheb reigned for 1415 years or 27 years. Manethos Epitome assigns a reign length of 4 years and 1 month to a king called Harmais. Scholars previously assigned this reignlength to Ay however evidence from excavations in Horemhebs tomb KV57 indicates that this figure should be raised by a decade to 14 years and 1 month and attributed to Horemheb. These excavations conducted under G.T. Martin and Jacobus Van Dijk in 2006 and 2007 uncovered a large hoard of 168 inscribed wine sherds and dockets below densely compacted debris in a great shaft called Well Room E in KV 57. Of the 46 wine sherds with year dates 14 have nothing but the year date formula 5 dockets have year 
10 X 3 dockets have year 
11 X 2 dockets preserve year 
12 X and 1 docket has a year 
13 X inscription. 22 dockets mention year 13 and 8 have year 14 of Horemheb but none mention a higher date for Horemheb.20 The full texts of the docket readings are identical and read as Year 13. Wine of the estate of HoremhebmerenAmun L.P.H. in the domain of Amun. Western River. Chief vintner Ty.20 Meanwhile the year 14 dockets in contrast are all individual and mention specific wines such as very good quality wine or in one case sweet wine and the location of the vineyard is identified.20 A general example is this text on a year 14 wine docket Year 14 Good quality wine of the estate of HoremhebmerenAmun L.P.H. in the domain of Amun from the wineyard of Atfih Chief vintner Haty.20 Other year 14 dockets mention Memphis  the Western River while their vintners are named as Nakhtamun Mersegermen Ramose and others.20196 Canopic Jar head of Horemheb found inside his KV57 tomb. The quality and consistency of the KV 57 dockets strongly suggest that Horemheb was buried in his year 14 or at least before the wine harvest of his year 15 at the very latest.20196 This evidence is consistent with the Horemheb dockets from Deir elMedina which mention years 2 3 4 6 13 and 14 but again no higher dates ... while a docket ascribed to Horemheb from Sedment has year 
12.2 4 The lack of dated inscriptions for Horemheb after his year 14 also explains the unfinished state of Horemhebs royal KV 57 tomb  a fact not taken into account by any of those scholars defending a long reign of 26 or 27 years. The tomb is comparable to that of Seti I in size and decoration technique and Seti Is tomb is far more extensively decorated than that of Horemheb and yet Seti managed to virtually complete his tomb within a decade whereas Horemheb did not even succeed in fully decorating the three rooms he planned to have done leaving even the burial hall unfinished. Even if we assume that Horemheb did not begin the work on his royal tomb until his year 7 or 8 ... it remains a mystery how the work could not have been completed had he lived on for another 20 or more years.20198 Therefore some scholars now accept a reign of 14 years and 1 month. In 1995 prior to the 2006 and 2007 discovery of wine dockets from Horemhebs tomb Van Dijk in a 1995 GM article already argued based on the career of Mayas chief sculptor Userhat Hatiay that Horemheb far shorter reign of between 15 and 17 years.25 Colossal Statue of Horemheb in the Oriental Institute Chicago. Traces of previous cartouches on the back of the statue confirm that this is an usurped statue of Tutankhamun. The argument for a 27 year reign derived from two texts. The first is an anonymous hieratic graffito written on the shoulder of a now fragmented statue from his mortuary temple in Karnak which mentions the appearance of the king himself or a royal cult statue representing the king for a religious feast. The ink graffito reads Year 27 first Month of Shemu day 9 the day on which Horemheb who loves Amun and hates his enemies entered the temple for the event. It was disputed whether this was a contemporary text or a reference to a festival commemorating Horemhebs accession written in the reign of a later king.26 The second text is the Inscription of Mes from the reign of Ramesses II which records that a court case decision was rendered in favour of a rival branch of Mes family in year 59 of Horemheb.27 It was argued that the year 59 Horemheb date included the reigns of all the rulers between Amenhotep III and Horemheb. Subtracting the nearly 17 year reign of Akhenaten the 2 year reign of Neferneferuaten the 9 year reign of Tutankhamun and the reign of Ay suggested a reign of 2627 years for Horemheb. However the length of Ays reign is not actually known and Wolfgang Helck argues that there was no standard Egyptian practice of including the years of all the rulers between Amenhotep III and Horemheb.
28 IV216220198199 The most recent interpretation of the archeological evidence today favours Van Dijks arguments that Horemheb either died in his Regnal Year 14 or that he started a Regnal Year 15 but died before the wine harvest of his final year was processed. As David Aston notes in a 2012 gypten und Levante paper this theory means that R. Haris 1964 emendation of the partly damaged Horemheb text London UC 14291 to Year 15 is possible but to year 25 is unlikely.29 Cartouches and symbolsedit A wall relief of Horemheb making an offering to Amun on the 
10 th pylon at Karnak. Horemheb turned to several gods because of his various names his throne name means Sacred are the manifestations of Ra and his name birth name is accompanied by the epithet beloved of Amun.2 It is not yet proven whether Horemheb had really exorcised the Amarna period the great iconoclasm began only after his death. To be able to build for himself however he did have the PerAten temple at Karnak pulled down and constructed a pylon of the Amun temple with its stone blocks. The Aten reliefs from the Amarna period on those blocks therefore remained fairly well preserved.2 Horemheb appear in reliefs wearing the typical pleated linen robe of a high ranking official depicted sitting in front of an offering table as a pharaoh holding the pole and the sekhem sceptre of a high official the uraeus was added after his ascension to the throne with a benubird regarded as the protector of the dead as the soul of Ra sitting on a stand and finally a man worshipping a benubird.2 The coronation inscription on the back of a double statue showing Horemheb with his wife tells that he is under the protection of Horus and appointed by Amun. It reports further that he had the damaged statues of the old gods remade and had the temples that had fallen into disrepair rebuilt. For the Amun cult he provided them with servants to the god and lector priests from the military elite. In a decree on a stele in Karnak he again officially confirms the restoration of the old order.2 Successionedit See also Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree KV 57 the Tomb of Horemheb The forecourt of Horemhebs Memphite tomb at Saqqara. Under Horemheb Egypts power and confidence were once again restored after the internal chaos of the Amarna Period this situation set the stage for the rise of the 
19 th Dynasty under such ambitious Pharaohs as Seti I and Ramesses II. Geoffrey Thorndike Martin in his excavation work at Saqqara states that the burial of Horemhebs second wife Mutnedjmet as well as that of an unborn or newborn baby was located at the bottom of a shaft to the rooms of Horemhebs Saqqara tomb. He notes that a fragment of an alabaster vase inscribed with a funerary text for the chantress of Amun and Kings Wife Mutnodjmet as well as pieces of a statuette of her was found here ... The funerary vase in particular since it bears her name and titles would hardly have been used for the burial of some other person.30 Eugene Strouhal studied a skull and other bones and concluded that they belonged to the queen. According to his analysis the queen lost her teeth at an early age. She died at around age forty possibly in childbirth as the remains of a fetus were found with her body.31 Since Horemheb had no surviving son he appointed his Vizier Paramesse to succeed him upon his death both to reward Paramesses loyalty and because the latter had both a son and grandson to secure Egypts royal succession. Paramesse employed the name Ramesses I upon assuming power and founded the 
19 th Dynasty of the New Kingdom. Horemhebs second successor Seti I was married to a possible daughter of Horemhebs Tanodjmy.32 While the decoration of Horemhebs KV 57 tomb was still unfinished upon his death this situation is not unprecedented Amenhotep IIs tomb was also not fully completed when he was buried even though this ruler enjoyed a reign of 26 years. Tomb and excavationedit The Sarcophagus of Ramesses II is thought to have been originally commissioned for Horemheb before being reused for the reburial of Ramesses II during the Wehem Mesut. Directly after his accession to the throne Horemheb had a tomb built in the Valley of Kings abandoning his earlier one near Memphis. For the first time scenes from the Book of Gates were used in the burial chamber as a decoration for a royal tomb.2 Horemhebs tomb was excavated in the early 
20 th century by Theodore M. Davis. Davis discovered it in a poor state due to robbers and earth movements over the centuries. The lid of the sarcophagus had been taken off and smashed by robbers.33 Cultural depictionsedit Filmedit Horemheb was portrayed by Victor Mature in The Egyptian 1954 the film adaptation of Mika Waltaris bestselling novel. Horemheb was portrayed by Salah Zulfikar in Nefertiti and Akhenaton 1973 Mexican short film of Ral Araiza. Televisionedit Horemheb was portrayed by British actor Nonso Anozie in the 2015 miniTV series Tut which aired on Spike in the US and on Channel 5 in the UK. Musicedit Horemhab is a character in the opera Akhnaten by Philip Glass he is sung by a baritone. Literatureedit Horemheb is a major character in Nick Drakes trilogy of mystery novels The Book of the Dead Tutankhamun and The Book of Chaos.citation needed Horemheb is a major character in P. C. Dohertys trilogy of historical novels An Evil Spirit Out of the West The Season of the Hyaena and The Year of the Cobra. Horemheb is a major character in Pauline Gedges historical novel The Twelfth Transforming. Horemheb is a major character in Katie Hamsteads trilogy Kiya Hope of the Pharaoh Kiya Mother of the King and Kiya Rise of a New Dynasty. Horemheb is a key character in Kyah Merritts historical trilogy A Legacy of Light trilogy. Horemheb is a minor character in the novels Nefertiti and The Heretic Queen by Michelle Moran. Horemheb appears as a major character in Lynda Suzanne Robinsons Lord Meren series of Egyptian mysteries. Horemheb is a minor character in Chie Shinoharas Japanese graphic novel Red River centered around ancient Anatolia and ancient Egypt. Horemheb is a major character in Mika Waltaris 1945 historical fiction international bestseller The Egyptian34 Horemheb is a major character originally named Kaires in two novels by Allen Drury.3536 This version is the illegitimate son of Ay and has an affair with Sitamun for many years until he drops the relationship in favor of his kingly ambitions. Initially presented as an easygoing and goodnatured courtier Horemheb becomes increasingly hardened ambitious and cynical after being forced to carry out morally questionable tasks such as killing Anen and raiding the Theban temple of Amun both on behalf of Akhenaten. He also plays a major role in the deaths of both Akhenaten and Tutankhamun. While Ay outmaneuvers him for the throne after Tuts death Horemheb had planned to force Ankhesenamun to marry him but she announced a marriage to Ay instead Horemheb easily forces his ailing father to accept him as heir a few years later. Horemheb is a key character in Judith Tarrs historical novel Pillar of Fire. Footnotesedit  Hnes is the citys ancient Egyptian name it was later called Herakleopolis Magna by classical authors its modern name is Ihnasya elMedina. Referencesedit  Ranke Hermann 1935. Die gyptischen Personennamen Bd. 1 Verzeichnis der Namen PDF. Glckstadt J.J. Augustin. p. 248. Archived PDF from the original on 17 March 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2020.  a b c d e f g Strudwick Helen 2006. The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. New York Sterling Publishing Co. Inc. pp. 8283. ISBN 9781435146549.  Hornung Erik Krauss Rolf Warburton David eds. 2006. Chronology table. Ancient Egyptian Chronology. Handbook of Oriental Studies. Brill. p. 493. ISBN 9789004113855.  Ramesses. carlos.emory.edu. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved 1 August 2015.  Gardiner Alan 1953. The coronation of king Haremhab. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 39 14 16 21.  The Full Collection. virtualegyptianmuseum.org. Virtual Egyptian Museum. Archived from the original on 20060105. Retrieved 20060817.  a b c d e Grimal Nicolas 1992. A History of Ancient Egypt. Blackwell.  Wilson John A. 1955. Texts from the tomb of general Horemheb. Ancient Near Eastern Texts ANET relating to the Old Testament 
2 nd ed.. Princeton University Press. pp. 250251.  a b c van Dijk Jacobus 1993. Chapter One Horemheb Prince Regent of Tutankhamun PDF. The New Kingdom Necropolis of Memphis dissertation. Historical and Iconographical Studies. Groningen NL University of Groningen. Archived PDF from the original on 20110313. Retrieved 20120407.  Gardiner Alan 1953. The coronation of King Haremhab. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 39 1331.  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 p.270  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 p.271  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 pp.27071  Wolfgang Helck Urkunden der 18. Dynastie Texte der Hefte 2021 Berlin AkademieVerlag 1984 pp. 19081910  Nozomu Kawai Ay vs Horemheb The Political Situation in the Late 
18 th Dynasty Revisited JEH 3 2010 pp.288  Ays tomb WV 23 in the western annex of the Valley of the Kings see Porter  Moss 1960. Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyph Texts Reliefs and Parts. Vol. 1. Oxford UK Clarendon Press. Part 2 pp. 550551.  The Great Edict of Horemheb. reshafim.org.il. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. Retrieved 9 February 2008.  Clayton Peter 1994. Chronicle of the Pharaohs. Thames  Hudson Ltd. p. 137. ISBN 9780500050743.  Tyldesley Joyce 2006. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p. 140. ISBN 9780500051450.  a b c d e f g h i van Dijk Jacobus 2008. New evidence on the length of the reign of Horemheb PDF. Journal of the American Research Centre in Egypt JARCE. 44 195.  Nagel G. 1938. La ceramique du Nouvel Empire a Deir Medineh. Vol. 15. Cairo. p. 6.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Koenig Y. 19791980. Catalogues des etiquettes de jarres hieratiques de Deir el Medineh. Cairo.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Martin G.T. 1988. Three Objects of New Kingdom Date from the Memphite Area and Sidmant 3. An inscribed amphora from Sidmant. In Baines J. et al. eds.. Pyramid Studies and Other Essays presented to I.E.S. Edwards. London.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  van Dijk 200820197198 cites Nagel 1938 for year 221 Koenig 1979198022 for year 3 no. 6299 year 4 no. 6295 year 6 no. 6403 year 13 no. 6294 and year 14 no. 6345 Martin 1988
23 pl. 21 pp. 118120  Jacobus Van Dijk Mayas Chief Sculptor UserhatHatiay. With a Note on the Length of the Reign of Horemheb PDF GM 148 1995 pp. 2934  Krauss Rolf 1994. Nur ein kurioser Irrtum oder ein Beleg fr die Jahr 26 und 27 von Haremhab. Discussions in Egyptology. 30 7385.  Inscription of Mes. reshafim.org.il. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 10 April 2009.  Helck Wolfgang 1984. Urkunden der 18 Dynastie Texte der Hefte 2021. Berlin AkademieVerlag. pp. 19081910.  David Aston Radiocarbon Wine Jars and New Kingdom Chronology PDF gypten und LevanteEgypt and the Levant 22 2012 p.296  Martin G. 1991. The Hidden Tombs of Memphis. Thames  Hudson. pp. 9798.  Hawass Zahi A. Saleem Sahar 2016. Scanning the Pharaohs CT Imaging of the New Kingdom Royal Mummies. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9789774166730. Archived from the original on 20221003. Retrieved 20201112  via Google Books.  Mladjov 2014.  Haremhab Pharaoh and Conqueror New Investigations in His Royal Tomb in the Valley of the Kings video. The Met. Archived from the original on 20170405. Retrieved 20170223.  Waltari Mika November 1945. Sinuhe Egyptilinen Sinuhe The Egyptian in Finnish. Helsinki WSOY. note that many later translations including the 1949 English edition were heavily abridged and Bowdlerized  Drury Allen July 1976. A God Against the Gods. Doubleday. ISBN 0385001991. reprinted by WordFire Press in 2015  Drury Allen February 1977. Return to Thebes. Doubleday. ISBN 0385041993. reprinted by WordFire Press in 2015 Bibliographyedit Cyril Aldred Two monuments of the reign of oremab in Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 54 1968 100106. Jrgen von Beckerath Nochmals die Regierungsdauer des aremab in SAK 6 1978 4349. Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des pharaonischen gypten MS 46 Philip Von Zabern Mainz 1997. Alan Gardiner The Inscription of Mes A Contribution to Egyptian Juridical Procedure Untersuchungen IV Pt. 3 Leipzig 1905.online Nicholas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Blackwell Books 1992. K.A. Kitchen The Basis of Egyptian Chronology in relation to the Bronze Age Volume 1 pp. 3755 in High Middle or Low Acts of an International Colloquium on absolute chronology held at the University of Gothenburg 2022 August 1987. ed Paul Astrm. Ian Mladjov Rediscovering Queen Tanodjmy A probable link between Dynasties 18 and 19 Gttinger Miszellen 242 2014 5770. online External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Horemheb. Horemheb. Archaeowiki.org. Symposium on Horemhab video. Metropolitan Museum of Art  via YouTube. Haremhab Pharaoh and Conqueror New Investigations in His Royal Tomb in the Valley of the Kings lecture video  via YouTube. A Symposium on Haremhab General and King of Egypt video  via YouTube. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National France BnF data Germany Israel Belgium United States Sweden Netherlands Artists KulturNav People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHoremheboldid1222154724 Categories Horemheb 
14 thcentury BC births 1292 BC deaths 
14 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
13 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Tutankhamun Ay Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King Regents of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint location missing publisher CS1 Finnishlanguage sources fi Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with KULTURNAV identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 4 May 2024 at 0658 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width