Hittites - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Archeological discovery Toggle Archeological discovery subsection 
2.1 Biblical background 
2.2 Initial discoveries 
2.3 Writings 
2.4 Museums 
3 Geography 
4 History Toggle History subsection 
4.1 Origins 
4.2 Early period 
4.3 Old Kingdom 
4.4 Middle Kingdom 
4.5 New Kingdom 

4.5.1 Battle of Kadesh 

4.5.2 Downfall and demise of the kingdom 
4.6 PostHittite period 
5 Government Toggle Government subsection 
5.1 Religion of the early Hittites 
5.2 The Pankus 
6 Language 
7 Art 
8 Religion and mythology 
9 Law Toggle Law subsection 
9.1 Use of laws 
9.2 Law reform 
9.3 Examples of laws 
10 Biblical Hittites 
11 In ancient Greek mythology 
12 See also 
13 References 
14 Sources 
15 Further reading 
16 External links Toggle the table of contents Hittites 89 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Asturianu Azrbaycanca      Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal Cebuano etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Froyskt Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa  Kiswahili Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Lingua Franca Nova Magyar  Malagasy    Bahasa Melayu   Mngdngng Nederlands   Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Ozbekcha    Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Simple English Slovenina Slovenina Soomaaliga    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke    Uyghurche Ting Vit Winaray   Zazaki emaitka  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikivoyage From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Hittite empire Ancient Anatolian people of Kussara This article is about the Anatolian culture. For the group described in the Bible see Biblical Hittites. For the preHittite inhabitants of Anatolia see Hattians. Hittite Empire aattua   c.1650 BCc.1180 BC Royal seal of the last king uppiluliuma II Map of the Hittite Empire at its greatest extent with Hittite rule c.1300 BC Capital Hattusa Taruntaa under the reign of Muwatalli II Common languages Hittite Hattic Luwian Akkadian Religion Hittite religion Government Absolute monarchy Old Kingdom Constitutional monarchy Middle and New Kingdom1 King  c.1650 BC Labarna I first  c.12101180 BC uppiluliuma II last Historical era Bronze Age  Established c.1650 BC  Disestablished c.1180 BC Preceded by Succeeded by Hattians Kussara Kanesh Purushanda Pala Anatolia Third Eblaite Kingdom Kizzuwatna Assuwa Arzawa Wilusa Alashiya Kaskians Mushki Urumeans SyroHittite states Tabal Kummuh Carchemish Phrygia Lydia Today part of Turkey Syria Lebanon Cyprus The Great Temple in the inner city of Hattusa The Hittites htats were an Anatolian IndoEuropean people who formed one of the first major civilizations of Bronze Age West Asia. Possibly originating from beyond the Black Sea2 they settled in modern day Turkey in the early 
2 nd millennium BC. The Hittites formed a series of polities in northcentral Anatolia including the kingdom of Kussara before 1750 BC the Kanesh or Nesha kingdom c.17501650 BC and an empire centered on Hattusa around 1650 BC.34 Known in modern times as the Hittite Empire it reached its height during the mid
14 th century BC under uppiluliuma I when it encompassed most of Anatolia and parts of the northern Levant and Upper Mesopotamia. Between the 
15 th and 
13 th centuries BC the Hittites were one of the dominant powers of the Near East coming into conflict with the New Kingdom of Egypt the Middle Assyrian Empire and the empire of Mitanni. By the 
12 th century BC much of the Hittite Empire was annexed by the Middle Assyrian Empire with the remainder sacked by Phrygian newcomers to the region. From the late 
12 th century BC during the Late Bronze Age collapse the Hittites splintered into several small independent states some of which survived until the eighth century BC before succumbing to the NeoAssyrian Empire lacking a unifying continuity their descendants scattered and ultimately merged into the modern populations of the Levant and Mesopotamia.5 The Hittite languagereferred to by its speakers as neili the language of Nesawas a distinct member of the Anatolian branch of the IndoEuropean language family along with the closely related Luwian language it is the oldest historically attested IndoEuropean language.6 The history of the Hittite civilization is known mostly from cuneiform texts found in their former territories and from diplomatic and commercial correspondence found in the various archives of Assyria Babylonia Egypt and the broader Middle East the decipherment of these texts was a key event in the history of IndoEuropean studies. Cultural links to prehistoric Scandinavia have also been suggested.78 Scholars once attributed the development of ironsmelting to the Hittites who were believed to have monopolized ironworking during the Bronze Age. This theory has been increasingly contested in the 
21 st century9 with the Late Bronze Age collapse and subsequent Iron Age seeing the slow comparatively continuous spread of ironworking technology across the region. While there are some iron objects from Bronze Age Anatolia the number is comparable to that of iron objects found in Egypt and in other places from the same period and only a small number of these objects are weapons.10 Xray fluorescence spectrometry suggests that most or all irons from the Bronze Age are derived from meteorites.11 The Hittite military also made successful use of chariots.12 Modern interest in the Hittites increased with the founding of the Republic of Turkey in 1923. The Hittites attracted the attention of Turkish archaeologists such as Halet ambel and Tahsin zg. During this period the new field of Hittitology also influenced the naming of Turkish institutions such as the stateowned Etibank Hittite bank13 and the foundation of the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations in Ankara built 200 kilometers 124 miles west of the Hittite capital of Hattusa which houses the worlds most comprehensive exhibition of Hittite art and artifacts. Etymologyedit The Hittites called their kingdom Hattusa Hatti in Akkadian a name received from the Hattians an earlier people who had inhabited and ruled the central Anatolian region until the beginning of the second millennium BC and who spoke an unrelated language known as Hattic.14 The modern conventional name Hittites is due to the initial identification of the people of Hattusa with the Biblical Hittites by 
19 thcentury archaeologists. The Hittites would have called themselves something closer to Neshites or Neshians after the city of Nesha which flourished for some two hundred years until a king named Labarna renamed himself Hattusili I meaning the man of Hattusa sometime around 1650 BC and established his capital city at Hattusa.15 Archeological discoveryedit An Alaca Hyk bronze standard from a third millennium BC preHittite tomb Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ankara Ivory Hittite Sphinx 
18 th century BC Biblical backgroundedit See also Biblical Hittites Before the archeological discoveries that revealed the Hittite civilization the only source of information about the Hittites had been the Hebrew Bible. Francis William Newman expressed the critical view common in the early 
19 th century that no Hittite king could have compared in power to the King of Judah....16 As the discoveries in the second half of the 
19 th century revealed the scale of the Hittite kingdom Archibald Sayce asserted that rather than being compared to Judah the Anatolian civilization was worthy of comparison to the divided Kingdom of Egypt and was infinitely more powerful than that of Judah.17 Sayce and other scholars also noted that Judah and the Hittites were never enemies in the Hebrew texts in the Book of Kings they supplied the Israelites with cedar chariots and horses and in the Book of Genesis were friends and allies to Abraham. Uriah the Hittite was a captain in King Davids army and counted as one of his mighty men in 1 Chronicles 11. Initial discoveriesedit French scholar Charles Texier found the first Hittite ruins in 1834 but did not identify them as such.1318 The first archaeological evidence for the Hittites appeared in tablets found at the karum of Kanesh now called Kltepe containing records of trade between Assyrian merchants and a certain land of Hatti. Some names in the tablets were neither Hattic nor Assyrian but clearly IndoEuropean.19 The script on a monument at Boazkale by a People of Hattusas discovered by William Wright in 1884 was found to match peculiar hieroglyphic scripts from Aleppo and Hama in Northern Syria. In 1887 excavations at Amarna in Egypt uncovered the diplomatic correspondence of Pharaoh Amenhotep III and his son Akhenaten. Two of the letters from a kingdom of Khetaapparently located in the same general region as the Mesopotamian references to land of Hattiwere written in standard Akkadian cuneiform but in an unknown language although scholars could interpret its sounds no one could understand it. Shortly after this Sayce proposed that Hatti or Khatti in Anatolia was identical with the kingdom of Kheta mentioned in these Egyptian texts as well as with the biblical Hittites. Others such as Max Mller agreed that Khatti was probably Kheta but proposed connecting it with Biblical Kittim rather than with the Biblical Hittites. Sayces identification came to be widely accepted over the course of the early 
20 th century and the name Hittite has become attached to the civilization uncovered at Boazky.20 Hattusa ramp During sporadic excavations at Boazky Hattusa that began in 1906 the archaeologist Hugo Winckler found a royal archive with 10000 tablets inscribed in cuneiform Akkadian and the same unknown language as the Egyptian letters from Khetathus confirming the identity of the two names. He also proved that the ruins at Boazky were the remains of the capital of an empire that at one point controlled northern Syria.21 Drinking cup in the shape of a fist 14001380 BC Museum of Fine Arts Boston Under the direction of the German Archaeological Institute excavations at Hattusa have been under way since 1907 with interruptions during the world wars. Kltepe was successfully excavated by Professor Tahsin zg from 1948 until his death in 2005. Smaller scale excavations have also been carried out in the immediate surroundings of Hattusa including the rock sanctuary of Yazlkaya which contains numerous rock reliefs portraying the Hittite rulers and the gods of the Hittite pantheon.22 Writingsedit The Hittites used a variation of cuneiform called Hittite cuneiform. Archaeological expeditions to Hattusa have discovered entire sets of royal archives on cuneiform tablets written either in Akkadian the diplomatic language of the time or in the various dialects of the Hittite confederation.23 Museumsedit The Museum of Anatolian Civilizations in Ankara Turkey houses the richest collection of Hittite and Anatolian artifacts.citation needed Geographyedit Ceremonial vessels in the shape of sacred bulls called Hurri Day and Seri Night found in Hattusa Hittite Old Kingdom 
16 th century BC Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ankara Main article Hittite sites The Hittite kingdom was centered on the lands surrounding Hattusa and Nea Kltepe known as the land Hatti URUHaatti. After Hattusa was made the capital the area encompassed by the bend of the Kzlrmak River Hittite Marassantiya Greek Halys was considered the core of the Empire and some Hittite laws make a distinction between this side of the river and that side of the river. For example the bounty for an escaped slave who had fled beyond the river is higher than for a slave caught on the near side.citation needed To the west and south of the core territory lay the region known as Luwiya in the earliest Hittite texts. This terminology was replaced by the names Arzawa and Kizzuwatna with the rise of those kingdoms.24 Nevertheless the Hittites continued to refer to the language that originated in these areas as Luwian. Prior to the rise of Kizzuwatna the heart of that territory in Cilicia was first referred to by the Hittites as Adaniya.25 Upon its revolt from the Hittites during the reign of Ammuna26 it assumed the name of Kizzuwatna and successfully expanded northward to encompass the lower AntiTaurus Mountains as well. To the north lived the mountain people called the Kaskians. To the southeast of the Hittites lay the Hurrian empire of Mitanni. At its peak during the reign of Murili II the Hittite empire stretched from Arzawa in the west to Mitanni in the east and included many of the Kaskian territories north as far as HayasaAzzi in the far northeast as well as south into Canaan near the southern border of Lebanon.citation needed Historyedit Scheme of IndoEuropean language dispersals from c. 4000 to 1000 BC according to the widely held Kurgan hypothesis.  Center Steppe cultures 1 black Anatolian languages archaic PIE 2 black Afanasievo culture early PIE 3 black Yamnaya culture expansion PonticCaspian steppe Danube Valley late PIE 
4 A black Western Corded Ware 
4 BC blue  dark blue Bell Beaker adopted by IndoEuropean speakers 
5 AB red Eastern Corded ware 
5 C red Sintashta protoIndoIranian 6 magenta Andronovo 
7 A purple IndoAryans Mittani 
7 B purple IndoAryans India NN dark yellow protoBaltoSlavic 8 grey Greek 9 yellowIranians  not drawn Armenian expanding from western steppe Originsedit The ancestors of the Hittites came into Anatolia between 4400 and 4100 BC when the Anatolian language family split from ProtoIndoEuropean.27 Recent genetic and archaeological research has indicated that ProtoAnatolian speakers arrived in this region sometime between 5000 and 3000 BC.28 The ProtoHittite language developed around 2100 BC29 and the Hittite language itself is believed to have been in use in Central Anatolia between the 
20 th and 
12 th centuries BC.30 The Hittites are first associated with the kingdom of Kussara sometime prior to 1750 BC.31 Hittites in Anatolia during the Bronze Age coexisted with Hattians and Hurrians either by means of conquest or by gradual assimilation.3233 In archaeological terms relationships of the Hittites to the Ezero culture of the Balkans and Maykop culture of the Caucasus had previously been considered within the migration framework.34 Analyses by David W. Anthony in 2007 concluded that steppe herders who were archaic IndoEuropean speakers spread into the lower Danube valley about 42004000 BC either causing or taking advantage of the collapse of Old Europe.35 He thought their languages probably included archaic ProtoIndoEuropean dialects of the kind partly preserved later in Anatolian36 and that their descendants later moved into Anatolia at an unknown time but maybe as early as 3000 BC.37 J. P. Mallory also thought it was likely that the Anatolians reached the Near East from the north either via the Balkans or the Caucasus in the 
3 rd millennium BC.38 According to Parpola the appearance of IndoEuropean speakers from Europe into Anatolia and the appearance of Hittite was related to later migrations of ProtoIndoEuropean speakers from the Yamnaya culture into the Danube Valley at c. 2800 BC3940 which was in line with the customary assumption that the Anatolian IndoEuropean language was introduced into Anatolia sometime in the third millennium BC.41 However Petra Goedegebuure has shown that the Hittite language has borrowed many words related to agriculture from cultures on their eastern borders which is evidence of having taken a route across the Caucasus.42 The dominant indigenous inhabitants in central Anatolia were Hurrians and Hattians who spoke nonIndoEuropean languages. Some have argued that Hattic was a Northwest Caucasian language but its affiliation remains uncertain whilst the Hurrian language was a nearisolate i.e. it was one of only two or three languages in the HurroUrartian family. There were also Assyrian colonies in the region during the Old Assyrian Empire 20251750 BC it was from the Assyrian speakers of Upper Mesopotamia that the Hittites adopted the cuneiform script. It took some time before the Hittites established themselves following the collapse of the Old Assyrian Empire in the mid
18 th century BC as is clear from some of the texts included here. For several centuries there were separate Hittite groups usually centered on various cities. But then strong rulers with their center in Hattusa modern Boazkale succeeded in bringing these together and conquering large parts of central Anatolia to establish the Hittite kingdom.43 Early periodedit The Sphinx Gate Alaca Hyk orum Turkey Reliefs and hieroglyphs from Chamber 2 at Hattusa built and decorated by uppiluliuma II the last king of the Hittites Hittite chariot from an Egyptian relief The Hittite state was formed from many small polities in NorthCentral Anatolia at the banks of the Kzlrmak River during the Middle Bronze Age ca. 19001650 BC.44 The early history of the Hittite kingdom is known through four cushionshaped tablets classified as KBo 
3.2 2 KBo 
17.2 1 KBo 
22.1  and KBo 
22.2  not made in attua but probably created in Kussara Na or another site in Anatolia that may first have been written in the 
18 th century BC454 in Old Hittite language and three of them using the socalled Old Script OS46 although most of the remaining tablets survived only as Akkadian copies made in the 
14 th and 
13 th centuries BC. These reveal a rivalry within two branches of the royal family up to the Middle Kingdom a northern branch first based in Zalpuwa and secondarily Hattusa and a southern branch based in Kussara still not found and the former Assyrian colony of Kanesh. These are distinguishable by their names the northerners retained language isolate Hattian names and the southerners adopted IndoEuropean Hittite and Luwian names.47 Zalpuwa first attacked Kanesh under Uhna in 1833 BC.48 And during this krum period when the merchant colony of the Old Assyrian Empire was flourishing in the site and before the conquest of Pithana the following local kings reigned in Kane urmili prior to 1790 BC Paanu a short time in 1790 BC Inar c.17901775 BC and Warama c.17751750 BC.49 One set of tablets known collectively as the Anitta text50 begin by telling how Pithana the king of Kussara conquered neighbouring Nea Kanesh31 this conquest took place around 1750 BC.51 However the real subject of these tablets is Pithanas son Anitta r.17451720 BC52 who continued where his father left off and conquered several northern cities including Hattusa which he cursed and also Zalpuwa. This was likely propaganda for the southern branch of the royal family against the northern branch who had fixed on Hattusa as capital.53 Another set the Tale of Zalpuwa supports Zalpuwa and exonerates the later attuili I from the charge of sacking Kanesh.53 Anitta was succeeded by Zuzzu r.17201710 BC52 but sometime in 17101705 BC Kanesh was destroyed taking the longestablished Assyrian merchant trading system with it.48 A Kussaran noble family survived to contest the ZalpuwanHattusan family though whether these were of the direct line of Anitta is uncertain.54 Meanwhile the lords of Zalpa lived on. Huzziya I descendant of a Huzziya of Zalpa took over Hatti. His soninlaw Labarna I a southerner from Hurma usurped the throne but made sure to adopt Huzziyas grandson attuili as his own son and heir. The location of the land of Hurma is believed to be in the mountains south of Kussara.55 Old Kingdomedit Hattusa ramp The founding of the Hittite Kingdom is attributed to either Labarna I or Hattusili I the latter might also have had Labarna as a personal name56 who conquered the area south and north of Hattusa. Hattusili I campaigned as far as the Semitic Amorite kingdom of Yamkhad in Syria where he attacked but did not capture its capital of Aleppo. Hattusili I did eventually capture Hattusa and was credited for the foundation of the Hittite Empire. Hattusili was king and his sons brothers inlaws family members and troops were all united. Wherever he went on campaign he controlled the enemy land with force. He destroyed the lands one after the other took away their power and made them the borders of the sea. When he came back from campaign however each of his sons went somewhere to a country and in his hand the great cities prospered. But when later the princes servants became corrupt they began to devour the properties conspired constantly against their masters and began to shed their blood. This excerpt from The Edict of Telepinu dating to the 
16 th century BC is supposed to illustrate the unification growth and prosperity of the Hittites under his rule. It also illustrates the corruption of the princes believed to be his sons. The lack of sources leads to uncertainty of how the corruption was addressed. On Hattusili Is deathbed he chose his grandson Mursili I or Murshilish I as his heir.57 The nandk vase also known as a Hseyindede vase a large fourhandled Hittite terracotta vase with scenes in relief depicting a sacred wedding ceremony mid 
17 th century BC nandktepe Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ankara Mursili continued the conquests of Hattusili I. In 1595 BC middle chronology or 1587 BC low middle chronology Mursili I conducted a great raid down the Euphrates River bypassing Assyria and sacking Mari and Babylon ejecting the Amorite rulers of the Old Babylonian Empire in the process. Rather than incorporate Babylonia into Hittite domains Mursili seems to have instead turned control of Babylonia over to his Kassite allies who were to rule it for the next four centuries. Due to fear of revolts at home he did not remain in Babylon for long. This lengthy campaign strained the resources of Hatti and left the capital in a state of nearanarchy. Mursili was assassinated by his brotherinlaw Hantili I during his journey back to Hattusa or shortly after his return home and the Hittite Kingdom was plunged into chaos. Hantili took the throne. He was able to escape multiple murder attempts on himself however his family did not. His wife Harapsili and her son were murdered. In addition other members of the royal family were killed by Zidanta I who was then murdered by his own son Ammuna. All of the internal unrest among the Hittite royal family led to a decline of power. The Hurrians a people living in the mountainous region along the upper Tigris and Euphrates rivers in modern south east Turkey took advantage of the situation to seize Aleppo and the surrounding areas for themselves as well as the coastal region of Adaniya renaming it Kizzuwatna later Cilicia. Throughout the remainder of the 
16 th century BC the Hittite kings were held to their homelands by dynastic quarrels and warfare with the Hurrians. The Hurrians became the center of power in Anatolia.5859 The campaigns into Amurru and southern Mesopotamia may be responsible for the reintroduction of cuneiform writing into Anatolia since the Hittite script is quite different from that of the preceding Assyrian colonial period. The Hittites entered a weak phase of obscure records insignificant rulers and reduced domains. This pattern of expansion under strong kings followed by contraction under weaker ones was to be repeated over and over through the Hittite Kingdoms 5
00 year history making events during the waning periods difficult to reconstruct. The political instability of these years of the Old Hittite Kingdom can be explained in part by the nature of the Hittite kingship at that time. During the Old Hittite Kingdom prior to 1400 BC the king of the Hittites was not viewed by his subjects as a living god like the Pharaohs of Egypt but rather as a first among equals.60 Only in the later period from 1400 BC until 1200 BC did the Hittite kingship become more centralized and powerful. Also in earlier years the succession was not legally fixed enabling War of the Rosesstyle rivalries between northern and southern branches. The next monarch of note following Mursili I was Telepinu c.1500 BC who won a few victories to the southwest apparently by allying himself with one Hurrian state Kizzuwatna against another Mitanni. Telepinu also attempted to secure the lines of succession.61 Middle Kingdomedit Twelve Hittite gods of the Underworld in the nearby Yazlkaya a sanctuary of Hattusa The last monarch of the Old Kingdom Telepinu reigned until about 1500 BC. Telepinus reign marked the end of the Old Kingdom and the beginning of the lengthy weak phase known as the Middle Kingdom.62 The period of the 
15 th century BC is largely unknown with few surviving records.63 Part of the reason for both the weakness and the obscurity is that the Hittites were under constant attack mainly from the Kaskians a nonIndoEuropean people settled along the shores of the Black Sea. The capital once again went on the move first to Sapinuwa and then to Samuha. There is an archive in Sapinuwa but it has not been adequately translated to date. It segues into the Hittite Empire period proper which dates from the reign of Tudhaliya I from c.1430 BC. One innovation that can be credited to these early Hittite rulers is the practice of conducting treaties and alliances with neighboring states the Hittites were thus among the earliest known pioneers in the art of international politics and diplomacy. This is also when the Hittite religion adopted several gods and rituals from the Hurrians. New Kingdomedit Tudhaliya IV relief in Hattusa Exact replica of a Hittite monument from Fasllar c.1300 BC Museum of Anatolian Civilizations With the reign of Tudhaliya I who may actually not have been the first of that name see also Tudhaliya the Hittite Kingdom reemerged from the fog of obscurity and entered the Hittite Empire period. Many changes were afoot during this time not the least of which was a strengthening of the kingship. Settlement of the Hittites progressed in the Empire period.60 However the Hittite people tended to settle in the older lands of south Anatolia rather than the lands of the Aegean. As this settlement progressed treaties were signed with neighboring peoples.60 During the Hittite Empire period the kingship became hereditary and the king took on a superhuman aura and began to be referred to by the Hittite citizens as My Sun. The kings of the Empire period began acting as a high priest for the whole kingdom  making an annual tour of the Hittite holy cities conducting festivals and supervising the upkeep of the sanctuaries.60 During his reign c.1400 BC King Tudhaliya I again allied with Kizzuwatna then vanquished the Hurrian states of Aleppo and Mitanni and expanded to the west at the expense of Arzawa a Luwian state. Another weak phase followed Tudhaliya I and the Hittites enemies from all directions were able to advance even to Hattusa and raze it. However the kingdom recovered its former glory under uppiluliuma I c.1350 BC who again conquered Aleppo. Mitanni was reduced to vassalage by the Assyrians under his soninlaw and he defeated Carchemish another Amorite citystate. With his own sons placed over all of these new conquests and Babylonia still in the hands of the allied Kassites this left uppiluliuma the supreme power broker in the known world alongside Assyria and Egypt and it was not long before Egypt was seeking an alliance by marriage of another of his sons with the widow of Tutankhamen. That son was evidently murdered before reaching his destination and this alliance was never consummated. However the Middle Assyrian Empire 13651050 BC once more began to grow in power with the ascension of Ashuruballit I in 1365 BC. Ashuruballit I attacked and defeated Mattiwaza the Mitanni king despite attempts by the Hittite king uppiluliuma I now fearful of growing Assyrian power attempting to preserve his throne with military support. The lands of the Mitanni and Hurrians were duly appropriated by Assyria enabling it to encroach on Hittite territory in eastern Asia Minor and Adadnirari I annexed Carchemish and northeast Syria from the control of the Hittites.64 While uppiluliuma I reigned the Hittite Empire was devastated by an epidemic of tularemia. The epidemic afflicted the Hittites for decades and tularemia killed uppiluliuma I and his successor Arnuwanda II.65 After uppiluliuma Is rule and the brief reign of his eldest son Arnuwanda II another son Mursili II became king c.1330 BC. Having inherited a position of strength in the east Mursili was able to turn his attention to the west where he attacked Arzawa. At a point when the Hittites were weakened by the tularemia epidemic the Arzawans attacked the Hittites who repelled the attack by sending infected rams to the Arzawans. This was the first recorded use of biological warfare. Mursili also attacked a city known as Millawanda Miletus which was under the control of Ahhiyawa. More recent research based on new readings and interpretations of the Hittite texts as well as of the material evidence for Mycenaean contacts with the Anatolian mainland came to the conclusion that Ahhiyawa referred to Mycenaean Greece or at least to a part of it.66676869 Battle of Kadeshedit Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II storming the Hittite fortress of Dapur Main article Battle of Kadesh Hittite prosperity was mostly dependent on control of the trade routes and metal sources. Because of the importance of Northern Syria to the vital routes linking the Cilician gates with Mesopotamia defense of this area was crucial and was soon put to the test by Egyptian expansion under Pharaoh Ramesses II. The outcome of the Battle of Kadesh is uncertain though it seems that the timely arrival of Egyptian reinforcements prevented total Hittite victory.70 The Egyptians forced the Hittites to take refuge in the fortress of Kadesh but their own losses prevented them from sustaining a siege. This battle took place in the 
5 th year of Ramesses c.1274 BC by the most commonly used chronology. Downfall and demise of the kingdomedit EgyptoHittite Peace Treaty c. 1258 BC between Hattusili III and Ramesses II the earliest known surviving peace treaty sometimes called the Treaty of Kadesh after the Battle of Kadesh Istanbul Archaeology Museum. Chimera with a human head and a lions body Late Hittite period in Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ankara After this date the power of both the Hittites and Egyptians began to decline yet again because of the power of the Assyrians.71 The Assyrian king Shalmaneser I had seized the opportunity to vanquish Hurria and Mitanni occupy their lands and expand up to the head of the Euphrates while Muwatalli was preoccupied with the Egyptians. The Hittites had vainly tried to preserve the Mitanni Kingdom with military support.64 Assyria now posed just as great a threat to Hittite trade routes as Egypt ever had. Muwatallis son UrhiTeshub took the throne and ruled as king for seven years as Mursili III before being ousted by his uncle Hattusili III after a brief civil war. In response to increasing Assyrian annexation of Hittite territory he concluded a peace and alliance with Ramesses II also fearful of Assyria presenting his daughters hand in marriage to the Pharaoh.71 The Treaty of Kadesh one of the oldest completely surviving treaties in history fixed their mutual boundaries in southern Canaan and was signed in the 
21 st year of Rameses c. 1258 BC. Terms of this treaty included the marriage of one of the Hittite princesses to Ramesses.7172 Hattusilis son Tudhaliya IV was the last strong Hittite king able to keep the Assyrians out of the Hittite heartland to some degree at least though he too lost much territory to them and was heavily defeated by TukultiNinurta I of Assyria in the Battle of Nihriya. He even temporarily annexed the island of Cyprus before that too fell to Assyria. The last king uppiluliuma II also managed to win some victories including a naval battle against Alashiya off the coast of Cyprus.73 But the Assyrians under Ashurreshishi I had by this time annexed much Hittite territory in Asia Minor and Syria driving out and defeating the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar I in the process who also had eyes on Hittite lands.dubious  discuss The Sea Peoples had already begun their push down the Mediterranean coastline starting from the Aegean and continuing all the way to Canaan founding the state of Philistia  taking Cilicia and Cyprus away from the Hittites en route and cutting off their coveted trade routes. This left the Hittite homelands vulnerable to attack from all directions and Hattusa was burnt to the ground sometime around 1180 BC following a combined onslaught from new waves of invaders the Kaskians Phrygians and Bryges. The Hittite Kingdom thus vanished from historical records much of the territory being seized by Assyria.74 Alongside with these attacks many internal issues also led to the end of the Hittite Kingdom. The end of the kingdom was part of the larger Bronze Age Collapse.75 A study of tree rings of juniper trees growing in the region showed a change to drier conditions from the 
13 th century BC into the 
12 th century BC with three years consecutive drought in 1196 1197 and 1198 BC.76 PostHittite periodedit Luwian storm god Tarunz in the National Museum of Aleppo Main article SyroHittite states By 1160 BC the political situation in Asia Minor looked vastly different from that of only 25 years earlier. In that year the Assyrian king TiglathPileser I was defeating the Mushki Phrygians who had been attempting to press into Assyrian colonies in southern Anatolia from the Anatolian highlands and the Kaska people the Hittites old enemies from the northern hillcountry between Hatti and the Black Sea seem to have joined them soon after. The Phrygians had apparently overrun Cappadocia from the West with recently discovered epigraphic evidence confirming their origins as the Balkan Bryges tribe forced out by the Macedonians. Although the Hittite Kingdom disappeared from Anatolia at this point there emerged a number of socalled SyroHittite states in Anatolia and northern Syria. They were the successors of the Hittite Kingdom. The most notable SyroHittite kingdoms were those at Carchemish and Melid. With the ruling family in Carchemish believed to have been an cadet branch of the then defunct central ruling Hittite line. These SyroHittite states gradually fell under the control of the NeoAssyrian Empire 911608 BC. Carchemish and Melid were made vassals of Assyria under Shalmaneser III 858823 BC and fully incorporated into Assyria during the reign of Sargon II 722705 BC. A large and powerful state known as Tabal occupied much of southern Anatolia. Known as Greek Tibarenoi Ancient Greek  Latin Tibareni Thobeles in Josephus their language may have been Luwian77 testified to by monuments written using Anatolian hieroglyphs.78 This state too was conquered and incorporated into the vast NeoAssyrian Empire. Ultimately both Luwian hieroglyphs and cuneiform were rendered obsolete by an innovation the alphabet which seems to have entered Anatolia simultaneously from the Aegean with the Bryges who changed their name to Phrygians and from the Phoenicians and neighboring peoples in Syria. Governmentedit Bronze Hittite figures of animals Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Alaca Hyk bronze standard deer with gold nose and two lionspanthers Museum of Anatolian Civilizations The earliest known constitutional monarchy was developed by the Hittites.7980 The head of the Hittite state was the king followed by the heirapparent. The king was the supreme ruler of the land in charge of being a military commander judicial authority as well as a high priest.81 However some officials exercised independent authority over various branches of the government. One of the most important of these posts in the Hittite society was that of the gal mesedi Chief of the Royal Bodyguards.82 It was superseded by the rank of the gal gestin Chief of the Wine Stewards who like the gal mesedi was generally a member of the royal family. The kingdoms bureaucracy was headed by the gal dubsar Chief of the Scribes whose authority did not extend over the lugal dubsar the kings personal scribe. Egyptian monarchs engaged in diplomacy with two chief Hittite seats located at Kadesh a city located on the Orontes River and Carchemish located on the Euphrates river in Southern Anatolia.83 Map of the Hittite Empire at its greatest extent under Suppiluliuma I c.13501322 and Mursili II c.13211295. Religion of the early Hittitesedit In the Central Anatolian settlement of Ankuwa home of the preHittite goddess Kattaha and the worship of other Hattic deities illustrates the ethnic differences in the areas the Hittites tried to control. Kattaha was originally given the name Hannikkun. The usage of the term Kattaha over Hannikkun according to Ronald Gorny head of the Alisar regional project in Turkey was a device to downgrade the preHittite identity of this female deity and to bring her more in touch with the Hittite tradition. Their reconfiguration of Gods throughout their early history such as with Kattaha was a way of legitimizing their authority and to avoid conflicting ideologies in newly included regions and settlements. By transforming local deities to fit their own customs the Hittites hoped that the traditional beliefs of these communities would understand and accept the changes to become better suited for the Hittite political and economic goals.84 The Pankusedit King Telipinu reigned c.1525  c.1500 BC is considered to be the last king of the Old Kingdom of the Hittites. He seized power during a dynastic power struggle. During his reign he wanted to take care of lawlessness and regulate royal succession. He then issued the Edict of Telipinus. In this edict he designated the Pankus which was a general assembly as the high court for constitutional crimes. Crimes such as murder were observed and judged by the Pankus. Kings themselves were also subject to jurisdiction under the Pankus. The Pankus also served as an advisory council for the king. The rules and regulations set out by the edict and the establishment of the Pankus proved to be very successful and lasted all the way through to end of the New Kingdom.85 The Pankus established a legal code where violence was not a punishment for a crime. Crimes such as a murder and theft which at the time were punishable by death in other southwest Asian Kingdoms were not capital crimes under the Hittite law code. Most criminal penalties involved restitution. For example in cases of thievery the punishment of that crime would to be to repay what was stolen in equal value.86 Languageedit Part of a series on IndoEuropean topics Languages List of IndoEuropean languages Extant Albanoid Albanian Armenian BaltoSlavic Baltic Slavic Celtic Germanic Hellenic Greek Kurdish IndoIranian IndoAryan Iranian Nuristani Italic Romance Extinct Anatolian Tocharian PaleoBalkan Dacian Illyrian Liburnian Messapic Mysian Paeonian Phrygian Thracian Reconstructed ProtoIndoEuropean language Phonology Sound laws Accent Ablaut Hypothetical Balkanic DacoThracian GraecoAlbanian GraecoArmenian GraecoAryan GraecoPhrygian IndoHittite ItaloCeltic ThracoIllyrian Grammar Vocabulary Root Verbs Nouns Pronouns Numerals Particles Other ProtoAlbanian ProtoAnatolian ProtoArmenian ProtoGermanic ProtoNorse ProtoItaloCeltic ProtoCeltic  ProtoItalic ProtoGreek ProtoBaltoSlavic ProtoSlavic  ProtoBaltic ProtoIndoIranian ProtoIranian Philology Hittite inscriptions Hieroglyphic Luwian Linear B Rigveda Avesta Homer Behistun Gaulish epigraphy Latin epigraphy Runic epigraphy Ogham Gothic Bible Bible translations into Armenian Tocharian script Old Irish glosses Origins Homeland ProtoIndoEuropeans Society Religion Mainstream Kurgan hypothesis IndoEuropean migrations Eurasian nomads Alternative and fringe Anatolian hypothesis Armenian hypothesis Beech argument Indigenous Aryanism Baltic homeland Paleolithic continuity theory Archaeology Chalcolithic Copper Age Pontic Steppe Domestication of the horse Kurgan Kurgan stelae Kurgan culture Steppe cultures BugDniester Sredny Stog DnieperDonets Samara Khvalynsk Yamnaya Mikhaylovka culture Novotitarovskaya culture Caucasus Maykop East Asia Afanasievo Eastern Europe Usatovo Cernavod Cucuteni Northern Europe Corded ware Baden Middle Dnieper Bronze Age Pontic Steppe Chariot Yamnaya Catacomb Multicordoned ware Poltavka Srubnaya NorthernEastern Steppe Abashevo culture Andronovo Sintashta Europe Globular Amphora Corded ware Bell Beaker ntice Trzciniec Nordic Bronze Age Terramare Tumulus Urnfield Lusatian South Asia BMAC Yaz Gandhara grave Iron Age Steppe Chernoles Europe ThracoCimmerian Hallstatt Jastorf Caucasus Colchian India Painted Grey Ware Northern Black Polished Ware Peoples and societies Bronze Age Anatolian peoples Hittites Armenians Mycenaean Greeks IndoIranians Iron Age IndoAryans IndoAryans Iranians Iranians East Asia Wusun Yuezhi Europe Celts Gauls Celtiberians Insular Celts Cimmerians Hellenic peoples Italic peoples Germanic peoples PaleoBalkanAnatolia Thracians Dacians Illyrians Paeonians Phrygians Scythians Middle Ages East Asia Tocharians Europe Albanians Balts Slavs NorsemenMedieval Scandinavians Middle Ages IndoAryan Medieval India Iranian Greater Iran Religion and mythology Reconstructed ProtoIndoEuropean mythology ProtoIndoIranian paganism Ancient Iranian religion Historical Hittite IndoAryan Vedic Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Iranian Persian Zoroastrianism Kurdish Yazidism Yarsanism Scythian Ossetian Others Armenian Europe PaleoBalkan Albanian  Illyrian  Thracian  Dacian Greek Roman Celtic Irish Scottish Breton Welsh Cornish Germanic AngloSaxon Continental Norse Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Slavic Practices Fire sacrifice Horse sacrifice Sati Winter solsticeYule IndoEuropean studies Scholars Marija Gimbutas J. P. Mallory Institutes Copenhagen Studies in IndoEuropean Publications Encyclopedia of IndoEuropean Culture The Horse the Wheel and Language Journal of IndoEuropean Studies Indogermanisches etymologisches Wrterbuch IndoEuropean Etymological Dictionary v t e Main articles Hittite language and Anatolian hieroglyphs Bronze tablet from orumBoazky dating from 1235 BC photographed at Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ankara IndoEuropean family tree in order of first attestation. Hittite belongs to the family of Anatolian languages and the oldest written IndoEuropean language. The Hittite language is recorded fragmentarily from about the 
19 th century BC in the Kltepe texts see Ishara. It remained in use until about 1100 BC. Hittite is the best attested member of the Anatolian branch of the IndoEuropean language family and the IndoEuropean language for which the earliest surviving written attestation exists with isolated Hittite loanwords and numerous personal names appearing in an Old Assyrian context from as early as the 
20 th century BC.citation needed The language of the Hattusa tablets was eventually deciphered by a Czech linguist Bedich Hrozn 18791952 who on 24 November 1915 announced his results in a lecture at the Near Eastern Society of Berlin. His book about the discovery was printed in Leipzig in 1917 under the title The Language of the Hittites Its Structure and Its Membership in the IndoEuropean Linguistic Family.87 The preface of the book begins with The present work undertakes to establish the nature and structure of the hitherto mysterious language of the Hittites and to decipher this language ... It will be shown that Hittite is in the main an IndoEuropean language. The decipherment famously led to the confirmation of the laryngeal theory in IndoEuropean linguistics which had been predicted several decades before. Due to its marked differences in its structure and phonology some early philologists most notably Warren Cowgill had even argued that it should be classified as a sister language to IndoEuropean languages IndoHittite rather than a daughter language. By the end of the Hittite Empire the Hittite language had become a written language of administration and diplomatic correspondence. The population of most of the Hittite Empire by this time spoke Luwian another IndoEuropean language of the Anatolian family that had originated to the west of the Hittite region.88 According to Craig Melchert the current tendency is to suppose that ProtoIndoEuropean evolved and that the prehistoric speakers of Anatolian became isolated from the rest of the PIE speech community so as not to share in some common innovations.89 Hittite as well as its Anatolian cousins split off from ProtoIndoEuropean at an early stage thereby preserving archaisms that were later lost in the other IndoEuropean languages.90 In Hittite there are many loanwords particularly religious vocabulary from the nonIndoEuropean Hurrian and Hattic languages. The latter was the language of the Hattians the local inhabitants of the land of Hatti before being absorbed or displaced by the Hittites. Sacred and magical texts from Hattusa were often written in Hattic Hurrian and Luwian even after Hittite became the norm for other writings.citation needed Artedit Monument over a spring at Eflatun Pnar Main article Hittite art Given the size of the empire there are relatively few remains of Hittite art. These include some impressive monumental carvings a number of rock reliefs as well as metalwork in particular the Alaca Hyk bronze standards carved ivory and ceramics including the Hseyindede vases. The Sphinx Gates of Alaca Hyk and Hattusa with the monument at the spring of Eflatun Pnar are among the largest constructed sculptures along with a number of large recumbent lions of which the Lion of Babylon statue at Babylon is the largest if it is indeed Hittite. Nearly all are notably worn. Rock reliefs include the Hanyeri relief and Hemite relief. The Nide Stele from the end of the 
8 th century BC is a Luwian monument from the PostHittite period found in the modern Turkish city of Nide. Religion and mythologyedit Stag statuette symbol of a Hittite male god. This figure is used for the Hacettepe University emblem. Early Hittite artifact found by T. E. Lawrence and Leonard Woolley right in Carchemish Main article Hittite mythology Hittite religion and mythology were heavily influenced by their Hattic Mesopotamian Canaanite and Hurrian counterparts. In earlier times IndoEuropean elements may still be clearly discerned. Storm gods were prominent in the Hittite pantheon. Tarhunt Hurrians Teshub was referred to as The Conqueror The king of Kummiya King of Heaven Lord of the land of Hatti. He was chief among the gods and his symbol is the bull. As Teshub he was depicted as a bearded man astride two mountains and bearing a club. He was the god of battle and victory especially when the conflict involved a foreign power.91 Teshub was also known for his conflict with the serpent Illuyanka.92 The Hittite gods are also honoured with festivals such as Puruli in the spring the nuntarriyashas festival in the autumn and the KI.LAM festival of the gate house where images of the Storm God and up to thirty other idols were paraded through the streets.93 Lawedit Main article Hittite laws Hittite laws much like other records of the empire are recorded on cuneiform tablets made from baked clay. What is understood to be the Hittite Law Code comes mainly from two clay tablets each containing 186 articles and are a collection of practiced laws from across the early Hittite Kingdom.94 In addition to the tablets monuments bearing Hittite cuneiform inscriptions can be found in central Anatolia describing the government and law codes of the empire.95 The tablets and monuments date from the Old Hittite Kingdom 16501500 BC to what is known as the New Hittite Kingdom 15001180 BC.96 Between these time periods different translations can be found that modernize the language97 and create a series of legal reforms in which many crimes9496 are given more humane punishments. These changes could possibly be attributed to the rise of new and different kings throughout the history empire or to the new translations that change the language used in the law codes.96 In either case the law codes of the Hittites provide very specific fines or punishments that are to be issued for specific crimes9698 and have many similarities to Biblical laws found in the books of Exodus and Deuteronomy.98 In addition to criminal punishments the law codes also provide instruction on certain situations such as inheritance and death.citation needed Use of lawsedit The law articles used by the Hittites most often outline very specific crimes or offenses either against the state or against other individuals and provide a sentence for these offenses. The laws carved in the tablets are an assembly of established social conventions from across the empire. Hittite laws at this time have a prominent lack of equality in punishments in many cases distinct punishments or compensations for men and women are listed.9498 Free men most often received more compensation for offenses against them than free women did. Slaves male or female had very few rights and could easily be punished or executed by their masters for crimes.9498 Most articles describe destruction of property and personal injury to which the most common sentence was payment for compensation of the lost property. Again in these cases men oftentimes receive a greater amount of compensation than women.9498 Other articles describe how marriage of slaves and free individuals should be handled. In any case of separation or estrangement the free individual male or female would keep all but one child that resulted from the marriage.9698 Cases in which capital punishment is recommended in the articles most often seem to come from prereform sentences for severe crimes and prohibited sexual pairings. Many of these cases include public torture and execution as punishment for serious crimes against religion. Most of these sentences would begin to go away in the later stages of the Hittite Empire as major law reforms began to occur.9496 Law reformedit PostHittite period statue of king uppiluliuma of the Luwian state of Pattin Hatay Archaeology Museum While different translations of laws can be seen throughout the history of the empire97 the Hittite outlook of law was originally founded on religion and were intended to preserve the authority of the state.94 Additionally punishments had the goal of crime prevention and the protection of individual property rights.94 The goals of crime prevention can be seen in the severity of the punishments issued for certain crimes. Capital punishment and torture are specifically mentioned as punishment for more severe crimes against religion and harsh fines for the loss of private property or life. The tablets also describe the ability of the king to pardon certain crimes but specifically prohibit an individual being pardoned for murder.9496 At some point in the 
16 th or 
15 th century BC Hittite law codes move away from torture and capital punishment and to more humanitarian forms of punishments such as fines.9496 Where the old law system was based on retaliation and retribution for crimes the new system saw punishments that were much more mild favoring monetary compensation over physical or capital punishment.94 Why these drastic reforms happened is not exactly clear but it is likely that punishing murder with execution was deemed not to benefit any individual or family involved.9496 These reforms were not just seen in the realm of capital punishment. Where major fines were to be paid a severe reduction in penalty can be seen. For example prior to these major reforms the payment to be made for the theft of an animal was thirty times the animals value after the reforms the penalty was reduced to half the original fine. Simultaneously attempts to modernize the language and change the verbiage used in the law codes can be seen during this period of reform.94959697 Examples of lawsedit Sphinx Gate entrance of the city of Hattusa Under both the old and reformed Hittite law codes three main types of punishment can be seen Death torture or compensationfines.94 The articles outlined on the cuneiform tablets provide very specific punishments for crimes committed against the Hittite religion or against individuals. In many but not all cases articles describing similar laws are grouped together. More than a dozen consecutive articles describe what are known to be permitted and prohibited sexual pairings.9698 These pairings mostly describe men sometimes specifically referred to as free men sometimes just men in general98 having relations be they consensual or not with animals stepfamily relatives of spouses or concubines.94 Many of these articles do not provide specific punishments but prior to the law reforms crimes against religion were most often punishable by death. These include incestuous marriages and sexual relations with certain animals.9698 For example one article states If a man has sexual relations with a cow it is an unpermitted sexual pairing he will be put to death.98 Similar relations with horses and mules were not subject to capital punishment but the offender could not become a priest afterwards.9496 Actions at the expense of other individuals most often see the offender paying some sort of compensation be it in the form money animals or land. These actions could include the destruction of farmlands death or injury of livestock or assault of an individual.98 Several articles also specifically mention acts of the gods. If an animal were to die by certain circumstances the individual could claim that it died by the hand of a god. Swearing that what they claim was true it seems that they were exempt from paying compensation to the animals owner.9698 Injuries inflicted upon animals owned by another individual are almost always compensated with either direct payment or trading the injured animal with a healthy one owned by the offender.98 Not all laws prescribed in the tablets deal with criminal punishment. For example the instructions of how the marriage of slaves and division of their children are given in a group of articles The slave woman shall take most of the children with the male slave taking one child.98 Similar instructions are given to the marriage of free individuals and slaves. Other actions include how breaking of engagements are to be handled.9698 Biblical Hittitesedit Main article Biblical Hittites The Bible refers to Hittites in several passages ranging from Genesis to the postExilic EzraNehemiah. The Hittites are usually depicted as a people living among the Israelites  Abraham purchases the Patriarchal burialplot of Machpelah from Ephron HaChiti Ephron the Hittite and Hittites serve as high military officers in Davids army. In 2 Kings 76 however they are a people with their own kingdoms the passage refers to kings in the plural apparently located outside geographic Canaan and sufficiently powerful to put a Syrian army to flight.99 It is a matter of considerable scholarly debate whether the biblical Hittites signified any or all of 1 the original Hattians 2 their IndoEuropean conquerors who retained the name Hatti for Central Anatolia and are today referred to as the Hittites the subject of this article or 3 a Canaanite group who may or may not have been related to either or both of the Anatolian groups and who also may or may not be identical with the later SyroHittite states.100101 Other biblical scholars following Max Mller have argued that rather than being connected with Heth son of Canaan the Anatolian land of Hatti was instead mentioned in Hebrew Bible literature and apocrypha as Kittim Chittim a people said to be named for a son of Javan.102 In ancient Greek mythologyedit One single mention of a Trojan ally named Keteians Greek  is made by Homer in the Odyssey. Some scholars have proposed that the Homeric Keteians correspond to the Bronze Age Hittites.103104 See alsoedit Asia portal Hittite plague List of Hittite kings List of artifacts significant to the Bible Short chronology timeline Referencesedit  Drapkin Israel 1989. Crime and Punishment in the Ancient World. Lexington Books. p. 29. ISBN 0669012793.  Hittite  Definition History Achievements  Facts  Britannica. www.britannica.com. 1 October 2023. Retrieved 20 October 2023.  Kloekhorst  Waal 2019.  a b Kloekhorst 2020.  Ancient History Encyclopedia. Sea Peoples. September 2009. Sea Peoples Archived 18 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine  The peaks and troughs of Hittite. 7 July 2004. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 19 December 2016.  Kristiansen Kristian Larsson Thomas B. 2005. The Rise of Bronze Age Society. Cambridge University Press. pp. 342343. ISBN 9780521843638. Archived from the original on 29 March 2023. Retrieved 21 December 2021.  Kristiansen Kristian Larsson Thomas B. 2005. The Rise of Bronze Age Society. Cambridge University Press. p. 249. ISBN 9780521843638. Archived from the original on 29 March 2023. Retrieved 21 December 2021.  Muhly James D. 2003. MetalworkingMining in the Levant. In Richard Suzanne ed.. Near Eastern Archaeology. Eisenbrauns. pp. 174183. ISBN 1575060833.  Waldbaum Jane C. From Bronze to Iron. Gothenburg Paul Astms Frlag 1978 5658.  Jambon Albert 24 November 2017. Bronze Age iron Meteoritic or not A chemical strategy PDF. Journal of Archaeological Science. 88 4753. Bibcode20
17 JArSc..88...
47 J. doi
10.1 0
16 j.jas.20
17.0 
9.0 08. S
2 CID 55644155.  Hittites. British Museum. London Trustees of the British Museum. Archived from the original on 7 November 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2014.  a b Erimtan Can. 2008. Hittites Ottomans and Turks Aaolu Ahmed Bey and the Kemalist Construction of Turkish Nationhood in Anatolia Archived 22 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine Anatolian Studies 58 141171  Ardzinba Vladislav. 1974 Some Notes on the Typological Affinity Between Hattian and Northwest Caucasian AbkhazoAdygian Languages. In Internationale Tagung der Keilschriftforscher der sozialistischen Lnder Budapest 2325. April 1974. Zusammenfassung der Vortrge Assyriologica 1 pp. 1015.  Cline Eric H. 2021. Of Arms and the Man. 1177 B.C. The Year Civilization Collapsed. Princeton University Press. p. 32. ISBN 9780691208015.  Francis William Newman 1853. A history of the Hebrew monarchy from the administration of Samuel to the Babylonish Captivity 
2 nd ed.. London John Chapman. p. 179 note 2.  The Hittites the story of a forgotten empire By Archibald Henry Sayce Queens College Oxford. October 1888. Introduction  Texier Charles 1835. Rapport lu le 15 mai 1835  lAcadmie royale des Inscriptions et Belleslettres de lInstitut sur un envoi fait par M. Texier et contenant les dessins de basreliefs dcouverts par lui prs du village de BogazKeui dans lAsie mineure Report read on 15 May 1835 to the Royal Academy of Inscriptions and Bellelettres of the Institute on a dispatch made by Mr. Texier and containing drawings of basreliefs discovered by him near the village of BogazKeui in Asia Minor. Journal des Savants in French 368376. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2018.  Kloekhorst 2014.  Rediscovery of the Hittites. www.hethport.uniwuerzburg.de. Retrieved 28 March 2022.  Gterbock Hans Gustav 1 January 2002. Recent Developments in Hittite Archaeology and History Papers in Memory of Hans G. Gterbock. Eisenbrauns. p. 101. ISBN 9781575060538. Retrieved 18 February 2022.  Hatr Ergn Korkan Mustafa Schachner Andreas nce smail 1 September 2021. The deep learning method applied to the detection and mapping of stone deterioration in openair sanctuaries of the Hittite period in Anatolia. Journal of Cultural Heritage. 51 3839. doi
10.1 0
16 j.culher.20
21.0 
7.0 04. ISSN 12962074. Retrieved 18 February 2022.  The Hittite Empire. Chapter V. Vahan Kurkjian  John Marangozis 2003 A Short Grammar of Hieroglyphic Luwian  Beal 1986.  Beal 1986 p. 426.  Kloekhorst Alwin 2022. Anatolian in Thomas Olander ed. The IndoEuropean Language Family A Phylogenetic Perspective Cambridge University Press p. 78 ...the Anatolian split may be dated to the period between 44004100 BCE. If ProtoAnatolian indeed first broke up into its daughter languages around the thirtyfirst century BCE...it would mean that it had some 13001000 years to undergo the specific innovations that define Anatolian as a separate branch...  Lazaridis Iosif et al. 2022. The genetic history of the Southern Arc A bridge between West Asia and Europe in Science 26 Aug 2022 Vol 377 Issue 6609 Research Article Summary p. 1 Around 70005000 years ago people with ancestry from the Caucasus ... moved west into Anatolia ... Some of these migrants may have spoken ancestral forms of Anatolian ...  Kloekhorst Alwin 2022. Anatolian in Thomas Olander ed. The IndoEuropean Language Family A Phylogenetic Perspective Cambridge University Press p. 75 ...a ProtoHittite ancestor language that may have been spoken only a few generations before the oldest attestations of Kaniite Hittite twentieth century BCE i.e. around 2100 BCE...  Kroonen Guus et al. 2018. Linguistic supplement to Damgaard et al. 2018 Early IndoEuropean languages Anatolian Tocharian and IndoIranian in Zenodo 2018 p. 3 ...The Anatolian branch is an extinct subclade of the IndoEuropean language family attested from the 
25 th century BCE onwards see below that consists of Hittite known 
20 th
12 th centuries BCE Luwian known 
20 th
7 th centuries BCE and a number of less wellattested members such as Carian Lycian Lydian and Palai...  a b Kuhrt Amlie 1995. The Ancient Near East Volume I. London and New York Routledge. pp. 22627. ISBN 9780415167635.  Puhvel J. 1994. Anatolian Autochton or Interloper. Journal of IndoEuropean Studies. 22 3  4 251264..  Steiner G. 1990. The Immigration of the First IndoEuropeans into Anatolia Reconsidered. Journal of IndoEuropean Studies. 18 1  2 185214..  Mallory J. P. 1989. In Search of the IndoEuropeans Language Archaeology and Myth. New York Thames and Hudson. ISBN 9780500050521. Retrieved 18 February 2022.  Anthony 2007 p. 133.  Anthony 2007 p. 229.  Anthony 2007 p. 262.  Mallory  Adams 1997 pp. 1216.  Parpola 2015 pp. 3738.  Anthony 2007 pp. 345 361367.  Anatolian languages. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2016.  Petra Goedegebuure  Anatolians on the Move From Kurgans to Kanesh Marija Gimbutas Memorial Lecture Oriental Institute University of Chicago retrieved 23 November 2021  Lehmann Winfred P. Slocum Jonathan. Hittite Online. Linguistics Research Center. University of Texas at Austin College of Liberal Arts. Archived from the original on 12 April 2010. Retrieved 12 April 2010.  Matessi Alvise 2021. The ways of an empire Continuity and change of route landscapes across the Taurus during the Hittite Period ca. 16501200 BCE in Journal of Anthropological Archaeology Volume 62 June 2021 ...the Hittite state emerged in Hatti in the bend of the Kzlrmak from a mosaic of canton polities occupying NorthCentral Anatolia during the Middle Bronze Age MBA ca. 19001650 BCE.  Kloekhorst  Waal 2019 p. 189.  Kloekhorst Alwin and Willemijn Waal 2019. A Hittite scribal tradition predating the tablet collections of attua The origin of the cushionshaped tablets KBo 
3.2 2 KBo 
17.2 1 KBo 
22.1  and KBo 
22.2 . in Zeitschrift Fr Assyriologie Und Vorderasiatische Archologie 1092 p. 190 ...Three of the four documents that have this peculiar cushionshape are generally regarded as showing Old Script OS KBo 
3.2 2 KBo 
17.2 1 and KBo 
22.1 ...  Forlanini 2010 pp. 115135.  a b Forlanini 2010 p. 121.  Kloekhorst Alwin 2021. A new interpretation of the Old Hittite Zalpatext CTH 
3.1  Na as the capital under uzziia I Labarna I and attuili I in Journal of the American Oriental Society Vol.141 No. 3 p. 564.  ed. StBoT 18  Kloekhorst Alwin 2021. A new interpretation of the Old Hittite Zalpatext CTH 
3.1  Na as the capital under uzziia I Labarna I and attuili I in Journal of the American Oriental Society Vol. 141 No. 3 p. 564 ...Around 1750 BCE Pitna king of Kuara conquered Na and took over power. He was succeeded by his son Anitta...  a b Forlanini 2010 p. 122.  a b Forlanini 2010 p. 130.  Bryce 2005.  Joost Blasweiler 2020 The kingdom of Hurma during the reign of Labarna and Hattusili. Part I. academia.edu  Forlanini 2010 p. 119.  Mark Joshua 28 April 2011. The Hittites. World History Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2017.  Roebuck 1966 p. 93.  The Hittites  Resources of Ancient Anatolia. Pericles Press. May 2017. Archived from the original on 6 March 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017.  a b c d Roebuck 1966 p. 94.  Forlanini 2010 pp. 115116.  Gurney 1966 p. 25.  Gurney 1966 pp. 2526.  a b Roux Georges 1993. Ancient Iraq. Penguin NonClassics. ISBN 9780140125238.  Zuckerman Molly K. Martin Debra L. 2016. New directions in biocultural anthropology 
1 st ed.. Hoboken New Jersey WileyBlackwell. p. 297. ISBN 9781118962961.  Trevisanato S. I. 2007. The Hittite plague an epidemic of tularemia and the first record of biological warfare. Medical Hypotheses. 69 6 13711374. doi
10.1 0
16 j.mehy.20
07.0 
3.0 12. PMID 17499936.  Windle Joachim Latacz 2004. Troy and Homer Towards a Solution of an Old Mystery. Oxford Oxford University Press. pp. 121122. ISBN 9780199263080. Archived from the original on 27 February 2017. Retrieved 2 April 2016.  Bryce 2005 pp. 5760.  Beckman Gary M. Bryce Trevor R. Cline Eric H. 2012. Writings from the Ancient World The Ahhiyawa Texts PDF. Writings from the Ancient World. Atlanta Society of Biblical Literature 6. ISSN 15707008. Archived PDF from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. At the very least perhaps we can say that the Ahhiyawa ProblemQuestion has been solved and answered after all for there is now little doubt that Ahhiyawa was a reference by the Hittites to some or all of the Bronze Age Mycenaean world.  Gurney 1966 p. 110.  a b c Gurney 1966 p. 36.  The peace treaty between Ramses II and Hattusili III. Ancient Egypt an introduction to the history and culture. December 2006. Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 27 January 2013.  Horst Nowacki Wolfgang Lefvre Creating Shapes in Civil and Naval Architecture A CrossDisciplinary Comparison Brill 2009 ISBN 9004173455  Gurney 1966 p. 39.  Spielvolgel Jackson 2011. Western Civilization. Boston MA Wadsworth Cengage Learning. p. 30. ISBN 9781111342142.  Drought may have doomed ancient Hittite empire tree study reveals. The Guardian. 8 February 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2023.  Barnett R.D. Phrygia and the Peoples of Anatolia in the Iron Age The Cambridge Ancient History Vol. II Part 2 1975 p. 422  The Georgian historian Ivane Javakhishvili considered Tabal Tubal Jabal and Jubal to be ancient Georgian tribal designations and argued that they spoke Kartvelian languages a nonIndoEuropean language  The Hittites smie.co 12 September 20
08 better source needed  Akurgal 2001 p. 118.  The Hittites. all about turkey. 5 May 2017. Archived from the original on 13 May 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017.  Bryce 2002 p. 22.  The Empire of the Hittites. The Old Testament Student. 4 1 3234. 1 September 1884. doi
10.1 086469493. JSTOR 3156304.  Gorny Ronald AugustNovember 1995. Hittite Imperialism and AntiImperial Resistance As Viewed from Aliar Hyk. The Archaeology of Empire in Ancient Anatolia 299300 6970. doi
10.2 3071357346. JSTOR 1357346. S
2 CID 163346233.  Telipinus Hittite king. Britannica. 5 May 2017. Archived from the original on 11 September 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017.  Eduljee K.E. 5 May 2017. Hittites. Heritage Institute. Archived from the original on 5 May 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017.  Hrozn Bedich Die Sprache der Hethiter ihr Bau und ihre Zugehrigkeit zum indogermanischen Sprachstamm ein Entzifferungsversuch Leipzig Germany J.C. Hinrichs 1917.  Hawkins David February 1986. Writing in Anatolia Imported and Indigenous Systems. World Archaeology. 17 3 363376. doi
10.1 080004382
43.1 9
86.9 979976. JSTOR 124701.  Melchert 2012 p. 7.  Jasanoff 2003 p. 20 with footnote 41.  Siren Christopher B. HittiteHurrian Mythology REF 
1.2  Myths and Legends. Comcast.net. Archived from the original on 6 July 2004. Retrieved 8 February 2011.  Kershaw Stephen P. 2013. A Brief Guide to the Greek Myths. Little Brown Book Group. ISBN 9781472107541.  Bryce 2002 p. 135.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Ta lknur Dinler Veysel 1 January 2015. Hittite Criminal Law in the Light of Modern Paradigms Searching for the traces of Modernday Criminal Law in the Past. Aramazd Armenian Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 9 7390.  a b Sayce A. H. 1905. The Hittite Inscriptions. The Biblical World. 26 1 3040. doi
10.1 086473607. JSTOR 3140922. S
2 CID 143295386.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Roth Martha. Law Collections from Mesopotamia and Asia Minor PDF. Writings from the Ancient World Society of Biblical Literature. 6 213246. Archived PDF from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 1 May 2018.  a b c Hoffner Harry A. 1981. The Old Hittite Version of Laws 164166. Journal of Cuneiform Studies. 33 34 206209. doi
10.2 3071359903. JSTOR 1359903. S
2 CID 159932628.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Coogan Michael David 2013. A reader of ancient Near Eastern texts  sources for the study of the Old Testament. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195324921. OCLC 796081940.  King James Bible 2 Kings 76 For the Lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots and a noise of horses even the noise of a great host and they said one to another Lo the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites and the kings of the Egyptians to come upon us.  Bryce 2005 pp. 355356.  Woudstra Marten 1981. The Book of Joshua. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 60. ISBN 9780802825254. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2015.  Full text of Hittites Mittanis  Aryans Indo Aryan Superstrate in Mitanni Internet. archive.org. Retrieved 14 August 2018.  Kelder Jorrit 2005. The Chariots of Ahhiyawa PDF. Dacia 65. Retrieved 19 March 2024.  Peled Ilan 4 November 2019. HL Hittite Laws. Law and Gender in the Ancient Near East and the Hebrew Bible. Routledge. p. 85. ISBN 9781000733457. Sourcesedit Akurgal Ekrem 2001. The Hattian and Hittite Civilizations. Ankara Ministry of Culture. ISBN 9789751727565. Anthony David W. 2007 The Horse the Wheel and Language. How BronzeAge Riders from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World Princeton University Press Archi Alfonso 2010. When Did the Hittites Begin to Write in Hittite. Pax Hethitica Studies on the Hittites and Their Neighbours in Honour of Itamar Singer. Wiesbaden Harrassowitz Verlag. pp. 3746. ISBN 9783447061193. Bachvarova Mary R. 2010. Manly Deeds Hittite Admonitory History and Eastern Mediterranean Didactic Epic. Epic and History. Chichester John Wiley  Sons. pp. 6685. ISBN 9781444315646. Barjamovic Gojko 2011. A Historical Geography of Anatolia in the Old Assyrian Colony Period. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press. ISBN 9788763536455. Beal Richard H 1986. The History of Kizzuwatna and the Date of the unaura Treaty. Orientalia. Vol. 55. pp. 4
24 ff. G Brinkman Hittite Diplomatic Texts Scholars Press 1999 ISBN 0788505513 UK Government Web Archive Bryce T. The Eternal Treaty from the Hittite perspective BMSAES 6 pp. 111 2006 Bryce Trevor R. 2002. Life and Society in the Hittite World. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199241705. Bryce Trevor R. 2005 1998. The Kingdom of the Hittites 
2 nd ed.. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199279081. Bryce Trevor R. 2009. The Routledge Handbook of the Peoples and Places of Ancient Western Asia The Near East from the Early Bronze Age to the fall of the Persian Empire. LondonNew York Routledge. ISBN 9781134159079. Bryce Trevor R. 2012. The World of The NeoHittite Kingdoms A Political and Military History. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191505027. Bryce Trevor R. 2016. The Land of Hiyawa Que Revisited. Anatolian Studies. 66 6779. doi
10.1 0
17 S0066154616000053. JSTOR 24878364. S
2 CID 163486778. Ceram C. W. 2001 The Secret of the Hittites The Discovery of an Ancient Empire. Phoenix Press ISBN 1842122959. Forlanini Massimo 2010. An Attempt at Reconstructing the Branches of the Hittite Royal Family of the Early Kingdom Period. Pax Hethitica Studies on the Hittites and Their Neighbours in Honour of Itamar Singer. Wiesbaden Harrassowitz Verlag. pp. 115135. ISBN 9783447061193. Gilan Amir. Epic and History in Hittite Anatolia In Search of a Local Hero. In Konstan  Raaflaub 2010 pp. 5165. Gilan Amir 2018. In Search of a Distant Past Forms of Historical Consciousness in Hittite Anatolia PDF. Anadolu. 44 123. Gilibert Alessandra 2011. SyroHittite Monumental Art and the Archaeology of Performance The Stone Reliefs at Carchemish and Zincirli in the Earlier First Millennium BCE. BerlinNew York Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 9783110222258. GoodnickWestenholz Joan 1997. Legends of the Kings of Akkade The Texts. Winona Lake Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9780931464850. GoodnickWestenholz Joan. Historical Events and the Process of Their Transformation in Akkadian Heroic Traditions. In Konstan  Raaflaub 2010 pp. 2650. Gurney O.R. 1966. The Hittites. Penguin. ISBN 0140202595. Gterbock Hans Gustav 1983 Hittite Historiography A Survey in H. Tadmor and M. Weinfeld eds. History Historiography and Interpretation Studies in Biblical and Cuneiform Literatures Magnes Press Hebrew University pp. 2135. Hoffner Jr. H.A 1973 The Hittites and Hurrians in D. J. Wiseman Peoples of the Old Testament Times Clarendon Press Oxford. Hittite Studies in Honor of Harry A. Hoffner Jr. on the Occasion of His 
65 th Birthday. Eisenbrauns 2003 ISBN 1575060795 Jasanoff Jay H. 2003. Hittite and the IndoEuropean Verb. Oxford Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199249053. Kloekhorst Alwin 2007. Etymological Dictionary of the Hittite Inherited Lexicon. Brill. ISBN 9789004160927. Kloekhorst Alwin 19 June 2014. Personal names from Kani the oldest IndoEuropean linguistic material. Farewell symposium Michiel de Vaan. Leiden. Kloekhorst Alwin Waal Willemijn 2019. A Hittite Scribal Tradition Predating the Tablet Collections of attua. Zeitschrift fr Assyriologie und vorderasiatische Archologie. 109 2 189203. doi
10.1 5
15 za20190014. hdl18873199128. S
2 CID 208141226. Kloekhorst Alwin 2020. The Authorship of the Old Hittite Palace Chronicle CTH 8 A Case for Anitta. Journal of Cuneiform Studies. 72 143155. doi
10.1 086709313. S
2 CID 224830641. Konstan David Raaflaub Kurt A. eds. 2010. Epic and History. Chichester John Wiley  Sons. ISBN 9781444315646. Macqueen J. G. 1986 The Hittites and Their Contemporaries in Asia Minor revised and enlarged Ancient Peoples and Places series ed. G. Daniel Thames and Hudson ISBN 0500021082. Mallory J.P. Adams D.Q. 1997. Encyclopedia of IndoEuropean Culture. Taylor  Francis. ISBN 9781884964985. Retrieved 24 March 2012. Melchert Craig 2012. The Position of Anatolian PDF. Melchert Craig 2020. Luwian. A Companion to Ancient Near Eastern Languages. Hoboken John Wiley  Sons. pp. 239256. ISBN 9781119193296. Mendenhall George E. 1973 The Tenth Generation The Origins of the Biblical Tradition The Johns Hopkins University Press ISBN 0801816548. Neu Erich 1974 Der Anitta Text StBoT 18 Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden. Orlin Louis L. 1970 Assyrian Colonies in Cappadocia Mouton The Hague. Parpola Asko 2015 The Roots of Hinduism. The Early Aryans and the Indus Civilization Oxford University Press UK Government Web Archive Srenhagen D. Forerunners of the HattusiliRamesses treaty BMSAES 6 pp. 5967 2006 Patri Sylvain 2007 Lalignement syntaxique dans les langues indoeuropennes dAnatolie StBoT 49 Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden ISBN 9783447056120 Roebuck Carl 1966. The World of Ancient Times. New York Charles Scribners Sons. Weeden Mark 2013. After the Hittites The Kingdoms of Karkamish and Palistin in Northern Syria PDF. Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies. 56 2 120. doi
10.1 1
11 j.204153
70.2 0
13.0 0055.x. Yakubovich Ilya 2020. Hittite. A Companion to Ancient Near Eastern Languages. Hoboken John Wiley  Sons. pp. 221237. ISBN 9781119193296. Further readingedit Bilgin Tayfun 2018. Officials and administration in the Hittite world. Berlin de Gruyter. ISBN 9781501516627. Jacques Freu et Michel Mazoyer Des origines  la fin de lancien royaume hittite Les Hittites et leur histoire Tome 1 Collection Kubaba LHarmattan Paris 2007 Jacques Freu et Michel Mazoyer Les dbuts du nouvel empire hittite Les Hittites et leur histoire Tome 2 Collection Kubaba LHarmattan Paris 2007 Jacques Freu et Michel Mazoyer Lapoge du nouvel empire hittite Les Hittites et leur histoire Tome 3 Collection Kubaba LHarmattan Paris 2008 Jacques Freu et Michel Mazoyer Le dclin et la chute de lempire Hittite Les Hittites et leur histoire Tome 4 Collection Kubaba LHarmattan Paris 2010 Jacques Freu et Michel Mazoyer Les royaumes NoHittites Les Hittites et leur histoire Tome 5 Collection Kubaba LHarmattan Paris 2012 Imparati Fiorella. Aspects De Lorganisation De Ltat Hittite Dans Les Documents Juridiques Et Administratifs. Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 25 no. 3 1982 22567. doi
10.2 3073632187 de Martino Stefan ed. 2022. Handbook of Hittite Empire. De Gruyter Oldenbourg. ISBN 9783110661781. Stone Damien. The Hittites Lost Civilizations. United Kingdom Reaktion Books 2023. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hittites. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Hittites. Wikiquote has quotations related to Hittites. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Hittites. Library resources about the Hittites Resources in your library Resources in other libraries New research suggests drought accelerated Hittite Empire collapse  Phys.org February 8 2023 Video lecture at Oriental Institute  Tracking the Frontiers of the Hittite Empire Pictures of Boazky one of a group of important sites Pictures of Yazlkaya one of a group of important sites Der Anitta Text at TITUS Tahsin Ozguc Hittites.info Hethitologieportal Mainz by the Akademie der Wissenschaften Mainz corpus of texts and extensive bibliographies on all things Hittite Missione Archeologica Italiana a Uakl Hyk  MAIAC. usaklihoyuk.org in Italian. Retrieved 17 January 2023. Map of Hittite Anatolia v t e Ancient kingdoms of Anatolia Bronze Age Ahhiyawa Arzawa Assuwa League Carchemish Hapalla Hatti HayasaAzzi Hittite Empire Hurrian States Isuwa Kizzuwatna Mitanni Kalama Kaskia Kussara Lukka Luwia Miletus Mira Mysia Nairi Pala PisidiaSagalassos Purushanda Seha Shupria Urshu Urumu WilusaTroy Zalpuwa Iron Age Aeolia Caria Cimmerians Colchis Diauehi Doris Etiuni Ionia Lycia Lydia Mushki NeoHittites Atuna Carchemish Gurgum ilakku Kammanu Kummuh Quw Tabal Phrygia Urartu Classical Age Antigonids Armenia Armenia Minor Bithynia Cappadocia Cilicia Commagene Galatia Osroene Paphlagonia Pergamon Pontus Turkey Portal v t e Anatolian peoples Peoples Cappadocians Carians Cataonians Caucones Cilicians Hittites Isaurians Leleges Leucosyri Luwians Lycaonians Lycians Termilae Lydians Maeonians Mariandyni Milyans Solymi Mysians Palaic peoples Pamphylians Paphlagonians Philistines Pisidians Sidians Telchines Trojans West Pontians v t e Timeline of Mesopotamia Northwestern Mesopotamia Northern Mesopotamia Southern Mesopotamia c. 35002350 BCE Late Chalcolithic 45  Early Jezirah 13 Uruk period  Jemdet Nasr period  Early Dynastic period c. 23502200 BCE Akkadian Empire c. 22002100 BCE Gutians c. 21002000 BCE Third Dynasty of Ur c. 20001800 BCE Mari and other Amorite citystates Old Assyrian period IsinLarsa and other Amorite citystates c. 18001600 BCE Old Hittite Kingdom Old Babylonian Empire Southern Akkadians c. 16001400 BCE Mitanni Hurrians Kardunia Kassites c. 14001200 BCE Middle Hittite Kingdom Middle Assyria c. 12001150 BCE Bronze Age Collapse Sea Peoples Arameans c. 1150911 BCE Phoenicia NeoHittite citystates Aram Damascus Arameans Middle Babylonia Chal de ans 911729 BCE NeoAssyrian Empire 729609 BCE 626539 BCE NeoBabylonian Empire Chaldeans 539331 BCE Achaemenid Empire 336301 BCE Macedonian Empire Ancient Greeks and Macedonians 311129 BCE Seleucid Empire 12963 BCE Seleucid Empire Parthian Empire 63 BCE224 CE Ancient Rome  Byzantine Empire Syria 2
24 mid 
7 C Sassanid Empire v t e Empires Ancient Colonies Akkadian NeoSumerian Assyrian Middle Assyrian NeoAssyrian Babylonian Old Babylonian Kassite NeoBabylonian Chinese Qin Han Jin Dmt Egyptian Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom New Kingdom Goguryeo Harsha Hellenistic Macedonian Seleucid Ptolemaic Bactrian IndoGreek Hittite Hunnic White Xiongnu Iranian Median Achaemenid Parthian Sasanian Kush Kushan Magadha Haryanka Shaishunaga Nanda Maurya Shunga Gupta Phoenician Carthaginian Roman Western Eastern Satavahana Xianbei Nirun Postclassical Aragonese Angevin Ayyubid Aztec Benin Bornu Bruneian Bulgarian First Second Burmese First Calakmul Caliphate Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Chalukya Western Eastern Chinese Sui Tang Liao Song Jn Yuan Chola Ethiopian Aksum Zagwe Solomonic Genoese Georgian Huetar Inca Kannauj Pala GurjaraPratihara Rashtrakuta Iranian Tahirid Saffarid Samanid Buyid Japanese Yamato Kamakura Muromachi Edo Kanem Khmer Latin Majapahit Mali Mongol Yuan Golden Horde Chagatai Khanate Ilkhanate Moroccan Idrisid Almoravid Almohad North Sea Oyo Hellenic Roman Byzantine Nicaea Thessalonica Trebizond Epirus Morea RomanoGermanic Carolingian Holy Roman Serbian Singhasari Songhai Srivijaya Tibetan Tikal Tiwanaku Toltec TurcoPersian Ghaznavid Great Seljuk Khwarezmian Timurid Turkic First Western Eastern Second Venetian Vietnamese Dinh Early Le Ly Tran Ho Later Tran Later Le Vijayanagara Wagadou Wari Modern Afghan Ashanti Austrian AustroHungarian Brazilian Burmese Second Third Central African Chinese Ming Qing China Manchukuo Ethiopian Haitian First Second French First Second German German Empire Nazi Germany Indian IndoPersian Mughal Sikh Iranian Safavid Afsharid Zand Qajar Pahlavi Japanese Korean Maratha Mexican First Second Mongol Oirat Khoshut Dzungar Kalmyk Bogd Moroccan Saadi Alawi Ottoman Russian Tsarist Imperial Sokoto Tongan Vietnamese Mac Revival Le Tay son Dainam Vietnam Colonial American Belgian British English Scottish Chinese Danish Dutch French German Italian Japanese Mongol Omani PolishLithuanian Couronian Portuguese Russian Spanish Swedish Lists Empires largest Ancient great powers Medieval great powers Modern great powers European colonialism African empires Miscellaneous Empire as a description of foreign policy American Empire Soviet empire Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHittitesoldid1222768969 Categories Hittites States and territories established in the 
17 th century BC States and territories disestablished in the 
12 th century BC Anatolian peoples Ancient peoples of Anatolia Ancient Syria Ancient history of Turkey Ancient Near East History of the Mediterranean Former kingdoms Former empires Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2015 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Greeklanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 Italianlanguage sources it Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 7 May 2024 at 2012 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width