Amenmesse - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Usurper 
2 Family 
3 Aftermath 
4 Gallery 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Amenmesse 31 languages  Azrbaycanca Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh For other people named Amenmose see Amenmose disambiguation. Amenmesse Pharaoh Reign 12011198 BC Predecessor Merneptah Successor Seti II Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Merymaat Shementawy K
3 ntmr.jM
3 mnt
3 wj Strong bull beloved of Maat he who strengthen the two lands Nebty name Werbiaytemipetsut1 Wrbj
3 wtmJptswt He who is great of miracles in Ipetsut Golden Horus Aa...Ipetsut  3... Great of ... Ipetsut  Prenomen Praenomen Menmire Setepenre MnmjRstp.nR Eternal like Ra the chosen one of Ra2 Nomen Amenmesse Heqawaset Jmnmsjswq
3 W
3 st Fashioned by Amun ruler of Waset Consort Tiya or Tiycitation needed Children Siptah Father Merneptah or Ramesses II Mother Takhat Died 1198 BC Burial KV103 Dynasty 
19 th Dynasty Amenmesse also Amenmesses or Amenmose was the fifth pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty in Ancient Egypt possibly the son of Merneptah and Queen Takhat. Others consider him to be one of the innumerable sons of Ramesses II. Very little is known about this pharaoh who ruled Egypt for only three to four years. Various Egyptologists date his reign between 1202 BC1199 BC4 or 1203 BC1200 BC5 with others giving an accession date of 1200 BC.6 Amenmesse means born of or fashioned by Amun in Egyptian. Additionally his nomen can be found with the epithet Heqawaset which means Ruler of Thebes.7 His royal name was Menmire Setepenre. Usurperedit Main article End of the 
19 th Dynasty It is likely that he was not Merneptahs intended heir. Scholars Kenneth Kitchen and Jrgen von Beckerath have theorized that Amenmesse usurped the throne from SetiMerneptah who was Merneptahs son and crown prince and who should have been next in the line of royal succession. It is unclear how this would have happened. Kitchen has written that Amenmesse may have taken advantage of a momentary weakness of SetiMerneptah or seized power while the crown prince was away in Asia. SetiMerneptah was most likely the same man as king Seti II whose reign was traditionally thought to have followed upon Amenmesses reign. The cartouches of Seti IIs tomb in Upper Egypt were deliberately erased and then repainted suggesting that Setis rule in Upper Egypt was temporarily interrupted by agents of his halfbrother. Confusion generally clouds Amenmesses reign and its correct position within the succession sequence of the rulers of the Egyptian 
19 th Dynasty. However an increasing number of Egyptologists today such as Rolf Krauss and Aidan Dodson maintain that Seti II was in fact the immediate successor of Merneptah without any intervening rule by Amenmesse.8 Under this scenario Amenmesse did not succeed Merneptah on the throne of Egypt and was rather a rival king who usurped power sometime during Years 2 to 4 of Seti IIs reign in Upper Egypt and Nubia where his authority is monumentally attested.9 Amenmesse was documented in power at Thebes during his third and fourth year and perhaps earlier in Nubia where Seti IIs Year 3 and Year 4 are noticeably unaccounted for.10 The treatment of Amenmesse as a rival king also best explains the pattern of destruction to Seti IIs tomb which was initially ransacked and later restored again by Seti IIs officials. This implies that the respective reigns of Amenmesse and Seti II were parallel to one another Seti II must have initially controlled Thebes in his first and second years during which time his tomb was excavated and partly decorated. Then Seti was ousted from power in Upper Egypt by Amenmesse whose agents desecrated Seti IIs tomb. Seti would finally defeat his rival Amenmesse and return to Thebes in triumph whereupon he ordered the restoration of his damaged tomb. Rolf Krauss followed by Aidan Dodson suggests that Amenmesse was once a Kushite Viceroy called Messuy.11 In particular two representations of Messuy on the temple of Amida allegedly show that a royal uraeus had been added to his brows in a way consistent with other pharaohs such as Horemheb Merneptah and some of the sons of Rameses III. An inscription at the temple of Amada also calls him the kings son himself but this may be merely a figure of speech to emphasize Messuys high stature as Viceroy under Merneptah. However Frank Yurco notes that various depictions of Messuy in several Nubian temples were never deliberately defaced by Seti IIs agents compared to the damnatio memoriae meted out to all depictions of another Viceroy of Kush Khaemtir who had served as Amenmesses Vizier.12 This strongly implies that Seti II held no grudge against Messuy which would be improbable if Messuy was indeed Amenmesse.13 Yurco also observes that the only objects from Messuys tomb which identified a Pharaoh all named only Merneptah Seti IIs father which leads to the conclusion that Messuy died and was buried in his tomb at Aniba Nubia during Merneptahs reign and could not be Amenmesse.14 There has also been a suggestion that the narrative of the Tale of Two Brothers first attested during the reign of Seti II may contain a veiled reference to the struggle between Amenmesse and Seti II. The records of a court case early in the reign of Seti II also throw some light on the matter. Papyrus Salt 124 records that Neferhotep one of the two chief workmen of the Deir elMedina necropolis had been killed during the reign of Amenmesse the kings name is written as Msy in the document.15 Neferhotep was replaced by Paneb his adopted son against whom many crimes were alleged by Neferhoteps brother Amennakhte in a stronglyworded indictment preserved on a papyrus in the British Museum. If Amennakhtes allegations can be trusted Paneb had stolen stone for the embellishment of his own tomb from that of Seti II in the course of its completion besides purloining or damaging other property belonging to that monarch. Also he had allegedly tried to kill Neferhotep in spite of having been educated by him and after the chief workman had been killed by the enemy had bribed the vizier Praemhab in order to usurp his place. Whatever the truth of these accusations it is clear that Thebes was going through very troubled times. There are references elsewhere to a war that had occurred during these years but it is obscure to what this word alludesperhaps to no more than internal disturbances and discontent. Neferhotep had complained of the attacks upon himself to the vizier Amenmose presumably a predecessor of Praemhab whereupon Amenmose had Paneb punished. Paneb however then successfully brought a complaint before MoseMsy whereupon the latter decided to dismiss Amenmose from office. Evidently this MoseMsy was a person of the highest importance who most probably should be identified with king Amenmesse himself.16 Familyedit See also Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree His mother is known to be Queen Takhat but who she is exactly is a matter of interpretation complicated by inscriptions being revised by Seti II and Amenmesse. Among her titles are Kings Daughter which would make her a daughter of Merneptah or Ramesses II or possibly a granddaughter of Ramesses. The name Takhat appears in a list of princesses dated to Year 53 of Ramesses II Louvre 6
66.1 7 If this is the same Takhat she would be about the same age as Seti II.18 A monument from Karnak carved while Amenmesse was in control of the area includes the relief of a woman titled Kings Daughter and Kings Mother. The monument was reinscribed from Mother to Wife. Another statue of Seti II Cairo CG1198 bears Setis name surcharged over someone elses while the names of Takhat were left alone. This suggests that Takhat was married to Seti as well as mother to Amenmesse.19 Others such as Frank Yurco believe Takhat was wife to Merneptah making the rivals Seti II and Amenmesse halfbrothers.20 Some assume that Twosret wife of Seti II was his sister. Amenmesses wife was thought to be a woman named Baktwerel since she was buried in the same tomb as Amenmesse KV10. Three mummies were initially present in this tomb two women and one man. It is uncertain if any of these remains belong to Amenmesse Takhat or Baketwerel. The two females Baketwerel and Takhat could have been buried later.21 Some people believe that Seti II broke into the tomb and had Amenmesses remains desecrated since his mummy was never found. Six quartzite statues originally placed along the axis of the hypostyle hall in the Amun Temple at Karnak are thought to be his although these were defaced and overwritten with the name of Seti II.22 One of these statues with the inscription the Great Royal Wife Takhat lends credence to the argument that a Takhat was Amenmesses wife. Amenmesse was also responsible for restoring a shrine dating from Thutmose III that stands before a temple at ElTod. There is confusion about the events surrounding his death. His mummy was not amongst those found in the cache at Deir el Bahri and from the destruction of his tomb in the Valley of the Kings it is assumed that Seti II took revenge upon his usurping halfbrother. Aftermathedit Amenmesse was buried in a rockcut tomb in the Valley of the Kings which is now identified as Tomb KV10. However almost all of its texts and scenes were either erased or usurped by Seti IIs agents. No mention of Amenmesse was spared.2324 A number of officials associated with Amenmesse were also attacked or replaced chief among them being the Theban High Priest of Amun Roma called Roy and Khaemtir a former viceroy of Kush who may have supported Amenmesses usurpation.25 Amenmesses tomb was looted in antiquity. However the remains of three mummies were found in this tomb two women and one man it is uncertain if any of these remains belong to Amenmesse Takhat or the later Baketwerel without further testing or whether they were later intrusions. It seems more likely however that Seti II had Amenmesses remains desecrated since his mummy was never found in either of the two great caches of royal mummies found in 1881 and 19
01.2 6 Surviving inscriptions mentioning Takhats name along with the wall inscriptions suggest she was buried in Amenmesses tomb. Artifacts from the tombs of Seti I and Rameses VI were also found in the KV10 tomb adding to the uncertainty. After his death Seti II also conducted a damnatio memoriae campaign against the memory of Amenmesses Vizier Khaemtir. Egyptologist Frank Yurco notes that Seti IIs agents erased all of Khaemtirs depictions and inscriptionseven those that were inscribed when Khaemtir served as a Viceroy in Nubia.27 It is possible that Siptah the Pharaoh who succeeded Seti II was the son of Amenmesse and not of Seti II. A statue of Siptah in Munich shows the Pharaoh seated in the lap of another clearly his father. The statue of the father however has been destroyed. Dodson writes The only ruler of the period who could have promoted such destruction was Amenmesse and likewise he is the only king whose offspring required such explicit promotion. The destruction of this figure is likely to have closely followed the fall of Bay or the death of Siptah himself when any shortlived rehabilitation of Amenmesse will have ended.28 M. Georg29 and Rolf Krauss3031 find that there are a number of parallels between the story of Amenmesse and the biblical story of Moses in Egypt. Galleryedit Referencesedit  Amenmesse  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. p.158  1 KV10 The Tomb of Amenmesse  Edward Wente and Charles Van Siclen III A Chronology of the New Kingdom 218  Michael Rice Whos Who in Ancient Egypt Routledge 1999  Vandersleyen gypte et la Valle du Nil vol 2 575  K. A. Kitchen The Titularies of the Ramesside Kings as Expression of Their Ideal Kingship ASAE 71 1987 13435.  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Handbook of Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 p.212  Krauss 1976 1977 1997 Dodson 1997  Hornung Krauss  Warburton op. cit. p.213  Krauss 1976 1977 The Viceroy of Kush Archived 20070223 at the Wayback Machine  Frank J. Yurco Was Amenmesse the Viceroy of Kush Messuwy JARCE 34 1997 pp.5354  56  Yurco JARCE 34 p.56  Yurco JARCE 34 pp.5556  J.J. Janssen Village Varia. Ten Studies on the History and Administration of Deir ElMedina Egyptologische Uitgaven 11 Leiden 1997. pp.99109  Rolf Krauss Untersuchungen zu Knig Amenmesse Nachtrge SAK 24 1997 pp.161184  Dodson A. Poisoned Legacy The Decline and Fall of the Nineteenth Egyptian Dynasty. American University In Cairo Press 2010 p 42 n 42  Dodson A. 2010 p 42  Dodson A. 2010 p 4042  Dodson A. 2010 n 38 n 40  Yurco JARCE 34 1997 p.54  Cardon 1979 Yurco 1979  Dodson Aidan. The Tomb of King Amenmesse Some Observations. DE 2 1985 711.  Dodson Aidan. Death after Death in the Valley of the Kings. In Death and Taxes in the Ancient Near East ed. Sara E. Orel 5359. Lewiston New York Edwin Mellen Press 1992.  Dodson Aidan 2004 ibid p.176  Yurco JARCE 34 1997 p.54  Yurco JARCE 34 1997 pp.4956.  Dodson Aidan2004 The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt American University of Cairo Press p.181  Georg M 2000 Mose  Name und Namenstraeger. Versuch einer historischen Annaeherung in Mose. Aegypten und das Alte Testament edited by E. Otto Verlag Katholisches Bibelwerk Stittgart  Krauss R. 2000 Moise le pharaon Editions du Roche  Rolf Krauss Das Rtsel MosesAuf den Spuren einer Erfindung biblischen. Ullstein Verlag Mnchen 2001 Bibliographyedit Cardon Patrick D. Amenmesse An Egyptian Royal Head of the Nineteenth Dynasty in the Metropolitan Museum. MMJ 14 1979 514. Dodson Aidan. The Takhats and Some Other Royal Ladies of the Ramesside Period. JEA 73 1987 22429. . and Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 2004. . Death after Death in the Valley of the Kings. In Death and Taxes in the Ancient Near East ed. Sara E. Orel 5359. Lewiston New York Edwin Mellen Press 1992. . Amenmesse in Kent Liverpool and Thebes. JEA 81 1995 11528. . Messuy Amada and Amenmesse. JARCE 34 1997 4148. Habachi Labib. King Amenmesse and Viziers Amenmose and Khaemtore Their Monuments and Place in History. MDAIK 34 1978 3967. Kitchen Kenneth A. The Titularies of the Ramesside Kings as Expression of Their Ideal Kingship. ASAE 71 1987 13141. Krauss Rolf. Untersuchungen zu Knig Amenmesse 1.Teil. SAK 4 1976 16199. . Untersuchungen zu Knig Amenmesse 2. Teil. SAK 5 1977 13174. . Untersuchungen zu Knig Amenmesse Nachtrge. SAK 24 1997 16184. Vandersleyen Claude. gypte et la Valle du Nil. Vol. 2 De la fin de Ancien Empire  la fin du Nouvel Empire. Paris Presses Universitaires de France 1995 Wente Edward and Charles Van Siclen III. A Chronology of the New Kingdom. In Studies in Honor of George R. Hughes January 12 1977 21761. Chicago The Oriental Institute 1976. Yurco Frank Joseph. Was Amenmesse the Viceroy of Kush Messuwy JARCE 34 1997 4956. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amenmesse. KV10 at The Theban Mapping Project Amenmesse the Real Moses v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAmenmesseoldid1210130378 Categories 
13 thcentury BC births 1199 BC deaths 
13 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
12 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 25 February 2024 at 0335 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width