Merneptah - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Prior to accession 
3 Chronology 
4 Reign 
5 Campaigns 
6 Succession 
7 Mummy 
8 See also 
9 References 
10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Merneptah 49 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml  Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Fourth pharaoh of the 
19 th Dynasty of Egypt Merneptah Merenptah Granodiorite bust of Merneptah Egyptian Museum Cairo Pharaoh Reign 12131203 BC ten years Predecessor Ramesses II Successor Seti IIAmenmesse Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Haiemmaat Nebty name Iribauertaentjemhu Golden Horus Nebsenedjaashefit1 Prenomen Praenomen Baenre Merynetjeru The Soul of Ra Beloved of the Gods Nomen Merneptah Hotephermaat Beloved of Ptah Joyous is Truth Consort Isetnofret II Takhat Children Seti II Merenptah Khaemwaset Isetnofret Father Ramesses II Mother Isetnofret Born c.1283 BC Died 2 May 1203 BC aged 80 Burial KV8 Mummy found in the KV35 royal cache Theban Necropolis Dynasty Nineteenth Dynasty Portrait of Pharaoh Merneptah Merneptah mrnpt mrnpt2 or Merenptah reigned July or August 1213 BC  2 May 1203 BC was the fourth pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Ancient Egypt. He ruled Egypt for almost ten years from late July or early August 1213 BC until his death on 2 May 1203 BC according to contemporary historical records.3 He was the first royalborn pharaoh since Tutankhamun of the Eighteenth Dynasty.4 Merneptah was the thirteenth son of Ramesses II5 only coming to power because all of his older brothers had died including his full brother Khaemwaset or Khaemwase. By the time he ascended to the throne he was around seventy years old. He is arguably best known for his victory stele featuring the first known mention of the name Israel. His throne name was Baenre Merynetjeru which means The Soul of Ra Beloved of the Gods. Familyedit Merneptah was likely the fourth child born to Isetnofret I and Ramesses II and his thirteenth son in total.5678 He married Isetnofret II who was likely his full sister or niece and she would be his Great Royal Wife when he became pharaoh Merneptah. They had at least two sons Merenptah named after his father and Seti II and a daughter Twosret. When Seti II became pharaoh his sister Twosret became his Great Royal Wife. She became pharaoh in her own right after the death of pharaoh Siptah. Takhat the mother of Amenmesse may have been a secondary queen though scholars are yet to confirm this. Prior to accessionedit Ramesses II lived well into his nineties and was one of the oldest pharaohs in Egyptian history if not the oldest. He outlived many of his heirs and eventually Merneptah would be the son to succeed him. Merneptah would have been prepared to be pharaoh through the responsibility of his government roles. By year 40 of Ramesses II Merneptah had been promoted to Overseer of the Army. In year 55 he was officially proclaimed crown prince. At that point he gained additional responsibilities by serving as Prince Regent for the last twelve years of Ramesses IIs life.9 Chronologyedit See also Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree According to one reading of contemporary historical records Merneptah ruled Egypt for almost ten years from late July or early August 1213 BC until his death on 2 May 1203 BC.3 Reignedit Merneptah moved the administrative center of Egypt from Piramesse PiRamesses his fathers capital back to Memphis where he constructed a royal palace next to the temple of Ptah. This palace was excavated in 1915 by the University of Pennsylvania Museum led by Clarence Stanley Fisher. Campaignsedit Limestone block showing a pair of unfinished cartouches of Merenptah Merneptah I 
19 th dynasty of Egypt Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Merneptah had to carry out several military campaigns during his reign. In the fifth year of his rule he fought against the Libyans whowith the assistance of the Sea Peopleswere threatening Egypt from the west. Merneptah led a victorious sixhour battle against a combined Libyan and Sea People force at the city of Perire probably located on the western edge of the Nile delta. His account of this campaign against the Sea Peoples and Libu is described in prose on a wall beside the sixth pylon at Karnak which states Beginning of the victory that his majesty achieved in the land of Libya I Ekwesh Teresh Lukka Sherden Shekelesh Northerners coming from all lands. Later in the inscription Merneptah receives news of the attack ... the third season saying The wretched fallen chief of Libya Meryre son of Ded has fallen upon the country of Tehenu with his bowmenSherden Shekelesh Ekwesh Lukka Teresh Taking the best of every warrior and every man of war of his country. He has brought his wife and his childrenleaders of the camp and he has reached the western boundary in the fields of Perire.10 Merneptah makes an offering to Ptah on a column An inscription on the Athribis Stele now in the garden of Cairo Museum declares His majesty was enraged at their report like a lion assembled his court and gave a rousing speech. Later he dreamed he saw Ptah handing him a sword and saying Take thou it and banish thou the fearful heart from thee. When the bowmen went forth says the inscription Amun was with them as a shield. After six hours the surviving Nine Bows threw down their weapons abandoned their baggage and dependents and ran for their lives. Merneptah states that he defeated the invasion killing 6000 soldiers and taking 9000 prisoners. To be sure of the numbers among other things he took the penises of all uncircumcised enemy dead and the hands of all the circumcised from which history learns that the Ekwesh were circumcised a fact causing some to doubt that they were Greek. There is also an account of the same events in the form of a poem from the Merneptah Stele also known as the Israel Stele which mentions the suppression of revolts in Canaan and makes reference to the supposed utter destruction of Israel in a campaign prior to his fifth year in Canaan Israel has been wiped out ... its seed is no more. This is the first recognised ancient Egyptian record of the existence of Israelnot as a country or city but as a tribe or people.11 A newly discovered massive layer of fiery destruction confirms Merneptahs boast about his Canaanite campaign.12 Successionedit Main article End of the 
19 th Dynasty Stone sarcophagus of Merneptah in KV8 Merneptah was already an elderly man in his late 
60 s if not early 
70 s when he assumed the throne.13 Merneptahs successor Seti II was a son of Queen Isetnofret. However Seti IIs accession to the throne was not unchallenged a rival king named Amenmesse who was either another son of Merneptah by Takhat or much less likely of Ramesses II seized control of Upper Egypt and Kush during the middle of the reign of Seti II. Only after he overcame Amenmesse was Seti able to reassert his authority over Thebes in his fifth year. It is possible that before seizing Upper Egypt Amenmesse had been known as Messuy and had been viceroy of Kush. Mummyedit Mummy of Merneptah Merneptah suffered from arthritis and atherosclerosis and died as an old man after a reign that lasted for nearly a decade. He was originally buried within tomb KV8 in the Valley of the Kings but his mummy was not found there. In 1898 it was located along with eighteen other mummies in the mummy cache found in the tomb of Amenhotep II KV35 by Victor Loret. His mummy was taken to Cairo and eventually unwrapped by G. Elliott Smith on July 8 1907. Smith notes that The body is that of an old man and is 1 meter 714 millimeters 56 in height. Merneptah was almost completely bald only a narrow fringe of white hair now cut so close as to be seen only with difficulty remaining on the temples and occiput. A few short about 2 mill black hairs were found on the upper lip and scattered closely clipped hairs on the cheeks and chin. The general aspect of the face recalls that of Ramesses II but the form of the cranium and the measurements of the face much more nearly agree with those of his grandfather Seti the Great.14 In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.15 See alsoedit List of children of Ramesses II Referencesedit  King Merenptah Digital Egypt University College London 2001. Accessed 20070929.  Merneptah. Random House Websters Unabridged Dictionary.  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten Mainz 1997 pp.190  Darnell J. C.  Manassa C. 2007. Tutankhamuns Armies Battle and Conquest During Ancient Egypts Late Eighteenth Dynasty. John Wiley  Sons.  a b Gae Callender The Eye Of Horus A History of Ancient Egypt Longman Cheshire 1993 p.263  Merrill J. Marc 20120502. 1 Building Bridges of Time Places and People Volume I Tombs Temples  Cities of Egypt Israel Greece  Italy. AuthorHouse. p. 213. ISBN 9781468573695.  Bart Anneke. Merneptah. slu.edu. Saint Louis University. Retrieved 20171221. Merneptah was the 
13 th son of Ramses II.  Penn Museum  Egypt Sphinx Gallery. Penn Museum. Retrieved 20171221. Merenptah was the 
13 th son and eventual successor of the famous Ramses II.  Merneptah. Academic Dictionaries and Encyclopedias. Retrieved 20171221. Already a man in his sixties Merneptah had helped to manage state affairs for his father in the city of PiRamesse and in the Delta and he now took on new responsibilities ruling as prince regent for the elderly king throughout the last twelve years of his reign.  Robert Drews The End of the Bronze Age Princeton University Press 1993. p.49  Jacobus Van Dijk The Amarna Period and the Later New Kingdom in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt ed. Ian Shaw Oxford University Press 2000 p.302  Bohstrom Philippe 2017. First Discovery of Bodies in Biblical Gezer From Fiery Destruction 3200 Years Ago.  Joyce Tyldesley 2001. Ramesses Egypts Greatest Pharaoh. Penguin Books. p. 185.  Grafton Elliot Smith The Royal Mummies Cairo 1912 pp. 6570  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Further readingedit Eva March Tappan ed. The Worlds Story A History of the World in Story Song and Art Boston Houghton Mifflin 1914 Vol. III Egypt Africa and Arabia trans. W. K. Flinders Petrie pp. 4755 scanned by J. S. Arkenberg Department of History California State Fullerton Professor Arkenberg has modernized the text and it is available via Internet Ancient History Sourcebook Wikimedia Commons has media related to Merneptah. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Israel United States People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMerneptaholdid1220466198 Categories 
13 thcentury BC births 1203 BC deaths 
13 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies Ramesses II Children of Ramesses II Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 2323 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width