Seti II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Contest for the throne 
2 Reign 
3 Wives and treasure 
4 Mummy 
5 Bibliography 
6 References 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Seti II 39 languages  Azrbaycanca  Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty Seti II Statue of Seti II at the Museo Egizio Turin Italy Pharaoh Reign 12031197 BC1 Predecessor Merneptah Successor Siptah Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Werpehti K
3 ntwrptj Strong bull great of strength Nebty name Nakhtkhepeshderpedjut91 Ntpdrpwt9 He who strikes victoriously the 9 bows the enemies of Egypt Golden Horus Aaneruemtawnebu 
3 nrwmt
3 wnbw He whose victories are great in all the lands Prenomen Praenomen Userkheperure Setepenre2 WsrprwRstpnR Powerful are the manifestations of Ra the chosen one of Ra Nomen Seti Meryenptah StjmrjnPt Seth beloved of Ptah Consort Takhat Twosret Children SetiMerenptah Father Merneptah Mother Isetnofret II Died 1197 BC Burial KV153 Mummy found in the KV35 royal cache Theban Necropolis Dynasty 
19 th Dynasty Seti II or Sethos II was the fifth pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt and reigned from c. 1203 BC to 1197 BC.1 His throne name Userkheperure Setepenre means Powerful are the manifestations of Re the chosen one of Re.4 He was the son of Merneptah and Isetnofret II and occupied the throne during a period known for dynastic intrigue and short reigns and his rule was no different. Seti II had to deal with many serious plots most significantly the accession of a rival king named Amenmesse possibly a half brother who seized control over Thebes and Nubia in Upper Egypt during his second to fourth regnal years. Contest for the throneedit Evidence that Amenmesse was a direct contemporary with Seti IIs rulerather than Seti IIs immediate predecessorincludes the fact that Seti IIs royal KV155 tomb at Thebes was deliberately vandalised with many of Setis royal names being carefully erased here during his reign.6 The erasures were subsequently repaired by Seti IIs agents. This suggests that Seti IIs reign at Thebes was interrupted by the rise of a rival king Amenmesse in Upper Egypt.7 Secondly the German scholar Wolfgang Helck has shown that Amenmesse is only attested in Upper Egypt by several Year 3 and a single Year 4 ostracas Helck also noted that no Year 1 or Year 2 ostracas from Deir El Medina could legitimately be assigned to Amenmesses reign.8 This conforms well with the clear evidence of Seti IIs control over Thebes in his first two years which is attested by various documents and papyri. In contrast Seti II is absent from Upper Egypt during his third and fourth years which are notably unattestedpresumably because Amenmesse controlled this region during this time.9 Mummy of Seti II Finally and most importantly it is well known that the chief foreman of Deir elMedina a certain Neferhotep was killed in the reign of king Amenmesse on the orders of a certain Msy who was either Amenmesse himself or one of this kings agents according to Papyrus Salt 1
24.1 0 However Neferhotep is attested in office in the work register list of Ostraca MMA 

14.6.2 17 which also recorded Seti IIs accession to the throne and was later reused to register workers absences under this kings reign.11 If Seti IIs 
6 year reign followed that of the usurper Amenmesse then this chief foreman would not have been mentioned in a document which dated to the start of Seti IIs reign since Neferhotep was already dead.12 This indicates that the reigns of Amenmesse and Seti II must have partly overlapped with one another and suggests that both rulers were rivals who were fighting each another for the throne of Egypt. During the second to fourth years of AmenmesseSeti IIs parallel reigns Amenmesse gained the upper hand and seized control over Upper Egypt and Nubia he ordered Seti IIs tomb in the Valley of the Kings to be vandalised. Prior to his fifth year however Amenmesse was finally defeated by his rival Seti II who was the legitimate successor to the throne since he was Merneptahs son. Seti II in turn launched a damnatio memoriae campaign against all inscriptions and monuments belonging to both Amenmesse and this kings chief supporters in Thebes and Nubia which included a certain Khaemter a former Viceroy of Kush who had served as Amenmesses Vizier. Seti IIs agents completely erased both scenes and texts from KV10 the royal tomb of Amenmesse.13 Vizier Khaemters scenes in Nubia which were carved when he served as the Viceroy of Kush were so thoroughly erased that until Rolf Krauss and Labib Habachis articles were published in the 19
70 s1415 his career here as viceroy was almost unknown notes Frank J. Yurco.16 Reignedit See also End of the 
19 th Dynasty Limestone fragment inscribed with the birthname of King Seti II within a cartouche. 
19 th Dynasty. From Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London A replica statue of Seti II holding a shrine to the god Amun on display at the Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum A small temple erected by Seti II in the atrium of the temple of Karnak. An obelisk erected by Seti II in front of Karnak temple Seti II promoted Chancellor Bay to become his most important state official and built 3 tombs  KV13 KV14 and KV15  for himself his Senior Queen Twosret and Bay in the Valley of the Kings. This was an unprecedented act on his part for Bay who was of Syrian descent and was not connected by marriage or blood ties to the royal family. Because Seti II had his accession between II Peret 29 and III Peret 6 while SiptahSeti IIs successorhad his accession around late IV Akhet to early I Peret 217 Setis 
6 th and final regnal year lasted about 10 months therefore Seti II ruled Egypt for 5 years and 10 months or almost 6 full years when he died. Due to the relative brevity of his reign Setis tomb was unfinished at the time of his death. Twosret later rose to power herself after the death of Siptah Seti IIs successor. According to an inscribed ostraca document from the Deir elMedina workers community Seti IIs death was announced to the workmen by The Chief of police Nakhtmin on Year 6 I Peret 19 of Seti IIs reign.18 Since it would have taken time for the news of Seti IIs death to reach Thebes from the capital city of PiRamesses in Lower Egypt the date of I Peret 19 only marks the day the news of the kings death reached Deir elMedina.19 Seti II likely died sometime late in IV Akhet or early in I Peret Wolfgang Helck and R.J. Demare have now proposed I Peret 2 as the date of Seti IIs actual death20 presumably since it is 70 days before the day of his burial. From a graffito written in the first corridor of Twosrets KV14 tomb Seti II was buried in his KV15 tomb on Year 1 III Peret day 11 of Siptahs reign.21 Seti IIs earliest prenomen in his First Year was Userkheperure Setepenre22 which is written above an inscription of Messuy a Viceroy of Nubia under Merneptah on a rock outcropping at Bigeh Island. However Messuys burial in Tomb S90 in Nubia has been discovered to contain only funerary objects naming Merneptah which suggests that 1 Messuy may have died during Merneptahs reign and 2 Seti II may have merely associated himself with an official who had actively served his father as Viceroy of Kush. Seti II soon changed his royal name to Userkheperure Meryamun which was the most common form of his prenomen. Two important papyri date from the reign of Seti II. The first of these is the Tale of Two Brothers a fabulous story of troubles within a family on the death of their father which may have been intended in part as political satire on the situation of the two half brothers. The second is the records of the trial of Paneb. Neferhotep one of the two chief workmen of the Deir elMedina necropolis had been replaced by Paneb his troublesome soninlaw. Many crimes were alleged by Neferhoteps brotherAmennakhteagainst Paneb in a violently worded indictment preserved in papyrus now in the British Museum. If Amennakhtes testimony can be trusted Paneb had allegedly stolen stone from the tomb of Seti II while still working on its completionfor the embellishment of his own tombbesides purloining or damaging other property belonging to that monarch. Paneb was also accused of trying to kill Neferhotep his adopted fatherinlaw despite being educated by the latter and after the murder of Neferhotep by the enemy Paneb had reportedly bribed the Vizier Praemhab in order to usurp his fathers office. Whatever the truth of these accusations it is clear that Thebes was going through very troubled times. There are references elsewhere to a war that had occurred during these years but it is obscure to what this word alludesperhaps to no more than internal disturbances and discontent. Neferhotep had complained of Panebs attacks on himself to the vizier Amenmose presumably a predecessor of Praemhab whereupon Amenmose had punished Paneb. This troublemaker had then brought a complaint before Mose i.e. Msy who then acted to remove Praemhab from his office. Evidently this Mose must have been a person of the highest importance perhaps the king Amenmesse himself or a senior ally of the king. Seti II also expanded the copper mining at Timna Valley in Edom building an important temple to Hathor the cow goddess in the region. It was abandoned in the late Bronze Age collapse where a part of the temple seems to have been used by Midianite nomads linked to the worship of a bronze serpent discovered in the area.23 Seti II also founded a station for a barge on the courtyard in front of the pylon II at Karnak and chapels of the Theban Triad  Amun Mut and Khonsu. Wives and treasureedit Of the wives of Seti II Twosret and Takhat seem certain. Twosret would rule as regent for Siptah and later as Pharaoh. Her name is recorded in Manethos Epitome as a certain Thuoris who is assigned a reign of 7 years. Takhat bears the title of Kings Daughter which would make her the offspring of either Ramesses II or Merenptah. A list of princesses dated to Year 53 of Ramesses II names a Takhat who is not included in earlier lists. This would make her about the same age or younger than Seti II. The traditional view has been that the rivals were halfbrothers with Takhat as Queen to Merenptah and mother to Amenmesse while the mother of Seti II was Isetnofret II. Takhat is shown on several statues of Amenmesse and on one of these she is called Kings Daughter and Kings Wife with the word wife inscribed over Mother. According to Aidan Dodson the title was recarved when Seti regained control and usurped the statue. This would seem to indicate that Takhat was married to Seti and that Amenmesse was Setis son and usurped the throne from his own father.24 Dodson allows that there may have been two women named Takhat but the treatment of the image of Takhat makes it unlikely. Gold earrings containing Seti IIs name discovered in KV56 For many years a certain Tiaa was also accepted as a wife of Seti II and mother of Siptah. This was based on a number of funerary objects found in the tomb of Siptah bearing the name of Tiaa as Kings Wife and Kings Mother. However it now seems that these items washed into Siptahs tomb from the nearby tomb KV32 as the result of an accidental breakthrough. KV32 is the tomb of the wife of Thutmose IV Tiaa.25 In January 1908 the Egyptologist Edward R. Ayrton in an excavation conducted for Theodore M. Davis discovered a small burial in tomb KV56 which Davis referred to as The Gold Tomb in his publication of the discovery in the Valley of the Kings it proved to contain a small cache of jewelry that featured the name of Seti II.26 A set of earrings fingerrings bracelets a series of necklace ornaments and amulets a pair of silver gloves and a tiny silver sandal were found within this tomb.27 Mummyedit In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.28 Bibliographyedit Gabriella Dembitz The Decree of Sethos II at Karnak  Further Thoughts on the Succession Problem after Merenptah in In K. Endreffy  A. Gulys eds. Proceedings of the Fourth Central European Conference of Young Egyptologists. 31 August  2 September 2006 Budapest. Studia Aegyptiaca 18. 91  108 2007. Referencesedit  a b c Seti II on digital Egypt  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. p.158  Seti II. Retrieved 20070317.  Clayton p.158  KV 15 Sety II. Theban Mapping Project. Retrieved 5 November 2015.  Aidan Dodson The Decorative Phases of the Tomb of Sethos II and their Historical Implications Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 85 1999 pp. 136138  Dodson p. 131  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Handbook of Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 p.213  E. F. Wente  C. C. Van Siclen A Chronology of the New Kingdom Studies in Honor of George R. Hughes January 12 1977 Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 39 Chicago Oriental Institute p.252  Jac Janssen Amenmesse and After The chronology of the late Nineteenth Dynasty Ostraca in Village Varia. Ten Studies on the History and Administration of Deir elMedina Egyptologische Utigaven 11 Leiden 1997 pp. 99109  Janssen p.104  Janssen p.100  Otto Schaden Amenmesse Project Report ARCE Newsletter No.163 Fall 1993 pp. 19  Rolf Krauss Untersuchungen zu Knig Amenmesse Studien zur altgyptischen Kultur 5 1977 pp. 131174.  Labib Habachi King Amenmesse and Viziers Amenmose and Khaemtore Their Monuments and Place in History Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 34 1978 pp. 5867  Frank Joseph Yurco Was Amenmesse the Viceroy of Kush Messuwy Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 39 1997 p. 56  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten MASPhilipp von Zabern 1997 p.201  KRI IV 327. II.2228 57 A.17  Jacobus J. Janssen Village Varia Ten Studies on the History and Administration of Deir elMedina Egyptologische Uitgaven 11 Leiden Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten 1997 15354  Wolfgang Helck Begrbnis Pharaos in The Intellectual Heritage of Egypt Studies Presented to Lszl Kkosy by Friends and Colleagues on the Occasion of his 
60 th Birthday ed. Ulrich Luft Budapest La Chair dgyptologie de lUniversit Etvs Lorno de Budapest 1992 270 n.12. See also R.J. Demare The King is Dead  Long Live the King GM 137 1993 p.52  Hartwig Altenmller Bemerkungen zu den neu gefundenen Daten im Grab der Knigin Twosre KV 14 im Tal der Knige von Theben pp.147148 Abb. 19. Cf. Der Begrbnistag Sethos II SAK 11 1984 3738  Das Graffito 551 aus der thebanischen Nekropole SAK 21 1994 pp.1928  Frank Joseph Yurco Was Amenmesse the Viceroy of Kush Messuwy JARCE 39 1997 pp.4956  Magnusson Magnus Archaeology of the Bible Lands BBC Books  Dodson A. Poisoned Legacy The Decline and Fall of the Nineteenth Egyptian Dynasty American University Press in Cairo 2010. Appendix 4 p 40  Dodson A 2010 p 91  Davis T. M. The Tomb of Sipthah the Monkey Tomb and the Gold Tomb No.4 Bibn el Molk Theodore M. Davis Excavations A. Constable London 1908  Reeves Nicholas 2001. Reexcavating The Gold Tomb. Nicholasreeves.com. University College London. Archived from the original on 16 September 2009.  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021. External linksedit Media related to Seti II at Wikimedia Commons v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSetiIIoldid1220466379 Categories Seti II 
13 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
12 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt 1197 BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 2325 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width