File:Sethnakht closeup Lepsius.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileSethnakht closeup Lepsius.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. SethnakhtcloseupLepsius.png 506  522 pixels file size 441 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionSethnakht closeup Lepsius.png English Drawing of a relief of pharaoh Sethnakht. 
20 th dynasty New kingdom. Date 24 December 2013 115346 Source Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und Aethiopien band VIII  Abth. III. Blatt 299. Author Karl Richard Lepsius 181084 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1884 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 24 December 2013 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1119 24 December 2013 506  522 441 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Setnakhte Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox DraftList of burial places and mummies of Egyptian Pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org    Usage on arz.wikipedia.org       Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirminci slal Misir Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on el.wikipedia.org     Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Usage on fa.wikipedia.org   Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Sethnakht Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XX dinasta exipcia Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     XX  Usage on it.wikipedia.org Tausert Sethnakht Lista dei faraoni Bay cancelliere Usage on no.wikipedia.org 20. egyptiske dynasti Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni A XXa Dinastie Egiptean Usage on ru.wikipedia.org XX  Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Dvajseta egipanska dinastija Setnaht Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Setnakhte Usage on ta.wikipedia.org     Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Ikadalawampung dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Yirminci Hanedan Setnakhte Usage on uk.wikipedia.org   Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Setnakhte Danh sch pharaon Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.7 8 dpc Vertical resolution 
37.7 8 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileSethnakhtcloseupLepsius.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width