Ramesses III - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Early Years 
3 Accession 
4 Tenure of constant war 
5 Economic turmoil 
6 Conspiracy and death 
7 DNA and possible relationship with his son Pentawaret 
8 Legacy 
9 Chronological dispute 
10 Gallery 
11 References 
12 Further reading 
13 External links Toggle the table of contents Ramesses III 51 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn  Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh 11861155 BCE New Kingdom 
20 th Dynasty Ramesses III Ramses III Rameses III Relief from the sanctuary of the Temple of Khonsu at Karnak depicting Ramesses III Pharaoh Pharaoh Reign 11861155 BC Predecessor Setnakhte Successor Ramesses IV Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Aanisut K
3 nt
3 nsyt Strong bull whose royalty is great Nebty name Werhabused mi Tatenen Wrb.wsdmjT
3 nn Great of Hebsed like PtahTatenen Golden Horus Userrenput mi Atum Wsrrnp.wtmjJtm The golden falcon rich in years like Atum Prenomen Praenomen Usermaatre Meriamun Wsrm
3 tRmrjJmn Strong is the Maat of Ra beloved of Amun Nomen Ramesisu Heqaiunu R msj sw q3 Jwnw Ra has fashioned him ruler of Heliopolis Consort Tyti Isis TaHemdjert Tiye Children By Tyti Amenherkhepeshef Ramesses IV Meryamun By Isis TaHemdjert Pareherwenemef Ramesses VI Montuherkhopshef By Tiye Khaemwaset Pentawere Meryatum Ramesses VIII Duatentopet only daughter Father Setnakhte Mother TiyMerenese Born 1217 BC Died 1155 BC aged 6162 Burial KV11 Mummy found in the Deir elBahri royal cache Theban Necropolis Monuments Medinet Habu Dynasty 
20 th Dynasty Usermaatre Meryamun Ramesses III was the second Pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty in Ancient Egypt. Some scholars date his reign from 26 March 1186 to 15 April 1155 BC and he considered to be the last great king of the New Kingdom. His long reign saw the decline of Egyptian political and economic power linked to a series of invasions and internal economic problems that also plagued pharaohs before him. This coincided with a decline in the cultural sphere of Ancient Egypt.1 However his successful defense was able to slow down the decline although it still meant that his successors would have a weaker military. He has also been described as a warrior Pharaoh due to his strong military strategies. He led the way by defeating the invaders known as the Sea Peoples who had caused destruction in other civilizations and empires. He was able to save Egypt from collapsing at the time when many other empires fell during the Late Bronze Age however the damage of the invasions took a toll on Egypt.2 Rameses III constructed one of the largest mortuary temples of western Thebes now called Medinet Habu.3 He was assassinated in the Harem conspiracy led by his secondary wife Tiye and her eldest son Pentawere. This would ultimately cause a succession crisis which would further accelerate the decline of Ancient Egypt. He was succeeded by his son and designated successor Ramesses IV although many of his other sons would rule later. Name Ramesses also written Ramses and Rameses two main names transliterate as wsrmtrmrymn rmsswnw. They are normally realised as UsermaatreMeryamun RamesesHeqaiunu meaning The Maat of Ra is strong Beloved of Amun Born of Ra Ruler of Heliopolis. Early Years Ramesses III was the son of Setnakhte and TiyMerenese who wrote her name in a cartouche. Accession Ramesses III is believed to have reigned from March 1186 to April 1155 BC. This is based on his known accession date of I Shemu day 26 and his death on Year 32 III Shemu day 15 for a reign of 31 years 1 month and 19 days.4 Alternative dates for his reign are 11871156 BC. In a description of his coronation from Medinet Habu four doves were said to be dispatched to the four corners of the horizon to confirm that the living Horus Ramses III is still in possession of his throne that the order of Maat prevails in the cosmos and society.56 Tenure of constant war Further information Battle of Djahy Battle of the Delta and Ramesses III prisoner tiles Statue of Ramesses III at the Rockefeller Museum Jerusalem Ramses III offering incense wall painting in KV11. During his long tenure in the midst of the surrounding political chaos of the Late Bronze Age collapse Egypt was beset by foreign invaders including the socalled Sea Peoples and the Libyans and experienced the beginnings of increasing economic difficulties and internal strife which would eventually lead to the collapse of the Twentieth Dynasty. In Year 8 of his reign the Sea Peoples including Peleset Denyen Shardana Meshwesh of the sea and Tjekker invaded Egypt by land and sea. Ramesses III defeated them in two great land and sea battles. First he defeated them on land in the Battle of Djahy on the Egyptian Empires easternmost frontier in Djahy or modernday southern Lebanon. The second one was the Battle of the Delta in which Ramesses enticed the Sea Peoples and their ships into the mouth of the Nile where he had assembled a fleet in ambush. Although the Egyptians had a reputation as poor seamen they fought tenaciously. Rameses lined the shores with ranks of archers who kept up a continuous volley of arrows into the enemy ships when they attempted to land on the banks of the Nile. Then the Egyptian navy attacked using grappling hooks to haul in the enemy ships. In the brutal handtohand fighting which ensued the Sea Peoples were utterly defeated. The Harris Papyrus states As for those who reached my frontier their seed is not their heart and their soul are finished forever and ever. As for those who came forward together on the seas the full flame was in front of them at the Nile mouths while a stockade of lances surrounded them on the shore prostrated on the beach slain and made into heaps from head to tail.7 Ramesses III incorporated the Sea Peoples as subject peoples and settled them in southern Canaan. Their presence in Canaan may have contributed to the formation of new states in this region such as Philistia after the collapse of the Egyptian Empire in Asia. During the reign of Ramses III Egyptian presence in the Levant is still attested as far as Byblos8 and he may have campaigned further north into Syria.910 Ramesses III was also compelled to fight invading Libyan tribesmen in two major campaigns in Egypts Western Delta in his Year 5 and Year 11 respectively.11 By the early 
12 th century Egypt claimed overlordship of Cyrenaican tribes. At one point a ruler chosen by Egypt was set up briefly over the combined tribes of Meshwesh Libu and Soped.12 Economic turmoil The heavy cost of these battles slowly exhausted Egypts treasury and contributed to the gradual decline of the Egyptian Empire in Asia. The severity of these difficulties is stressed by the fact that the first known labour strike in recorded history occurred during Year 29 of Ramesses IIIs reign when the food rations for the favoured and elite royal tombbuilders and artisans in the village of Set Maat her imenty Waset now known as Deir elMedina could not be provisioned.13 Something in the air possibly the Hekla 3 eruption prevented much sunlight from reaching the ground and also arrested global tree growth for almost two full decades until 1140 BC. The result in Egypt was a substantial increase in grain prices under the later reigns of Ramesses VIVII whereas the prices for fowl and slaves remained constant.14 Thus the cooldown affected Ramesses IIIs final years and impaired his ability to provide a constant supply of grain rations to the workmen of the Deir elMedina community. Osirid statues of Ramses III at his temple in Karnak in the first courtyard of the Great Temple of Amun. These difficult realities are completely ignored in Ramesses official monuments many of which seek to emulate those of his famous predecessor Ramesses II and which present an image of continuity and stability. He built important additions to the temples at Luxor and Karnak and his funerary temple and administrative complex at MedinetHabu is amongst the largest and bestpreserved in Egypt however the uncertainty of Ramesses times is apparent from the massive fortifications which were built to enclose the latter. No temple in the heart of Egypt prior to Ramesses reign had ever needed to be protected in such a manner. Conspiracy and death Main article Harem conspiracy Fragment of the Journal of the Necropolis concerning the change of reign Ramesses III to Ramesses IV. Museo Egizio Turin. Thanks to the discovery of papyrus trial transcripts dated to Ramesses III it is now known that there was a plot against his life as a result of a royal harem conspiracy during a celebration at Medinet Habu On day 15 of month 2 of Shemu 1155 BCE. The conspiracy was instigated by Tiye one of his three known wives the others being Tyti and Iset TaHemdjert over whose son would inherit the throne. Tytis son Ramesses Amenherkhepshef the future Ramesses IV was the eldest and the successor chosen by Ramesses III in preference to Tiyes son Pentaweret. The trial documents15 show that many individuals were implicated in the plot.16 Chief among them were Queen Tiye and her son Pentaweret Ramesses chief of the chamber Pebekkamen seven royal butlers a respectable state office two Treasury overseers two Army standard bearers two royal scribes and a herald. There is little doubt that all of the main conspirators were executed some of the condemned were given the option of committing suicide possibly by poison rather than being put to death.17 According to the surviving trial transcripts a total of three separate trials were started while 38 people were sentenced to death.18 The tombs of Tiye and her son Pentaweret were robbed and their names erased to prevent them from enjoying an afterlife. The Egyptians did such a thorough job of this that the only references to them are the trial documents and what remains of their tombs. Some of the accused harem women tried to seduce the members of the judiciary who tried them but were caught in the act. Judges who were involved were severely punished.19 Red granite sarcophagus of Ramesses III Louvre. The Lid is in the Fitzwilliam Museum.20 Ramesses IV the kings designated successor assumed the throne upon his death rather than Pentaweret who was intended to be the main beneficiary of the palace conspiracy. Moreover Ramesses III died in his 
32 nd year before the summaries of the sentences were composed21 but the same year that the trial documents15 record the trial and execution of the conspirators. Cartouches of Ramesses III. Although it was long believed that Ramesses IIIs body showed no obvious wounds19 an examination of the mummy by a German forensic team televised in the documentary Ramesses Mummy King Mystery on the Science Channel in 2011 showed excessive bandages around the neck. A subsequent CT scan that was done in Egypt by Ashraf Selim and Sahar Saleem professors of radiology at Cairo University revealed that beneath the bandages was a deep knife wound across the throat deep enough to reach the vertebrae. According to the documentary narrator It was a wound no one could have survived.22 The CT scan revealed that his throat was cut to the bone severing the trachea esophagus and blood vessels which would have been rapidly fatal.2324 The December 2012 issue of the British Medical Journal quoted the conclusion of the study of the team of researchers led by Zahi Hawass the former head of the Egyptian Supreme Council of Antiquity and his Egyptian team as well as Albert Zink from the Institute for Mummies and the Iceman of Eurac Research in Bolzano Italy which stated that conspirators murdered Ramesses III by cutting his throat.232526 Zink observed in an interview that The cut to Ramesses IIIs throat is ... very deep and quite large it really goes down almost down to the bone spine  it must have been a lethal injury.27 A subsequent study of the CT scan of the mummy of Ramesses IIIs body by Sahar Saleem revealed that the left big toe was likely chopped by a heavy sharp object like an ax. There were no signs of bone healing so this injury must have happened shortly before death. The embalmers placed a prosthesislike object made of linen in place of the amputated toe. The embalmers placed six amulets around both feet and ankles for magical healing of the wound for the life after. This additional injury of the foot supports the assassination of the Pharaoh likely by the hands of multiple assailants using different weapons.28 Before this discovery it had been speculated that Ramesses III had been killed by means that would not have left a mark on the body. Among the conspirators were practitioners of magic29 who might well have used poison. Some had put forth a hypothesis that a snakebite from a viper was the cause of the kings death. His mummy includes an amulet to protect Ramesses III in the afterlife from snakes. The servant in charge of his food and drink were also among the listed conspirators but there were also other conspirators who were called the snake and the lord of snakes. In one respect the conspirators certainly failed. The crown passed to the kings designated successor Ramesses IV. Ramesses III may have been doubtful as to the latters chances of succeeding him given that in the Great Harris Papyrus he implored Amun to ensure his sons rights.30 DNA and possible relationship with his son Pentawaret The gods Horus left and Set right blessing Ramesses in this statute currently located in the Egyptian Museum. The Zink unit determined that the mummy of an unknown man buried with Ramesses was because of the proven genetic relationship and a mummification process that suggested punishment a good candidate for the pharaohs son Pentaweret who was the only son to revolt against his father. It was impossible to determine his cause of death. Both mummies were predicted by Whit Atheys STRpredictor to share the Y chromosomal haplogroup E
1 b
1 aV38 and 50 of their genetic material which pointed to a fatherson relationship.31 In 2010 Hawass et al undertook detailed anthropological radiological and genetic studies as part of the King Tutankhamun Family Project. The objectives included attempting to determine familial relationships among 11 royal mummies of the New Kingdom as well to research for pathological features including potential inherited disorders and infectious diseases.32 In 2012 Hawass et al undertook an anthropological forensic radiological and genetic study of the 
20 th dynasty mummies of Ramesses III and an unknown man which were found together.23 In 2022 S.O.Y. Keita analysed 8 Short Tandem loci STR data published as part of these studies by Hawass et al using an algorithm that only has three choices Eurasians subSaharan Africans and East Asians. Using these three options Keita concluded that the majority of the samples which included the genetic remains of Rameses III and Tutankhamun had a population affinity with subSaharan Africans in one affinity analysis. However Keita cautioned that this does not mean that the royal mummies lacked other affiliations which he argued had been obscured in typological thinking. Keita further added that different data and algorithms might give different results which reflects the complexity of biological heritage and the associated interpretation.33 Legacy The Great Harris Papyrus or Papyrus Harris I which was commissioned by his son and chosen successor Ramesses IV chronicles this kings vast donations of land gold statues and monumental construction to Egypts various temples at Piramesse Heliopolis Memphis Athribis Hermopolis This Abydos Coptos El Kab and various cities in Nubia. It also records that the king dispatched a trading expedition to the Land of Punt and quarried the copper mines of Timna in southern Canaan. Papyrus Harris I records some of Ramesses IIIs activities I sent my emissaries to the land of Atika i.e. Timna to the great copper mines which are there. Their ships carried them along and others went overland on their donkeys. It had not been heard of since the time of any earlier king. Their mines were found and they yielded copper which was loaded by tens of thousands into their ships they being sent in their care to Egypt and arriving safely. P. Harris I 78 1434 Medinet Habu temple relief of Ramesses III Ramesses began the reconstruction of the Temple of Khonsu at Karnak from the foundations of an earlier temple of Amenhotep III and completed the Temple of Medinet Habu around his Year 
12.3 5 He decorated the walls of his Medinet Habu temple with scenes of his naval and land battles against the Sea Peoples. This monument stands today as one of the bestpreserved temples of the New Kingdom.36 The mummy of Ramesses III was discovered by antiquarians in 1886 and is regarded as the prototypical Egyptian Mummy in numerous Hollywood movies.37 His tomb KV11 is one of the largest in the Valley of the Kings. In 1980 James Harris and Edward F. Wente conducted a series of Xray examinations on New Kingdom Pharaohs crania and skeletal remains which included the mummified remains of Ramesses III. The analysis in general found strong similarities between the New Kingdom rulers of the 
19 th Dynasty and 
20 th Dynasty with Mesolithic Nubian samples. The authors also noted affinities with modern Mediterranean populations of Levantine origin. Harris and Wente suggested this represented admixture as the Rammessides were of northern origin.38 In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.39 Chronological dispute There is uncertainty regarding the exact dates of the reign of Ramesses III. This uncertainty affects the dating of the Late BronzeIron Age transition in the Levant. This transition is defined by the appearance of Mycenaean LH IIIC
1 b Philistine pottery in the coastal plain of Palestine generally assumed to correspond to the settlement of Sea Peoples there at the 
8 th year of Ramesses III.40 Radiocarbon dates and other external evidence permit this transition to be as late as 1100 BC compared to the conventional dating of c. 1179 BC.41 Some scientists have tried to establish a chronological point for this pharaohs reign at 1159 BC based on a 1999 dating of the Hekla 3 eruption of the Hekla volcano in Iceland. Since contemporary records show that the king experienced difficulties provisioning his workmen at Deir elMedina with supplies in his 
29 th Year this dating of Hekla 3 might connect his 
28 th or 
29 th regnal year to c. 1159 BC.42 A minor discrepancy of one year is possible since Egypts granaries could have had reserves to cope with at least a single bad year of crop harvests following the onset of the disaster. This implies that the kings reign would have ended just three to four years later around 1156 or 1155 BC. A rival date of 2900 BP 950 BC has since been proposed by scientists based on a reexamination of the volcanic layer.43 Given that no Egyptologist dates Ramesses IIIs reign to as late as 1000 BC this would mean that the Hekla 3 eruption presumably occurred well after Ramesses IIIs reign. A 2002 study using highprecision radiocarbon dating of a peat deposit containing ash layers put this eruption in the range 10871006 BC.44 Gallery Ramesses IIIs mummy Finely painted reliefs from Ramesses IIIs Khonsu temple at Karnak Ramesses III prisoner tiles Inlay figures faience and glass of the traditional enemies of Ancient Egypt from Medinet Habu at the Museum of Fine Arts Boston. From left 2 Nubians Philistine Amorite Syrian Hittite Ramesses IIIs mortuary temple at Medinet Habu. A painted ceiling of Nekhbet at Ramesses IIIs mortuary temple at Medinet Habu. Medinet Habu  the severed hands of the defeated enemies Ramesses III talking with the Theban Triad Amun Mut and Khonsu. The Great Harris Papyrus at the British Museum c. 1150 BC. Image taken from the book The Search for Ancient Egypt p. 91 by Jean Vercoutter. References  Robins Gay. The Art of Ancient Egypt.  Cifola Barbara 1988. Ramses III and the Sea Peoples A Structural Analysis of the Medinet Habu Inscriptions. Orientalia. 57 3 275306. JSTOR 43077586.  Van de Mieroop Marc 2021. A history of ancient Egypt Second ed.. Chichester West Sussex. p. 237. ISBN 9781119620877.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  E.F. Wente  C.C. Van Siclen A Chronology of the New Kingdom in Studies in Honor of George R. Hughes SAOC 39 1976 p.235 ISBN 0918986
01 X  Murnane W. J. United with Eternity A Concise Guide to the Monuments of Medinet Habu p. 38 Oriental Institute Chicago  American University in Cairo Press 1980.  Wilfred G. Lambert A. R. George Irving L. Finkel 2000. Wisdom Gods and Literature Studies in Assyriology in Honour of W.G. Lambert. Eisenbrauns. pp. 384. ISBN 9781575060040. Retrieved 18 August 2012.  Hasel Michael G. Merenptahs Inscription and Reliefs and the Origin of Israel in The Near East in the Southwest Essays in Honor of William G. Dever edited by Beth Albprt Hakhai The Annual of the American Schools of Oriental Research Vol. 58 2003 quoting from Edgerton W. F. and Wilson John A. 1936 Historical Records of Ramses III the Texts in Medinet Habu Volumes I and II. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 12. Chicago The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.  James Peter 2017 The levantine warrecords of Ramesses III  changing attitudes past present and future p. 71  Kitchen K.A. 2012. Ramesses III The Life and Times of Egypts Last Hero. University of Michigan Press. p. 14.  Kahn D. 2016 The Historical Background of a Topographical List of Ramesses III pp. 161168  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Blackwell Books 1992. p.271  David OConnor. Expedition Magazine  Penn Museum. www.penn.museum. 29 3. University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Retrieved 4 August 2022.  William F. Edgerton The Strikes in Ramses IIIs TwentyNinth Year JNES 10 No. 3 July 1951 pp. 137145  Frank J. Yurco End of the Late Bronze Age and Other Crisis Periods A Volcanic Cause in Gold of Praise Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honor of Edward F. Wente ed Emily Teeter  John Larson SAOC 58 1999. p.456  a b J. H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt Part Four 423456  James H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt Part Four 416417  James H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt Part Four 446450  Joyce Tyldesley Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt Thames  Hudson October 2006 p.170  a b Cambridge Ancient History Cambridge University Press 2000 p.247  Strudwick Nigel Strudwick Helen 1999. Thebes in Egypt A Guide to the Tombs and Temples of Ancient Luxor. Cornell University Press. p. 113. ISBN 0801436931.  J. H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt p.418  Egyptologist Ramses III assassinated in coup attempt Archived 20180302 at the Wayback Machine Dan Vergano USA Today December 17 2012  a b c Zahi Hawass Somaia Ismail Ashraf Selim Sahar N. Saleem Dina Fathalla Sally Wasef Ahmed Zakaria Gad Rama Saad Suzan Fares Hany Amer Paul Gostner Yehia Z. Gad Carsten M. Pusch Albert R. Zink December 17 2012. Revisiting the harem conspiracy and death of Ramesses III anthropological forensic radiological and genetic study. British Medical Journal. 345 e8268. doi
10.1 1
36 bmj.e8268. hdl1007262081. PMID 23247979. S
2 CID 206896841. Archived from the original on February 2 2013. Retrieved December 19 2012.cite journal CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  Hawass Zahi Saleem Sahar N. 2016. Scanning the Pharaohs  CT Imaging of the New Kingdom Royal Mummies Hardback ed.. New York The American University in Cairo Press. pp. 181182. ISBN 9789774166730.  King Ramesses IIIs throat was slit analysis reveals Archived 20180504 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 20121218.  British Medical Journal Study reveals that Pharaohs throat was cut during royal coup Archived 20190518 at the Wayback Machine Monday December 17 2012  AFP December 18 2012. Pharaohs murder riddle solved after 3000 years. The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on April 21 2013. Retrieved December 18 2012.  Pharaoh Ramesses III Killed by Multiple Assailants Radiologist Says. Live Science. Archived from the original on 20180227. Retrieved 20180226.  J. H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt pp.454456  J. H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt Part Four 246  Hawass Zahi et al. 2012. Revisiting the harem conspiracy and death of Ramesses III anthropological forensic radiological and genetic study. BMJ. 345 e8268 e8268. doi
10.1 1
36 bmj.e8268. hdl1007262081. PMID 23247979. S
2 CID 206896841. Retrieved 6 January 2018.  Hawass Zahi Gad Yehia Z. Ismail Somaia Khairat Rabab Fathalla Dina Hasan Naglaa Ahmed Amal Elleithy Hisham Ball Markus Gaballah Fawzi Wasef Sally Fateen Mohamed Amer Hany Gostner Paul Selim Ashraf 20100217. Ancestry and Pathology in King Tutankhamuns Family. JAMA. 303 7 638647. doi
10.1 0
01 jama.20
10.1 21. ISSN 00987484. PMID 20159872.  Keita S. O. Y. September 2022. Ideas about Race in Nile Valley Histories A Consideration of Racial Paradigms in Recent Presentations on Nile Valley Africa from Black Pharaohs to Mummy Genomest. Journal of Ancient Egyptian Interconnections.  A. J. Peden The Reign of Ramesses IV Aris  Phillips Ltd 1994. p.32 Atika has long been equated with Timna see here B. Rothenburg Timna Valley of the Biblical Copper Mines 1972 pp.201203 where he also notes the probable port at Jezirat alFaroun.  Jacobus Van Dijk The Amarna Period and the later New Kingdom in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt ed. Ian Shaw Oxford University Press paperback 2002 p.305  Van Dijk p.305  Bob Brier The Encyclopedia of Mummies Checkmark Books 1998. p.154  An Xray atlas of the royal mummies. Chicago University of Chicago Press. 1980. pp. 207208. ISBN 0226317455.  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021.  Mazar Amihai 1985. The emergence of the Philistine material culture. Israel Exploration Journal. 35 23 95107. JSTOR 27925978.  Hagens Graham 2006. Testing the Limits Radiocarbon dating and the end of the Late Bronze Age. Radiocarbon. 48 1 83100. Bibcode20
06 Radcb..48...
83 H. doi
10.1 0
17 S0033822200035414. Archived from the original on 20170317. Retrieved 20141016.  Frank J. Yurco End of the Late Bronze Age and Other Crisis Periods A Volcanic Cause in Gold of Praise Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honor of Edward F. Wente ed Emily Teeter  John Larson SAOC 58 1999 pp.456458  At first scholars tried to redate the event to 3000 BP TOWARDS A HOLOCENE TEPHROCHRONOLOGY FOR SWEDEN Archived 20090407 at the Wayback Machine Stefan Wastegrd XVI INQUA Congress Paper No. 4113 Saturday July 26 2003. Also Late Holocene solifluction history reconstructed using tephrochronology Archived 20081201 at the Wayback Machine Martin P. Kirkbride  Andrew J. Dugmore Geological Society London Special Publications 2005 v. 242 p. 145155.  Van Den Bogaard C. Drfler W. Glos R. Nadeau M. J. E. Grootes P. M. Erlenkeuser H. 2002. Two Tephra Layers Bracketing Late Holocene Paleoecological Changes in Northern Germany. Quaternary Research. 57 3 314. Bibcode20
02 QuRes..57..3
14 V. doi
10.1 0
06 qres.20
02.2 325. S
2 CID 140611931. Further reading Eric H. Cline and David OConnor eds. Ramesses III The Life and Times of Egypts Last Hero University of Michigan Press 2012 560 pages essays by scholars. Conspiracies in ancient Egypt External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ramses III. Timna Valley of the Ancient Copper Mines v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Rulers of the Ancient Near East Territories dates 12345 Egypt Canaan Ebla Mari Kish Assur Akshak Akkad Uruk Adab Umma Lagash Ur Elam 40003200 BCE Naqada I Naqada II EgyptMesopotamia relations PreDynastic period 40002900 BCE Susa I Uruk period 40003100 BCE Anu Ziggurat 4000 BCE Anonymous Kingpriests Susa II Uruk influence or control 32003100 BCE ProtoDynastic period Naqada III Early or legendary kings Upper Egypt Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Lower Egypt Hedju Hor NyHor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner NatHor Mekh Double Falcon Wash 31002900 BCE Early Dynastic Period First Dynasty of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer Menes Neithhotep regent HorAha Djer Djet Merneith regent Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird Canaanites Jemdet Nasr period 31002900 BCE ProtoElamite period Susa III 31002700 BCE 2900 BCE Second Dynasty of Egypt Hotepsekhemwy NebraRaneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Early Dynastic Period I 29002700 BCE First Eblaite Kingdom First kingdom of Mari Kish I dynasty Jushur Kullassinabel Nangishlishma Entarahana Babum Puannum Kalibum 2800 BCE Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab Mashda Arwium Etana Balih Enmenuna MelemKish Barsalnuna Uruk I dynasty Meshkianggasher Enmerkar conqueror of Aratta 2700 BCE Early Dynastic Period II 27002600 BCE Zamug Tizqar Ilku Iltasadum Lugalbanda Dumuzid the Fisherman Enmebaragesi made the land of Elam submit6 Aga of Kish Gilgamesh Old Elamite period 27001500 BCE IndusMesopotamia relations 2600 BCE Third Dynasty of Egypt Djoser First Egyptian pyramids Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni Early Dynastic Period III 26002340 BCE Sagisu Aburlim Agurlim IbbiDamu BabaDamu Kish II dynasty 5 kings Uhub Mesilim UrNungal Udulkalama Labashum Lagash Enhegal Lugal shaengur Ur AImdugud UrPabilsag Meskalamdug Queen Puabi Akalamdug Enundaraanna Meshe Melamanna Lugalkitun Adab Ninkisalsi Medurba Lugaldalu 2575 BCE Old Kingdom of Egypt Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis Ur I dynasty Mesannepada King of Ur and Kish victorious over Uruk 2500 BCE Phoenicia 2500539 BCE Second kingdom of Mari IkunShamash IkuShamagan Ansud Saumu IshtupIshar IkunMari IblulIl Nizi Kish III dynasty KuBaba Akshak dynasty Unzi Undalulu Uruk II dynasty Ensha kushanna Mugsi Umma I dynasty Pabilgagaltuku Lagash I dynasty UrNanshe Akurgal Aannepada Meskiagnun Elulu Balulu Awan dynasty Peli Tata Ukkutahesh Hishur 2450 BCE Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas EnarDamu IsharMalik Ush Enakalle Elamite invasions 3 kings6 Shushun tarana Napilhush 2425 BCE KunDamu Eannatum King of Lagash Sumer Akkad conqueror of Elam 2400 BCE AdubDamu IgrishHalam IrkabDamu Kish IV dynasty PuzurSuen UrZababa Urur Lugalkinishedudu Lugalkisalsi Eiginimpae Meskigal UrLumma Il Gishakidu Queen Barairnun Enannatum Entemena Enannatum II Enentarzi Ur II dynasty Nanni MeshkiangNanna II Kikusiwetempti 2380 BCE Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Adab dynasty Lugalannemundu King of the four quarters of the world 2370 BCE IsarDamu EnnaDagan IkunIshar IshqiMari Invasion by Mari Anbu Anba Bazi Zizi of Mari Limer Sharrumiter6 Ukush Lugalanda Urukagina Luhishan 2350 BCE PuzurNirah IshuIl ShuSin Uruk III dynasty Lugalzagesi Governor of Umma King of all Sumer 2340 BCE Akkadian Period 23402150 BCE Akkadian Empire Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu Akkadian Governors Eshpum Ilshurabi Epirmupi Iliishmani 2250 BCE NaramSin Lugalushumgal vassal of the Akkadians 2200 BCE First Intermediate Period Seventh Dynasty of Egypt Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Second Eblaite Kingdom Third kingdom of Mari Shakkanakku dynasty Ididish ShuDagan IshmaDagan Vassals of the Akkadians SharKaliSharri Igigi Imi Nanum Ilulu 3 years Dudu Shuturul Uruk IV dynasty Urnigin Urgigir Lagash II dynasty PuzerMama UrNingirsu I Pirigme LuBaba Lugula Kaku HishepRatep Helu Khita PuzurInshushinak 2150 BCE Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Ur III period 21502000 BCE NrMr IshtupIlum IshgumAddu Apilkin Gutian dynasty 21 kings Laerabum Sium Kuda Uruk Puzurili UrUtu Umma II dynasty Lugalannatum vassal of the Gutians UrBaba Gudea UrNingirsu Urgar Nammahani Tirigan 2125 BCE Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Uruk V dynasty Utuhengal 2100 BCE Vassals of UR III Iddiilum IliIshar TuraDagan PuzurIshtar Vassals of Ur III7 Ur III dynasty Kings of Ur Sumer and Akkad UrNammu Shulgi AmarSin ShuSin 20251763 BCE Amorite invasions IbbiSin Elamite invasions Kindattu Shimashki Dynasty Middle Kingdom of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Third Eblaite Kingdom Amorites IbbitLim Immeya Indilimma Amorite Shakkanakkus HitialErra HanunDagan ... Lim Dynasty of Mari Amorites YaggidLim YahdunLim YasmahAdad ZimriLim Queen Shibtu Old Assyria PuzurAshur I Shalimahum Ilushuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I PuzurAshur II NaramSin Erishum II IsinLarsa period Amorites Dynasty of Isin IshbiErra ShuIlishu IddinDagan IshmeDagan LipitEshtar UrNinurta BurSuen LipitEnlil Erraimitti Enlilbani Zambiya Iterpisha Urdukuga Suenmagir Damiqilishu Dynasty of Larsa Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel NurAdad SinIddinam SinEribam SinIqisham SilliAdad WaradSin RimSin I ... RimSin II Uruk VI dynasty Alilahadum Sumubinasa NaramSin of Uruk Snkid Sniribam Sngmil Ilumgamil Anam of Uruk Irdanene RimAnum Nabiiliu Sukkalmah dynasty SiwePalarKhuppak Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu 18001595 BCE Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abraham Biblical Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Yamhad Yamhad dynasty Amorites Old Assyria ShamshiAdad dynasty 18081736 BCE Amorites ShamshiAdad I IshmeDagan I MutAshkur Rimush Asinum Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Nondynastic usurpers 17351701 BCE PuzurSin Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Adaside dynasty 1700722 BCE Belbani Libaya SharmaAdad I IptarSin Bazaya Lullaya ShuNinua SharmaAdad II Erishum III ShamshiAdad II IshmeDagan II ShamshiAdad III Ashurnirari I PuzurAshur III Enlilnasir I Nurili Ashurshaduni Ashurrabi I Ashurnadinahhe I EnlilNasir II Ashurnirari II Ashurbelnisheshu Ashurrimnisheshu Ashurnadinahhe II First Babylonian dynasty Old Babylonian Period Amorites Sumuabum SumulaEl SinmuballitSabium ApilSin Sinmuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna Abieshuh Ammiditana Ammisaduqa SamsuDitana Early Kassite rulers Second Babylonian dynasty Sealand Dynasty Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Second Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hyksos Pharaoh Ahmose I slaying a Hyksos Semqen AperAnati SakirHar Khyan Apepi Khamudi Mitanni 16001260 BCE Kirta Shuttarna I Parshatatar 15311155 BCE Tutankhamun New Kingdom of Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ahmose I Amenhotep I Third Babylonian dynasty Kassites AgumKakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashmanharbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I Burnaburiash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliashu IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak II Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Elamite period 15001100 BCE Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty UntashNapirisha Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb Hittite Empire Ugarit Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret Elamite Empire Shutrukid dynasty ShutrukNakhunte 11551025 BCE Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI Third Intermediate Period Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II Phoenicia Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Kingdom of Israel Saul Ishbosheth David Solomon SyroHittite states Middle Assyria EribaAdad I Ashuruballit I Enlilnirari Arikdenili Adadnirari I Shalmaneser I TukultiNinurta I Ashurnadinapli Ashurnirari III Enlilkudurriusur NinurtaapalEkur Ashurdan I NinurtatukultiAshur MutakkilNusku Ashurreshishi I TiglathPileser I AsharidapalEkur Ashurbelkala EribaAdad II ShamshiAdad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashurnirari IV Ashurrabi II Ashurreshishi II TiglathPileser II Ashurdan II Fourth Babylonian dynasty Second Dynasty of Isin Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur NeoElamite period 1100540 BCE 1025934 BCE Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Babylonian dynasties Period of Chaos Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna Marbitiaplausur Nabmukinapli 911745 BCE Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht Bakenranef Kingdom of Samaria Kingdom of Judah NeoAssyrian Empire Adadnirari II TukultiNinurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III ShamshiAdad V Shammuramat regent Adadnirari III Shalmaneser IV AshurDan III Ashurnirari V Ninth Babylonian Dynasty Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina five kings NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabushumaukin II Nabumukinzeri HumbanTahrid dynasty Urtak Teumman Ummanigash Tammaritu I Indabibi Humbanhaltash III 745609 BCE Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa Black Pharaohs Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun NeoAssyrian Empire Sargonid dynasty TiglathPileser Shalmaneser Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Ashurnadinshumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal Ashuretililani Sinsharishkun Sinshumulishir Ashuruballit II Assyrian conquest of Egypt Assyrian conquest of Elam 626539 BCE Late Period Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III NeoBabylonian Empire Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Median Empire Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages 539331 BCE Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Achaemenid Empire Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III Twentyeighth Dynasty of Egypt Twentyninth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 331141 BCE Argead dynasty and Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV Hellenistic Period Seleukos I Nikator Tetradrachm from Babylon Argead dynasty Alexander III Philip III Alexander IV Antigonid dynasty Antigonus I Seleucid Empire Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes 14130 BCE Kingdom of Judea Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Parthian Empire Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I 30 BCE116 CE Roman Empire Roman conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Judea Syria 116117 CE Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan Parthamaspates of Parthia 117224 CE Syria Palaestina Province of Mesopotamia Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV 224270 CE Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Coin of Ardashir I Hamadan mint. Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm 270273 CE Palmyrene Empire Vaballathus Zenobia Antiochus 273395 CE Roman Empire Province of Egypt Syria Palaestina Syria Province of Mesopotamia 395618 CE Byzantine Empire Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 618628 CE Sasanian conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Shahrbaraz Sahralanyozan Shahrbaraz Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Khosrow II Kavad II 628641 CE Byzantine Empire Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran Shapuri Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 639651 CE Muslim conquest of Egypt Muslim conquest of the Levant Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia Chronology of the Neolithic period Rulers of Ancient Central Asia  Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.  Hallo W. Simpson W. 1971. The Ancient Near East. New York Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 4849.  Rulers of Mesopotamia. cdli.ox.ac.uk. University of Oxford CNRS.  Thomas Ariane Potts Timothy 2020. Mesopotamia Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 9781606066492.  Roux Georges 1992. Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532534 Chronological Tables. ISBN 9780141938257.  a b c Per Sumerian King List  Unger Merrill F. 2014. Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 9781625646064. Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel United States Sweden People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRamessesIIIoldid1220902342 Categories Ramesses III 
12 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies Sea Peoples 1217 BC births 1155 BC deaths Ancient murdered monarchs 
12 thcentury BC murdered monarchs Late Bronze Age collapse Deaths by stabbing in Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semiprotected from banned users Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 26 April 2024 at 1632 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width