Setnakhte - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Accession 
2 Reign length 
3 Monuments 
4 Papyrus Harris 
5 Genetics 
6 References 
7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Setnakhte 36 languages   Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia First pharaoh of the 
20 th dynasty Setnakhte Setnakht Drawing of a relief of pharaoh Sethnakht. Pharaoh Reign 11891186 BC Predecessor Twosret Successor Ramesses III Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Werpehti Nebty name Tutkhaumitatjenen Golden Horus Sekhemkhepeshderkheruef Prenomen Praenomen Userkhauresetepenre Powerful are the forms of Re Chosen of Re Nomen Setnakht Meryamunra Seth Is Victorious Beloved Of AmonRe1 Consort TiyMerenese Children Ramesses III Died 1186 BC Burial KV14 Dynasty Twentieth Dynasty Not to be confused with Sanakht. Userkhauresetepenre Setnakhte also called Setnakht or Sethnakht was the first pharaoh 1189 BC1186 BC of the Twentieth Dynasty of the New Kingdom of Egypt and the father of Ramesses III. Accessionedit Main article End of the 
19 th Dynasty Setnakhte was not the son brother or a direct descendant of either Twosret or Merneptah Siptahthe immediately preceding two pharaohsnor that of Siptahs predecessor Seti II whom Ramesses III Setnakhtes son formally considered the last legitimate ruler in his Medinet Habu kinglist.23 Setnakhte was a man of unknown origins who seized the throne during a time of crisis and political unrest likely from Twosret and he was presumably a minor descendant of Ramesses II through a separate family line from that of Seti II Siptah and Twosret.4 As Aidan Dodson writes Setnakhtes accession to power as an usurper is confirmed by a victory stela at Elephantine at Aswan which shows his rise to power was accompanied by violence and a civil war The great assembly of the gods is pleased with his plans like Re since the land had been in confusion....The great god stretched out his arm and selected his person l.p.h. from among the millions dismissing the hundreds of thousands prior to him....Now his person l.p.h. was like his father Sutekh who flexed his arms to rid Egypt of those who had led it astray....Fear of him has seized the hearts of opponents before him they flee like flocks of sparrows with a falcon after them. They left silver and gold....which they had given to these Asiatics in order for them to bring reinforcements....Their plans failed and the plans were futile as every god and goddess performed wonders for the good god proclaiming the onset of a slaughter under him....On Year 2 II Shemu 10 of king Setnakhte there were no more opponents of his person l.p.h. in any lands. They came to inform his person l.p.h. Let your heart be happy O lord of this land those things that the god foretold have come to pass and your foes do not exist in the land....5 Setnakhtes opponents are depicted to be desperate enough to hire supporters from Syria and Palestine in this stela. Senakhte married TiyMerenese who was perhaps a daughter of Merneptah. A connection between Setnakhtes successors and the preceding Nineteenth Dynasty is also suggested by one of Ramesses IIs children bearing this namecitation needed and that similar names are shared by Setnakhtes descendants such as Ramesses Amunherkhepshef Sethherkhepshef and Monthuherkhepshef.6 Reign lengthedit Setnakhte was originally believed to have enjoyed a reign of only two years based upon his Year 2 Elephantine stela but his third regnal year is now attested in Inscription No. 271 on Mount Sinai.7 If his theoretical accession date is assumed to be II Shemu 10 based on the date of his Elephantine stela Setnakhte would have ruled Egypt for at least two years and 11 months before he died or nearly three full years. This date is 1 day removed from Twosrets highest known date of Year 8 II Shemu 9 although Towsret is known to have ruled for a minimum of 6 more months at her mortuary temple at Gournah and is based upon a calculation of Ramesses IIIs known accession date of I Shemu 
26.8  Peter Clayton also assigned Setnakhte a reign of three years in his 1994 book on the Egyptian pharaohs.9 Year 4 quartzite stela of Bakenkhunsu In a midJanuary 2007 issue of the Egyptian weekly AlAhram however Egyptian antiquity officials announced that a recently discovered and wellpreserved quartzite stela belonging to the High Priest of Amun Bakenkhunsu was explicitly dated to Year 4 of Setnakhtes reign. The AlAhram article notes that this data contradicts...the official record which says Setnakhte ruled Egypt for only three years. According to the new information provided by the stela Setnakhtes reign certainly lasted for four years and may have continued for a little longer.10 Zahi Hawass the former Secretary General of Egypts Supreme Council of Antiquities declared the discovery to be one of the most important finds of 2006 because it adjusts the history of the 
20 th Dynasty and reveals more about the life of Bakenkhunsu.10 As Setnakhtes reign was short he may have come to the throne fairly late in life. However the AlAhram figure does not change the fact that Setnakhte likely truly ruled Egypt for only three rather than four full years since there are no Year 1 dates attested for him and his famous Year 2 Elephantine stela states that Setnakhte finally secured his kingship after defeating all his opponents and challengers to the throne in his second year. The date of the Elephantine stela in Year 2 II Shemu day 10 of Setnakhtes reign
11 the date of which is mentioned only halfway in the stela rather than at its startis immediately followed by this proclamation There were no opponents against His Majesty l.p.h. in all the lands.12 This reference to the defeat of Setnakhtes enemies implies that this specific date marked the termination of a conflictpresumably Setnakhtes struggle for the thronewhich extended partly into his second year and means that Setnakhtes first year would have overlapped with Twosrets final year if Twosret was his opponent. Therefore he likely did not even rule Egypt in his theoretical first year and could only properly administer the country from sometime during his second year. In any event there was an interregnum lasting at least a year in which no ruler controlled all of Egypt and Setnakhtes effective reign length should be reduced by a year from 4 to 3 years. Setnakhtes Elephantine stela touches on this chaotic period and refers explicitly to the expulsion of certain Asiatics who fled Egypt abandoning the gold which they had looted from Egyptian temples. It is uncertain the degree to which this inscription referred to contemporary events or rather repeated antiAsiatic sentiment from the reign of Pharaoh Ahmose I. Setnakhte identified with the God Atum or Temu and built a temple to this God at PerAtum Biblical Pithom.citation needed The mummy in the boat from KV35 before its destruction After his death Setnakhte was buried in KV14 which was originally designed to be Twosrets royal tomb. His mummy has never been identified with certainty although the socalled mummy in the boat found in KV35 was sometimes identified with him an attribution rejected by Aidan Dodson who rather believes the body belonged to a royal family member of Amenhotep II of the 
18 th Dynasty. In any case the mummy was destroyed in a looting in 1901 thus preventing any analysis of it.13 Monumentsedit Reliefs of Horus and Geb from tomb KV14 While Setnakhtes reign was still comparatively brief it was just long enough for him to stabilize the political situation in Egypt and establish his son Rameses III as his successor to the throne of Egypt. The Bakenkhunsu stela reveals that it was Setnakhte who began the construction of a Temple of AmunRe in Karnak which was eventually completed by his son Ramesses III. Setnakhte also started work on a tomb KV11 in the Valley of the Kings but stopped it when the tombcarvers accidentally broke into the tomb of the Nineteenth Dynasty Pharaoh Amenmesse. Setnakhte then appropriated the tomb of Queen Twosret KV14 his predecessor for his own use. Papyrus Harrisedit The beginning of the Great Harris Papyrus or Papyrus Harris I which documents the reign of Ramesses III provides some details about Setnakhtes rise to power. An excerpt of James Henry Breasteds 1906 translation of this document is provided below The land of Egypt was overthrown from without and every man was thrown out of his right they had no chief mouth for many years formerly until other times. The land of Egypt was in the hands of chiefs and of rulers of towns one slew his neighbour great and small. Other times having come after it with empty years Irsu a selfmade man a certain Syrian Kharu was with them as chief wr. He set plundering their i.e. the peoples possessions. They made gods like men and no offerings were presented in the temples. But when the gods inclined themselves to peace to set the land in its rights according to its accustomed manner they established their son who came forth from their limbs to be ruler LPH of every land upon their great throne Userkhauresetepenremeryamun LPH the son of Re Setnakhtmeriremeryamun LPH. He was KhepriSet when he is enraged he set in order the entire land which had been rebellious he slew the rebels who were in the land of Egypt he cleansed the great throne of Egypt he was ruler of the Two Lands on the throne of Atum. He gave ready faces to those who had been turned away. Every man knew his brother who had been walled in. He established the temples in possession of divine offerings to offer to the gods according to their customary stipulations.14 Until 2000 Chancellor Bay was considered the only plausible candidate for this Irsu. However an IFAO Ostracon no. 1864 found at Deir elMedina dated to Year 5 records that Pharaoh Siptah LPH has killed the great enemy Bay.15 Because Chancellor Bay died at least 3 years before this Irsu he can no longer be considered a plausible candidate for this historical figure. Geneticsedit In December 2012 a genetic study conducted by the same researchers who decoded King Tutankhamuns DNA found that Ramesses III Setnakhtes son and second pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt belonged to YDNA EM2 alternatively known as haplogroup E
1 b
1 a
1.1 6 Referencesedit  Setnakht  httpswww.britannica.combiographySetiII Brittanica  Medinet Habu Canon  A. Dodson Poisoned Legacy The Fall of the Nineteenth Egyptian Dynasty American University in Cairo 2010 p.119  A. Dodson Poisoned Legacy The Fall of the Nineteenth Egyptian Dynasty American University in Cairo 2010 pp.119120  Nos anctres de lAntiquit 1991. Christian Settipani p.153 173  175  Von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten 1997 p. 201202  E.F. Wente  C.C. Van Siclen A Chronology of the New Kingdom in Studies in Honor of George R. Hughes SAOC 39 1976 pp.236237  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994 p.160  a b ElAref Nevine 1117 January 2007. Dynasty revealed. AlAhram Weekly 827. Archived from the original on 3 April 2011. Retrieved 20110403.  Dino Bidoli Stadt und Temple von Elephantine. Dritter Grabungsbericht. MDAIK 28 1972 192 ff. pl. 49.  KRI V 671 251 13  Schneider Thomas 2010. Contributions to the Chronology of the New Kingdom and the Third Intermediate Period. gypten  Levante. 20. pp. 386387  James H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt Vol No.41906 pp.198199  Pierre Grandet Lexecution du chancelier Bay O. IFAO 1864 BIFAO 100 2000 pp.339356  Hawass Z. Ismail S. Selim A. Saleem S. N. Fathalla D. Wasef S. Gad A. Z. Saad R. Fares S. Amer H. Gostner P. Gad Y. Z. Pusch C. M. Zink A. R. 17 December 2012. Revisiting the harem conspiracy and death of Ramesses III anthropological forensic radiological and genetic study. BMJ. 345 dec14 14 e8268. doi
10.1 1
36 bmj.e8268. hdl1007262081. PMID 23247979. S
2 CID 206896841. Retrieved 6 July 2013. Bibliographyedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sethnakht. James H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt Vol No.41906 Erik Hornung Untersuchungen zur Chronologie und Geschichte des Neuen Reiches 1964 J. Von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten Philip Von Zabern Mainz 1997 pp. 9498 and pp. 201202 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSetnakhteoldid1217894158 Categories 
12 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt 1186 BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 8 April 2024 at 1401 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width