Make your donation now - Wikimedia Foundation
Make your donation now Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia is still not on the market Thank you for considering a donation to the Wikimedia Foundation the nonprofit that hosts Wikipedia and other crucial free knowledge projects. We invite you to reflect on the number of times you visited Wikipedia in the past year. If the knowledge you gained here was valuable please join the 2 of readers who donate to the nonprofit that supports Wikipedia. It is hard to know what to trust online these days. Wikipedia is different not perfect but also not here to make a profit or to push a particular perspective. It is written by everyone together because they want to help create a free repository of highquality information. If Wikipedia has given you useful knowledge this year please give back. There are no small contributions every edit counts every donation counts. Thank you. It appears that you do not have JavaScript enabled or your browser does not support it. In order to provide a safe secure and pleasant experience our donation form requires JavaScript. Loading If the form does not load your web browser may not be supported. Please try a different browser. Donation amount EGP How often would you like to donate Just Once Give Monthly Donation amount EGP E30 E50 E150 E300 E450 E700 E1500 Other Please select an amount minimum 1 We cannot accept donations greater than USD 4 1 2 through our website. Please contact our major gifts staff at 3. Donate by creditdebit card Visa MasterCard American Express JCB Discover Ill generously add EX to cover the transaction fees so you can keep 100 of my donation. Where your donation goes Technology Servers bandwidth maintenance development. Wikipedia is one of the top 10 websites in the world and it runs on a fraction of what other top websites spend. People and Projects The other top websites have thousands of employees. Wikimedia Foundation has about 700 staff and contractors to support a wide variety of projects making your donation a great investment in a highlyefficient notforprofit organization. Tax deductibility information We do not sell or trade your information to anyone. By donating you agree to share your personal information with the Wikimedia Foundation the nonprofit organization that hosts Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects and its service providers pursuant to our donor policy. Wikimedia Foundation and its service providers are located in the United States and in other countries whose privacy laws may not be equivalent to your own. For more information please read our donor policy. For recurring donors fixed monthly payments will be debited by the Wikimedia Foundation on the monthly anniversary of the first donation until such time as you notify us to discontinue them. Donations initiated on the 29 30 or 31 of the month will recur on the last day of the month for shorter months as close to the original date as possible. For questions please contact donatewikimedia.org. Problems donating Other ways to give Frequently asked questions Almost done Please make it Y monthly. Monthly support is the best way to ensure that Wikipedia keeps thriving. No thanks Ill make a onetime donation of X Yes Ill donate Y each month Yes Ill donate monthly but for a different amount Thank you for your support Enter your monthly donation amount Please select an amount minimum 1 We cannot accept donations greater than USD 4 1 2 through our website. Please contact our major gifts staff at 3. Donate monthly Retrieved from httpsdonate.wikimedia.orgwikiSpecialLandingPage Navigation menu Personal tools English Log in Namespaces Special page English Views More Search Navigation Support pages index Other ways to give Problems donating Cancel or change recurring giving Matching Gifts Wiki Recent changes Documentation collab Tools Special pages Printable version Get shortened URL Download QR code Privacy policy About Donate Disclaimers Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view