File:Ramses V mummy head.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileRamses V mummy head.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 481  599 pixels. Other resolutions 193  240 pixels  385  480 pixels  617  768 pixels  822  1024 pixels  1813  2258 pixels. Original file 1813  2258 pixels file size 
1.7 5 MB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionRamses V mummy head.png English Head of mummy of pharaoh Ramesses V.      V. Date 22 February 2010 Source httpwww.lib.uchicago.educgibineoseospage.plDPI1
00 callnumDT57.C
2 vol
59 object182 edited in GIMP Author G. Elliot Smith Catalogue General Antiquites Egyptiennes du Musee du Caire The Royal Mummies Le Caire  Imprimerie de Linstitut Francais Darcheologie Orientale 1912 Catalogue General Antiquites Egyptiennes du Musee du Caire DT57.C2 vol 59 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse Public domain This media file is in the public domain in the United States. This applies to U.S. works where the copyright has expired often because its first publication occurred prior to January 1 1929 and if not then due to lack of notice or renewal. See this page for further explanation. United States This image might not be in the public domain outside of the United States this especially applies in the countries and areas that do not apply the rule of the shorter term for US works such as Canada Mainland China not Hong Kong or Macao Germany Mexico and Switzerland. The creator and year of publication are essential information and must be provided. See WikipediaPublic domain and WikipediaCopyrights for more details. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 22 February 2010 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0941 31 December 2017 1813  2258 
1.7 5 MB Steinsplitter rm empty border 1500 22 February 2010 2266  2822 
1.2 9 MB Anton Gutsunaevcommonswiki  intfiledesc  Information Descriptionen
1 Head of mummy of pharaoh Ramesses V. ru1    V. Sourcehttpwww.lib.uchicago.educgibineoseos File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of Egyptian mummies royalty List of pharaohs Ramesses V Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org    Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirminci slal Misir V Ramzes Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  V Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Ramss V Llista de mmies reials egpcies Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Ramesse V. Usage on de.wikipedia.org Ramses V. Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on eo.wikipedia.org Ramseso la 
5 a Usage on es.wikipedia.org Ramss V AnexoMomias egipcias reales Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Ramses V.a Usage on fa.wikipedia.org   Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Ramses V Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Ramss V Usage on ga.wikipedia.org Ramasaes V Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XX dinasta exipcia Usage on hy.wikipedia.org         XX  Usage on id.wikipedia.org Ramses V Usage on it.wikipedia.org Ramses V Storia dellantico Egitto Lista dei faraoni Usage on no.wikipedia.org 20. egyptiske dynasti Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Ramzes V Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Ramesss V Usage on ru.wikipedia.org    V XX  Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Dvajseta egipanska dinastija Ramzes V. Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  V Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Ramses V Usage on ta.wikipedia.org      Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Ikadalawampung dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. PNG file comment File written by Adobe Photoshop 
4.0  Horizontal resolution 1
18.1 1 dpc Vertical resolution 1
18.1 1 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileRamsesVmummyhead.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width