Ramesses IV - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Projects 
3 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
3.1 Levant 
4 Death 
5 Gallery 
6 References 
7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ramesses IV 41 languages  Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Gaeilge  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus Romn    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Third pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty of the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt Ramesses IV Ramses IV Rameses IV Ramesses IV offering two Nu vases British Museum. Pharaoh Reign 11551149 BC Predecessor Ramesses III Successor Ramesses V Royal titulary Horus name Horus Kanekhet Ankhemmaat Nebkhabused mi Itef Ptah Tatenen K
3 ntnmm3.tnb
3 bwsdmjjt.fPtT
3 nn Horus the strong bull his Maat lives master of the HebSed like his father PtahTatenen Nebty name Mekemetwaf Pedjut9 Mkkmtwfpwt9 The protector of Egypt he who vanquishes the 9 bows the enemies of Egypt 1 Golden Horus Wser Renput Wer Nekhetu Wsrrnpwtwrntw The golden falcon rich in years whose victories are great Prenomen Praenomen Usermaatre Heqamaatre Setepenamun Wsrm3.tRstp.nJmn Rich in Maat like Ra the chosen one of Amun After the second year Heqamaatre Setepenamun q
3 m3.tRstp.nJmn Ruler of the Maat like Ra the chosen one of Amun Nomen Ramesisu Heqamaat Meriamun Rmsjswq
3 m
3 tmrjJmn Ra has fashioned him ruler of the Maat beloved of Amun2 Consort Duatentopet halfsister Children Ramesses V Father Ramesses III Mother Tyti3 Born 1176 BC Died 1149 BC aged 27 Burial KV2 Mummy found in the KV35 royal cache Theban Necropolis Monuments Temple of Khonsu at Karnak Dynasty Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Usermaatre Heqamaatre Setepenamun Ramesses IV also written Ramses or Rameses was the third pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty of the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt. He was the second son of Ramesses III and became crown prince when his elder brother Amenherkhepshef died aged 154 in 1164 BC when Ramesses was only 12 years old.45 His promotion to crown prince is suggested by his appearance suitably entitled in a scene of the festival of Min at the Ramesses III temple at Karnak which may have been completed by Year 22 of his fathers reign. the date is mentioned in the poem inscribed there4 As his fathers chosen successor the prince employed three distinctive titles Hereditary Prince Royal scribe and Generalissimo. The latter two titles are mentioned in a text at the temple of Amenhotep III at Soleb6 and all three titles appear on a lintel now in Florence Italy.7 As heirapparent he took on increasing responsibilities for instance in Year 27 of his fathers reign he is depicted appointing a certain Amenemope to the important position of Third Prophet of Amun in the latters TT 148 tomb.8 Amenemopes Theban tomb also accords prince Ramesses all three of his aforementioned sets of royal titles.9 Despite the 
31 year reign of his father Ramesses III Ramesses IV was only 21 when he became pharaoh.4 His rule has been dated to 1155 to 1149 BC. Familyedit It is now believed that Ramesses IVs mother was most likely Queen Tyti from recently discovered notes published in the 2010 issue of the Journal of Egyptian Archaeology.10 They reveal that Tytiwho was a kings daughter a kings wife and a kings mother in her own rightwas identified in Papyrus BM EA 10052 i.e. the tombrobbery papyri to be a queen of Ramesses III Ramesses IVs father. The 2010 JEA article authorsincluding Aidan Dodsonwrite that since Ramesses VIs mother is known to be a certain lady named Iset TaHemdjert or Isis only Ramesses IV and Ramesses VIII remain as candidates for the son of Tyti. Given that Ramesses VIII only reigned briefly some 25 years after his fathers death it is hardly likely that the decoration of QV52 with the mwtnsw i.e. kings mother title intimately mixed with Tytis other titles could have been delayed this late to refer to him. This leaves Ramesses IV as the only credible primary subject of the mwtnsw title in the tomb. As for whichif anyof the other sons of Ramesses III were borne to Tyti no unequivocal data is available other than the fact that Amenhirkhopeshef B buried in QV5511 was ms n HmtnTr mwtnTr Hmtnswwrt paralleling Tytis titles so closely that he may with some confidence be proposed as her son.12 Thus the identity of Ramesses IVs mother has been resolved in favour of Queen Tyti who was once erroneously thought to be the mother of another king in the mid19
80 s Ramesses XI.13 Ramesses IV was succeeded to the throne by his 
13 yearold14 son Ramesses V. Projectsedit Fragment of the Journal of the Necropolis concerning the change of reign Ramesses III to Ramesses IV. Museo Egizio Turin. Limestone ostracon depicting Ramesses IV smiting his enemies. Statue of Ramesses IV nomen and prenomen cartouches on shoulders currently housed in the British Museum Ramesses IV came to the throne in difficult circumstances. Ramesses III his father was assassinated by conspirators led by Tiye one of his secondary wives to establish Pentawer her own son and Ramesses IVs halfbrother on the throne.15 Ramesses IV however was able to secure himself on the throne and had the conspirators arrested and executed. At the start of his reign the pharaoh initiated a substantial building program on the scale of Ramesses II by doubling the size of the work gangs at Deir elMedina to a total of 120 men and dispatching numerous expeditions to the stone quarries of Wadi Hammamat and the turquoise mines of the Sinai.16 The Great Rock stela of Ramesses IV at Wadi Hammamat records that the largest expeditiondated to his Year 3 third month of Shemu day 
27 consisted of 8368 men alone including 5000 soldiers 2000 personnel of the Amun temples 800 Apiru and 130 stonemasons and quarrymen under the personal command of the High Priest of Amun Ramessesnakht.17 The scribes who composed the text also noted that this figure included 900 men who are dead and omitted from this list.4 Consequently once this omitted figure is included to the tally of 8368 men who served in the Year 3 quarry expedition a total of 900 men out of an original expedition of 8368 men perished during this endeavour for a mortality rate of 
10.7 . Some of the stones which were dragged 60 miles to the Nile from Wadi Hammamat weighed 40 tons or more.18 Other Egyptian quarries including Aswan were located much closer to the Nile which enabled them to use barges to transport stones long distances. Part of the kings program included the extensive enlargement of his fathers Temple of Khonsu at Karnak and the construction of a large mortuary temple near the Temple of Hatshepsut. Ramesses IV also sent several expeditions to the turquoise mines in the Sinai a total of four expeditions are known prior to his fourth year. The Serabit elKhadim stela of the Royal Butler Sobekhotep states Year 3 third month of Shemu. His Majesty sent his favoured and beloved one the confident of his lord the Overseer of the Treasury of Silver and Gold Chief of the Secrets of the august Palace Sobekhotep justified to bring for him all that his heart desired of turquoise on his fourth expedition.19 This expedition dates to either Ramesses III or IVs reign since Sobekhotep is attested in office until at least the reign of Ramesses V.4 Ramesses IVs final venture to the turquoise mines of the Sinai is documented by the stela of a senior army scribe named Panufer. Panufer states that this expeditions mission was both to procure turquoise and to establish a cult chapel of king Ramesses IV at the Hathor temple of Serabit elKhadim.20 The stela reads Year 5 second month of Shomu i.e. summer. The sending by His Majesty to build the Mansion of Millions of Years of Ramesses IV in the temple of Hathor Lady of Turquoise by Panefer the Scribe of the Commands of the Army son of Pairy justified.21 While little is known regarding the route that the mining missions took from Egypt to Serabit elKhadim A. J. Peden who wrote a biography of Ramesses IV in 1994 states that there were two obvious routes to reach this site The first was a straightforward march from a Delta base such as Memphis east southeast and then south into Sinai. Surviving a march in this inhospitable land would have presented formidable logistical obstacles perhaps forcing an alternative route to be adopted. This would involve a departure from the Delta to a site near the modern port of Suez. From here they could have proceeded by boat to the ports of Abu Zenima or ElMarkha on the west coast of the Sinai peninsula and from there it is a short journey inland of only a day or two to the actual site of Serabit elKhadim.4 Attestationsedit Relief of Ramesses IV at the Temple of Khonsu in Karnak Ramesses IV is attested by his aforementioned building activity at Wadi Hammamat and Serabit elKhadim in the Sinai as well as several papyri and even one obelisk. The creation of a royal cult in the Temple of Hathor is known under his reign at Serabit elKhadim while Papyrus Mallet or P. Louvre 1050 dates to Years 3 and 4 of his reign.4 Papyrus Mallet is a six column text dealing partly with agricultural affairs its first column lists the prices for various commodities between Year 31 of Ramesses III until Year 3 of Ramesses IV.4 The final four columns contain a memorandum of 2 letters composed by the Superintendent of Cattle of the Estate of AmenRe Bakenkhons to several midlevel administrators and their subordinates.4 Meanwhile surviving monuments of Ramesses IV in the Delta consists of an obelisk recovered in Cairo and a pair of his cartouches found on a pylon gateway both originally from Heliopolis.4 The most important document to survive from this pharaohs rule is Papyrus Harris I which honours the life of his father Ramesses III by listing the latters many accomplishments and gifts to the temples of Egypt and the Turin papyrus the earliest known geologic map. Ramesses IV was perhaps the last New Kingdom king to engage in largescale monumental building after his father as there was a marked decline in temple building even during the longer reigns of Ramesses IX and VI. The only apparent exception was the attempt of Ramesses V and VI to continue the vast and uncompleted mortuary temple of Ramesses IV at the Assasif.4 Levantedit At Beirut a 
12 th century burial shaft included a bone amulet with the cartouche of Ramesses IV.22 Deathedit Ushabti of Ramses IV Muse du Louvre. Despite Ramesses IVs many endeavours for the gods and his prayer to Osirispreserved on a Year 4 stela at Abydosthat thou shalt give me the great age with a long reign as my predecessor the king did not live long enough to accomplish his ambitious goals.23 Ramesses IVs highest known date in the archaeological records is a Year 7 III Akhet day 23 ostracon24 which under the Egyptian dating system meant that this ruler had a reign of just more than 6 full years. After a short reign of about six and a half years Ramesses IV died and was buried in tomb KV2 in the Valley of the Kings. His mummy was found in the royal cache of Amenhotep IIs tomb KV35 in 18
98.2 3 His chief wife is Queen Duatentopet or Tentopet or who was buried in QV74. His son Ramesses V would succeed him to the throne.25 Originally Ramesses IV had a tomb built for him in the Valley of the Queens QV53. In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade. 26 Galleryedit Biography portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ramses IV. Ring featuring ducks with Ramesses IVs name Relief of Ramesses IV at the Temple of Khonsu The Mummy of Ramesses IV Referencesedit  The Epigraphic Survey Medinet Habu Vol. I  VII Band II. Tafel 101.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994 p.167  Jehon Grist The Identity of the Ramesside Queen Tyti Journal of Egyptian Archaeology Vol. 71 1985 pp. 7181  a b c d e f g h i j k l A. J. Peden The Reign of Ramesses IV Aris  Phillips Ltd 1994.  Jacobus Van Dijk The Amarna Period and the later New Kingdom in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt ed. Ian Shaw Oxford University Press paperback 2002 p.306  Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions Vol. V 372 16  Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions Vol. V 373 3  G.A. Gaballa  K.A. Kitchen Amenemope His Tomb and Family MDAIK 37 1981 pp.164180  Gaballa  Kitchen pp.172173  176177  Mark Collier Aidan Dodson  Gottfried Hamernik P. BM EA 10052 Anthony Harris and Queen Tyti JEA 96 2010 pp.242246  PM I 2 759761  Collier Dodson  Hamernik JEA 96 p.246  K.A. Kitchen Family Relationships of Ramesses IX and the Late Twentieth Dynasty SAK 11 1984 12734  Manetho Aegyptiaca 1994.  Hawass Zahi Ismail Somaia et al. December 17 2012. Revisiting the harem conspiracy and death of Ramesses III anthropological forensic radiological and genetic study. BMJ. 345. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. e8268. doi
10.1 1
36 bmj.e8268. hdl1007262081. PMID 23247979. S
2 CID 206896841. Retrieved 20 June 2020.  Van Dijk pp.306307  Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions Vol. VI 1214  Time Life Lost Civilizations series Ramses II Magnificence on the Nile 1993 p.133  Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions Vol. VI 8586  Porter and Moss Vol. VIII 347365  Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions Vol. VI 294  Curvers Hans. 2013. Beirut Cemeteries 19992013  a b Clayton Chronicle p.167  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten. Mainz Philipp von Zabern 1997 p.201202  Van Dijk p.307  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Further readingedit Gabriella Dembitz Les inscriptions de Ramss IV de lalle processionnelle nordsud  Karnak rvises. Karnak Varia 6 in Cahiers de Karnak 16 2017 167178. David F. Wieczorek A Rock Inscription of Ramesses IV at Gebelein a previously unknown New Kingdom expedition in tudes et Travaux XXVIII 2015 217229. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRamessesIVoldid1217009478 Categories Ramesses IV 
12 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies Children of Ramesses III Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 3 April 2024 at 0749 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width