File:Tomb KV1 Ramesses VII Lepsius.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileTomb KV1 Ramesses VII Lepsius.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Size of this preview 400  600 pixels. Other resolutions 160  240 pixels  543  814 pixels. Original file 543  814 pixels file size 66 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionTomb KV1 Ramesses VII Lepsius.jpg English Drawing from tomb KV1. Closeup of pharaoh Ramesses VII while making an offer to a god. Valley of the Kings Reign of Ramesses VII 
20 th Dynasty New Kingdom. Lepsius Denkmaeler Abtheilung III Band VII pl. 234 Date 3 October 2014 110240 Source Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und Aethiopien  Tafelwerke  Band VII Author Karl Richard Lepsius 181084 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1884 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Annotations InfoField This image is annotated View the annotations at Commons 449 62 73 163 543 814 Praenomen Usermaatre Setepenre Meryamun 375 65 73 157 543 814 Nomen Ramesisu Itiamun Netjerheqaiunu Ramesses VII Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 3 October 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0936 3 October 2014 543  814 66 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Ramesses VII Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox DraftList of burial places and mummies of Egyptian Pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org    Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirminci slal Misir Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  VII Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org Ramss VII Usage on fa.wikipedia.org   Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique KV1 Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XX dinasta exipcia Usage on hy.wikipedia.org  VII     XX  Usage on id.wikipedia.org Ramses VII Usage on it.wikipedia.org Lista dei faraoni Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Ramzis VII Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Ramses VII Usage on no.wikipedia.org 20. egyptiske dynasti Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni A XXa Dinastie Egiptean Usage on ru.wikipedia.org XX  Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sk.wikipedia.org KV1 Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Dvajseta egipanska dinastija Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Ramses VII Usage on ta.wikipedia.org      Usage on th.wikipedia.org   7  Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Ikadalawampung dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Yirminci Hanedan Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Ramesses VII Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q6215 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileTombKV
1 RamessesVIILepsius.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width