Ramesses V - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign 
2 Death 
3 References 
4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ramesses V 39 languages  Azrbaycanca  Bosanski Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh in the ancient Egypt Ramesses V Also written Ramses and Rameses Obelisk of Ramesses V. Archaeological Museum of Bologna KS 1884 Pharaoh Reign 11491145 BC Predecessor Ramesses IV Successor Ramesses VI Royal titulary Horus name Kanekhetmenmaat K
3 ntmnm
3 t Strong bull whose Maat is permanent Golden Horus UserrenputmerAtum WsrrnpwtmrJtm Rich in years like Atum Prenomen Praenomen Usermaatre Sekheperenre Wsrm
3 tRsprnR Ra is rich in Maat he who Ra has raised Nomen Ramesisu Imenherkhepeschef R msj sw Jmn r p.f Ra is the one who created him Amun is his force Consort Henutwati and Tawerettenru Father Ramesses IV Mother Duatentopet Died 1145 BC Burial KV9 Mummy found in the KV35 royal cache Theban Necropolis Dynasty 
20 th Dynasty Usermaatre Sekheperenre Ramesses V also written Ramses and Rameses was the fourth pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt and was the son of Ramesses IV and Duatentopet. His mummy is now on display at the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Cairo. Reignedit Ramesses Vs reign was characterized by the continued growth of the power of the priesthood of Amun which controlled much of the temple land in the country and the state finances at the expense of the ruling pharaohs. The Turin 1887 papyrus records a financial scandal during Ramesses reign that involved the priests of Elephantine. A period of domestic instability also afflicted his reign as evidenced by the fact that according to the Turin Papyrus Cat. 2044 the workmen of Deir elMedina periodically stopped work on Ramesses Vs KV9 tomb in this kings first regnal year out of fear of the enemy presumably Libyan raiding parties who had reached the town of PerNebyt and burnt its people.1 Another incursion by these raiders into Thebes is recorded a few days later.2 This shows that the Egyptian state was having difficulties ensuring the security of its own elite tomb workers let alone the general populace during this troubled time. The Wilbour Papyrus believed to date to Year 4 of Ramesses Vs reign was a major land survey and tax assessment document which covered various lands extending from near Crocodilopolis Medinet elFayyum southwards to a little short of the modern town of ElMinya a distance of some 90 miles.3 It reveals most of Egypts land was controlled by the Amun temples which also directed the countrys finances. The document highlights the increasing power of the High Priest of Amun Ramessesnakht whose son a certain Usimarenakhte held the office of chief tax master. Deathedit This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedias inclusion policy. May 2020 Learn how and when to remove this message The circumstances of Ramesses Vs death are unknown but it is known he had a reign of almost four full years. 4 He died in his 
4 th Regnal Year around the time interval between the first and second month of Peret5 An ostracon records that this king was only buried in Year 2 of Ramesses VI his successor which was highly irregular since Egyptian tradition required a king to be mummified and buried precisely 70 days into the reign of his successor.6 Ramesses Vs mummified head. However another reason for the much delayed burial of Ramesses V in Year 2 second month of Akhet day 1 of Ramesses VIs reign see KRI VI 343 may have been connected with Ramesses VIs need to clear out any Libyans invaders from Thebes and to provide a temporary tomb for Ramesses V until plans for a double burial within tomb KV9 could be put into effect.2 Moreover a Theban work journal P. Turin 1923 dated to Year 2 of Ramesses VIs reign shows that a period of normality had returned to the Theban West Bank by this time.2 The mummy of Ramesses V was recovered in 1898 and seemed to indicate that he suffered and subsequently died from smallpox due to lesions found on his face. He was thought to be one of the earliest known victims of the disease.78 While a 2016 discovery has found that the shared ancestral form of smallpox dates back to 1580 AD this study merely indicates that the strains of smallpox circulating at the time of smallpox eradication had a common ancestor in the late 
16 th century specifically that the VARV lineages eradicated during the 
20 th century had only been in existence for 200 years at a time of rapidly expanding human movement and population size in the face of increasingly widespread inoculation and vaccination. Indeed they say merely about ancient cases of smallpox that if they were indeed due to smallpox these early cases were caused by virus lineages that were no longer circulating at the point of eradication in the 19
70 s.9 The advent of vaccination or variolation in China and Japan during the middle ages could have altered the relative presence of smallpox strains and diminished the presence of ancient strains.10 A 2015 review summarizing recent research into the question of smallpox evolution and divergence from its common ancestors suggests it is most likely that smallpox evolved 30004000 years ago in East Africa or India which is not inherently contradicted by the study described11 the latter of which contains descriptions of smallpox from before the first century AD at least. Finally another genomic analysis places the evolution of smallpox at 16000 years before present and mentions Ramses V if the pustular eruption of Ramses V was from smallpox it could represent a smallpox outbreak from imported cases... rather than regional endemic disease. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that only three mummies in that period had similar lesions.12 Referencesedit  A.J. Peden The Reign of Ramesses IV Aris  Phillips Ltd 1994 p.21 Pedens source on these recorded disturbances is KRI VI 340343  a b c Peden p.21  Alan Gardiner Egypt of the Pharaohs 1961  Peter Clayton Chronology of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994 p. 167  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten. Mainz Philipp von Zabern 1997 pp.201202  Clayton p.167  Erik Hornung The Pharaoh p.292 in The Egyptians ed. Sergio Donadoni and Robert Bianchi University of Chicago Press 1997 1  Donald R. Hopkins Ramses V  Duggan Ana T. Perdomo Maria F. PiombinoMascali Dario Marciniak Stephanie Poinar Debi Emery Matthew V. Buchmann Jan P. Duchne Sebastian Jankauskas Rimantas Humphreys Margaret Golding G. Brian Southon John Devault Alison Rouillard JeanMarie Sahl Jason W. Dutour Olivier Hedman Klaus Sajantila Antti Smith Geoffrey L. Holmes Edward C. Poinar Hendrik N. 19 December 2016. 
17 th Century Variola Virus Reveals the Recent History of Smallpox. Current Biology. 26 24 34073412. doi
10.1 0
16 j.cub.20
16.1 
0.0 61. PMC 5196022. PMID 27939314.  httpsbiotech.law.lsu.edublawbtsmallpoxwhoredbookChp2006.pdf Early Efforts at Control Variolation Vaccination and Isolation and Quarantine  Babkin Igor Babkina Irina 10 March 2015. The Origin of the Variola Virus. Viruses. 7 3 11001112. doi
10.3 3
90 v7031100. PMC 4379562. PMID 25763864.  Li Y. Carroll D. S. Gardner S. N. Walsh M. C. Vitalis E. A. Damon I. K. 27 September 2007. On the origin of smallpox Correlating variola phylogenics with historical smallpox records. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 104 40 1578715792. doi
10.1 0
73 pnas.0609268104. PMC 2000395. PMID 17901212. Further readingedit A.J. Peden Where did Ramesses VI bury his nephew GM 181 2001 8388 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ramses V. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRamessesVoldid1207736352 Categories Ramesses V 
12 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies 1145 BC deaths Deaths from smallpox Ramesses IV Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from May 2020 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from May 2020 All articles with style issues Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 15 February 2024 at 1551 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width