File:Temple Khonsu Ramesses XI Lepsius.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileTemple Khonsu Ramesses XI Lepsius.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Size of this preview 400  600 pixels. Other resolutions 160  240 pixels  425  637 pixels. Original file 425  637 pixels file size 46 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionTemple Khonsu Ramesses XI Lepsius.jpg English Drawing from the temple of Khonsu in Karnak Room E. Closeup of pharaoh Ramesses XI while taking a sort of shower of Life performed by two gods. Karnak Reign of Ramesses XI end
20 th Dynasty endNew Kingdom. Lepsius Denkmaeler Abtheilung III Band VII pl. 239 Date 3 October 2014 110242 Source Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und Aethiopien  Tafelwerke  Band VII Author Karl Richard Lepsius 181084 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1884 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Annotations InfoField This image is annotated View the annotations at Commons 356 320 51 103 425 637 Praenomen Menmaatre Setepenptah 18 310 51 102 425 637 Nomen Ramesisu Khaemwaset Meryamun Netjerheqaiunu Ramesses XI Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic      Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 3 October 2014 media type imagejpeg File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0936 3 October 2014 425  637 46 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Ramesses XI Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox DraftList of burial places and mummies of Egyptian Pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org          Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirminci slal Misir XI Ramzes Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  XI Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Ramss XI Tentamun XXI dinastia Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Ramesse XI. Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Ramss XI Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Ramses XI.a Usage on fa.wikipedia.org     Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Ramss XI XXIe dynastie gyptienne Usage on ga.wikipedia.org Ramasaes XI Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XX dinasta exipcia Usage on he.wikipedia.org     Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     XX  Usage on it.wikipedia.org Ramses XI Storia dellantico Egitto Lista dei faraoni Tentamon XXI dinastia Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 11 Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Ramzis XI Usage on nl.wikipedia.org PortaalEgyptologieUitgelicht Ramses XI PortaalEgyptologieUitgelicht33 Usage on no.wikipedia.org 20. egyptiske dynasti Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Ramzes XI Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Ramesss XI Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni A XXa Dinastie Egiptean Usage on ru.wikipedia.org XX  Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Dvajseta egipanska dinastija Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Ramses XI View more global usage of this file. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileTempleKhonsuRamessesXILepsius.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width