File:RamsesXCrop.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileRamsesXCrop.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. RamsesXCrop.jpg 309  300 pixels file size 38 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionRamsesXCrop.jpg English A Crop of Karl Richard Lepsiuss Mural of Ramesses X of Egypt Date 16 June 2015 Source FileTombKV
18 RamessesXLepsius.jpg Author Karl Richard Lepsius Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse Public domain This media file is in the public domain in the United States. This applies to U.S. works where the copyright has expired often because its first publication occurred prior to January 1 1929 and if not then due to lack of notice or renewal. See this page for further explanation. United States This image might not be in the public domain outside of the United States this especially applies in the countries and areas that do not apply the rule of the shorter term for US works such as Canada Mainland China not Hong Kong or Macao Germany Mexico and Switzerland. The creator and year of publication are essential information and must be provided. See WikipediaPublic domain and WikipediaCopyrights for more details. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic     Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 16 June 2015 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0421 17 June 2015 309  300 38 KB Avrand6 User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Khepresh List of pharaohs Ramesses X Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox DraftList of burial places and mummies of Egyptian Pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org      Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirminci slal Misir Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  X Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Ramss X Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org Ramss X Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Ramses X.a Usage on fa.wikipedia.org     Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Ramss X Usage on ga.wikipedia.org Ramasaes X Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XX dinasta exipcia Usage on hy.wikipedia.org  X     XX  Usage on id.wikipedia.org Ramses X Usage on it.wikipedia.org Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 10 Usage on ka.wikipedia.org  X Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Ramzis X Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Ramses X Usage on no.wikipedia.org 20. egyptiske dynasti Ramses X Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Ramzes X Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Ramesss X Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni A XXa Dinastie Egiptean Usage on ru.wikipedia.org XX  Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Dvajseta egipanska dinastija Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Ramses X Usage on ta.wikipedia.org      Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Ramesses X Ikadalawampung dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Yirminci Hanedan Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  X View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 96 dpi Vertical resolution 96 dpi Color space sRGB Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileRamsesXCrop.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width