Ancient Libya - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 History 
3 Geography 
4 Later sources 
5 Ancient Libyan Berber tribes 
6 See also 
7 References and notes 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Libya 23 languages   Brezhoneg Catal Deutsch Espaol  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi  Norsk bokml Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Region west of the Nile Valley Map of the world according to Herodotus During the Iron Age and classical antiquity Libya from Greek  Liby which came from Berber Libu referred to modernday Africa west of the Nile river. Greek and Roman geographers placed the dividing line between LibyaAfrica and Asia at the Nile.1234 More narrowly Libya could also refer to the country immediately west of Egypt viz Marmarica Libya Inferior and Cyrenaica Libya Superior. The Libyan Sea or Mare Libycum was the part of the Mediterranean Sea south of Crete between Cyrene and Alexandria. In the Hellenistic period the Berbers were known collectively as Libyans5 a Greek term for the inhabitants of the Berber world. Berbers occupied North Africa for thousands of years alongside the Egyptians. Egypt contains the Siwa Oasis which is bordering Libya to the east. The Siwi language a Berber language is still spoken in the area. SubSaharan Africa was known as Aethiopia. Nameedit Further information Libu The name is based on the ethnonym Libu Ancient Greek  Lbyes Latin Libyes. The name Libya in use since 1934 for the modern country formerly known as Tripolitania and Barca was the Latin designation for the region of the Maghreb from the Ancient Greek Attic Greek  Lib Doric Greek  Lib. In Classical Greece the term had a broader meaning encompassing the continent that later second century BC became known as Africa which in antiquity was assumed to constitute one third of the worlds land mass Europe and Asia combined making up the other two thirds. The Libu are attested since the Late Bronze Age as inhabiting the region Egyptian Rbw Punic  lby. The oldest known references to the Libu date to Ramesses II and his successor Merneptah pharaohs of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt during the 
13 th century BC. LBW appears as an ethnic name on the Merneptah Stele.6 Menelaus had travelled there on his way home from Troy it was a land of wonderful richness where the lambs have horns as soon as they are born where ewes lamb three times a year and no shepherd ever goes short of milk meat or cheese. Homer names Libya in Odyssey IX.95 XXIII.311. Homer used the name in a geographic sense while he called its inhabitants Lotuseaters. After Homer Aeschylus Pindar and other ancient Greek writers used the name. Herodotus 
1.4 6 used  Lib to indicate the African continent the Lbues proper were the lightskinned North Africans while those south of Egypt and Elephantine on the Nile were known to him as Aethiopians7 this was also the understanding of later Greek geographers such as Diodorus Siculus Strabo etc. When the Greeks actually settled in the real Libya in the 6
30 s the old name taken from the Egyptians was applied by the Greeks of Cyrenaica who may have coexisted with the Libu.8 Later the name appeared in the Hebrew language written in the Bible as Lehabim and Lubim indicating the ethnic population and the geographic territory as well. In the neoPunic inscriptions it was written as Lby for the masculine noun and Lbt for the feminine noun of Libyan.citation needed Latin absorbed the name from Greek and the Punic languages. The Romans would have known them before their colonization of North Africa because of the Libyan role in the Punic Wars against the Romans. The Romans used the name Lbues but only when referring to Barca and the Libyan Desert of Egypt. The other Libyan territories were called Africa. Classical Arabic literature called Libya Lubya indicating a speculative territory west of Egyptclarification needed. Modern Arabic uses Libya. The Lwatae the tribe of Ibn Battuta9 as the Arabs called it was a Berber tribe that mainly was situated in Cyrenaica. This tribe may have ranged from the Atlantic Ocean to modern Libya however and was referred to by Corippius as Laguatan he linked them with the Maures. Ibn Khalduns Muqaddimah states Luwa was an ancestor of this tribe. He writes that the Berbers add an a and t to the name for the plural forms. Subsequently it became Lwat. Conversely the Arabs adopted the name as a singular form adding an h for the plural form in Arabic. Ibn Khaldun disagrees with Ibn Hazam who claimed mostly on the basis of Berber sources that the Lwatah in addition to the Sadrata and the Mzata were from the Qibts Egyptians. According to Ibn Khaldun this claim is incorrect because Ibn Hazam had not read the books of the Berber scholars.10 Oric Bates a historian considers that the name Libu or LBW would be derived from the name Luwatah11 whilst the name Luwatah is a derivation of the name Libu.clarification needed Oric Bates considered all the Libyan tribes a civilization united under central Libu and Meshwesh control a Libyan Civilization.12 Historyedit Archaeological Site of Sabratha Libya Compared with the history of Egypt historians know little about the history of Libya as there are few surviving written records. Information on ancient Libya comes from archaeological evidence and historic sources written by Egypts neighbors the ancient Greeks Romans and Byzantines and from Arabs of Medieval times. Since Neolithic times the climate of North Africa has become drier. A reminder of the desertification of the area is provided by megalithic remains which occur in great variety of form and in vast numbers in presently arid and uninhabitable wastelands citation needed dolmens and circles akin to Stonehenge cairns underground cells excavated in rock barrows topped with huge slabs and steppyramidlike mounds.citation needed Most remarkable are the trilithons some still standing some fallen which occur isolated or in rows and consist of two squared uprights standing on a common pedestal that supports a huge transverse beam.citation needed In the Terrgurt valley Cowper says There had been originally no less than eighteen or twenty megalithic trilithons in a line each with its massive altar placed before it.13 In ancient times the PhoeniciansCarthaginians the NeoAssyrian Empire the Persian Achaemenid Empire see Libya satrapy the Macedonian Empire of Alexander the Great and his Ptolemaic successors from Egypt ruled variously parts of Libya. With the Roman conquest the entire region of presentday Libya became part of the Roman Empire. Following the fall of the Empire Vandals and local representatives of the Byzantine Empire also ruled all or parts of Libya. The territory of modern Libya had separate histories until Roman times as Tripoli and Cyrenaica. Cyrenaica by contrast was Greek before it was Roman. It was also known as Pentapolis the five cities being Cyrene near the village of Shahat with its port of Apollonia Marsa Susa Arsinoe Tocra Berenice Benghazi and Barca Merj. From the oldest and most famous of the Greek colonies the fertile coastal plain took the name of Cyrenaica. These five cities were also known as the Western Pentapolis not to be confused with the Pentapolis of the Roman era on the current west Italian coast. Geographyedit The exact boundaries of ancient Libya are unknown. It lay when west of ancient Egypt and was known as Tjehenu to the Ancient Egyptians.14 Later sourcesedit After the Egyptians the Greeks Romans and Byzantines mentioned various other tribes in Libya. Later tribal names differ from the Egyptian ones but probably some tribes were named in the Egyptian sources and the later ones as well. The Meshweshtribe represents this assumption. Scholars believe it would be the same tribe called Mazyes by Hektaios and Maxyes by Herodotus while it was called Mazaces and Mazax in Latin sources. All those names are similar to the name used by the Berbers for themselves Imazighen.15 Late period sources give more detailed descriptions of Libya and its inhabitants. The ancient historian Herodotus describes Libya and the Libyans in his fourth book known as The Libyan Book. Pliny the Elder Diodorus Siculus and Procopius also contributed to what is now primary source material on ancient Libya and the Libyans. Ibn Khaldun who dedicated the main part of his book Kitab elibar which is known as The history of the Berbers did not use the names Libya and Libyans but instead used Arabic names The Old Maghreb ElMaghrib elQadim and the Berbers ElBarbar or ElBaraberah. Ancient Libyan Berber tribesedit There were many tribes in ancient Libya including the now extinct Psylli with the Libu being the most prominent. The ancient Libyans were mainly pastoral nomads living off their goats sheep and other livestock. Milk meat hides and wool were gathered from their livestock for food tents and clothing. Ancient Egyptian sources describe Libyan men with long hair braided and bearded neatly parted from different sides and decorated with feathers attached to leather bands around the crown of the head while wearing thin robes of antelope hide dyed and printed crossing the shoulder and coming down until mid calf length to make a robe. Older men kept long braided beards. Women wore the same robes as men plaited decorated hair and both sexes wore heavy jewelry. Depictions of Libyans in Egyptian reliefs show prominent and numerous tattoos very similar to traditional Berber tattoos still seen today. Weapons included bows and arrows hatchets spears and daggers.citation needed The Libyan script that was used in Libya was mostly a funerary script.16 It is difficult to understand and there are a number of variations.17 Ibn Khaldun divided the Berbers into the Batr and the Baranis.
18 clarification needed Herodotus divided them into Eastern Libyans and Western Libyans. Eastern Libyans were nomadic shepherds east of Lake Tritonis. Western Libyans were sedentary farmers who lived west of Lake Tritonis.19 At one pointwhen a catastrophic changeclarification needed reduced the vast body of fresh water to a seasonal lake or marsh. Ibn Khaldun and Herodotus distinguish the Libyans on the basis of their lifestyles rather than ethnic background. Modern historians tend to follow Herodotuss distinction. Examples include Oric Bates in his book The Eastern Libyans. Some other historians have used the modern name of the Berbers in their works such as the French historian Gabriel Camps.20 The Libyan tribes mentioned in these sourcesclarification needed were Adyrmachidae Giligamae Asbystae Marmaridae Auschisae Nasamones Macae Lotuseaters or Lotophagi Garamantes Gaetulians Mauri and Luwatae as well as many others. See alsoedit History of North Africa North Africa during classical antiquity Necropolis of Cyrene References and notesedit  Africa  whats in a name. sahistory.org. For the ancient Greeks almost everything south of the Mediterranean Sea and west of the Nile was referred to as Libya. This was also the name given by the ancient Greeks to the Berber people who occupied most of that land. The ancient Greeks believed their world was divided into three greater regions Europa Asia and Libya all centred around the Aegean Sea. They also believed that the dividing line between Libya and Asia was the Nile River placing half of Egypt in Asia and the other half in Libya. For many centuries even into the late medieval period cartographers followed the Greek example placing the Nile as the dividing line between the landmasses.  Strabo. Book II Chapter 526. Geography. Now as you sail into the strait at the Pillars Libya lies on your right hand as far as the stream of the Nile and on your left hand across the strait lies Europe as far as the Tanas. And both Europe and Libya end at Asia.  Pliny the Elder. Book III Chapter 1. Natural History. The whole globe is divided into three parts Europe Asia and Africa. Our description commences where the sun sets and at the Straits of Gades where the Atlantic ocean bursting in is poured forth into the inland seas. As it makes its entrance from that side Africa is on the right hand and Europe on the left Asia lies between them the boundaries being the rivers Tanais and Nile.  Herodotus. Book II chapter 16. Histories. If then our judgment of this be right the Ionians are in error concerning Egypt but if their opinion be right then it is plain that they and the rest of the Greeks cannot reckon truly when they divide the whole earth into three parts Europe Asia and Libya they must add to these yet a fourth part the Delta of Egypt if it belong neither to Asia nor to Libya for by their showing the Nile is not the river that separates Asia and Libya the Nile divides at the extreme angle of this Delta so that this land must be between Asia and Libya.  Oliver Roland  Fagan Brian M. 1975 Africa in the Iron Age c. 500 B.C. to A.D. 1400. Cambridge Cambridge University Press p. 47  Gardiner Alan Henderson 1964 Egypt of the Pharaohs an introduction Oxford University Press London p. 273 ISBN 0195002679  The Cambridge History of North Africa and the people between them as the Egyptians p. 141.  Fage J. D. ed. 1978 The Libyans The Cambridge History of Africa From c. 500 BC to AD 1050 volume II Cambridge University Press Cambridge England p. 141 ISBN 0521215927  The full name of Ibn Battuta was Abu Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Abd Allah alLawati atTanji ibn Battuta  The History of Ibn Khaldun third chapter p. 1842
58 in Arabic  Bates Oric 1914 The Eastern Libyans. London Macmillan  Co. p. 57  Bates Oric 5 November 2013. The Eastern Libyan19
14 An Essay. Routledge. p. 142. ISBN 9781136248771.  The Geographical Journal. Royal Geographical Society. 1897.  A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian Raymond O Faulkner Page 306  Mohammed Chafik Highlights of thirtythree centuries of Imazighen p. 9 .  Chaker Salem. Lcriture libycoberbre The LibycoBerber script in French. Archived from the original on 13 January 2010. Retrieved 5 December 2010.  Chaker Script  Ibn Khaldun The History of Ibn Khaldun The thirth chapter p. 181152.  
1 Herodotus On Libya from The Histories c. 430 BC  Gabriel Camps is considered as the father of the North African prehistory by founding dEtude Berbreclarification needed at the University of AixenProvence and the Encyclopdie berbre. From the introduction of the English book The Berbers by Elizabeth Fentres and Michael Brett p. 7. External linksedit Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Libya. What Happened to the Ancient Libyans Chasing Sources across the Sahara from Herodotus to Ibn Khaldun by Richard L. Smith. Bunson Margaret. Libya. Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. New York Facts on File Inc. 1991 Who Lived in Africa before the Roman Conquest v t e Libya History Ancient Roman Islamic Tripolitania and Cyrenaica Spanish Tripoli Hospitaller Tripoli Ottoman Italian colonization Italian Tripolitania Italian Cyrenaica Italian Libya Libyan genocide The Holocaust Allied occupation Kingdom Libya under Gaddafi State of Libya Libyan Crisis 2011 20142020 Geography Borders Cities Climate Districts Ecoregions Libyan Desert Municipalities Subdivisions Wildlife Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Foreign relations under Gaddafi Government of National Accord Government of National Unity Presidential Council Head of state Head of government High Council of State House of Representatives Military Human rights LGBT Economy Agriculture Central Bank Communications Companies Dinar currency Energy Great ManMade River National Oil Corporation Oil reserves Tourism Transport Culture Demographics Education Health Libyan Arabic Literature Media Music Public holidays Religion Sports Football Olympics Women Outline Index Category Portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientLibyaoldid1221416205 Categories Ancient Libya Libya in Greek mythology Historical regions Ancient Greek geography of North Africa Hidden categories Articles with Arabiclanguage sources ar CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2010 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Latinlanguage text Articles containing Attic Greeklanguage text Articles containing Doric Greeklanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010 This page was last edited on 29 April 2024 at 2025 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width