Bronze Age - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Metal use 
2 Near East Toggle Near East subsection 
2.1 Near East Bronze Age divisions 
2.2 Anatolia 
2.3 Egypt 

2.3.1 Early Bronze dynasties 

2.3.2 Nubia 

2.3.3 Middle Bronze dynasties 

2.3.4 Late Bronze dynasties 
2.4 Iranian plateau 
2.5 Levant 
2.6 Mesopotamia 
3 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 
3.1 Central Asia 

3.1.1 Agropastoralism 

3.1.2 BactriaMargiana Archaeological Complex 

3.1.3 SeimaTurbino phenomenon 
3.2 East Asia 

3.2.1 China 

3.2.2 Japan 

3.2.3 Korea 
3.3 South Asia 

3.3.1 Indus Valley 
3.4 Southeast Asia 

3.4.1 Thailand 

3.4.2 Vietnam 

3.4.3 Myanmar 
4 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 
4.1 Southeast Europe 
4.2 Aegean 

4.2.1 Aegean collapse 
4.3 Central Europe 
4.4 Southern Europe 
4.5 West Europe 

4.5.1 Great Britain 

4.5.2 Iberian Peninsula 

4.5.3 Atlantic Bronze Age 

4.5.4 Ireland 
4.6 Northern Europe 
4.7 Eastern Europe 
4.8 Caucasus 
5 Africa Toggle Africa subsection 
5.1 SubSaharan Africa 
5.2 West Africa 
6 Americas 
7 Trade 
8 See also 
9 Notes 
10 References 
11 Further reading 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Bronze Age 145 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch    Aragons  Asturianu Avae Azrbaycanca     Bnlmg      Boarisch  Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Fiji Hindi Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego      Gychi Konknni  Hausa   Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Kaby  Kaszbsczi  Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyl gwiyannen Kurd  Ladin Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban. Lombard Magyar  Malagasy     Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirands   Nederlands Nedersaksies     Nordfriisk Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha       Patois Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Qrmtatarca Romn Rumantsch       Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara    Trke Trkmene   Vneto Vepsn kel Ting Vit Vro  WestVlams Winaray    emaitka  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Historical period c. 33001200 BC For other uses see Bronze Age disambiguation. This article may require copy editing for grammar style cohesion tone or spelling. You can assist by editing it. January 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message One of the Alaca Hyk bronze standards from a preHittite tomb dating to the third millennium BC from the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ankara Bronze Age  Chalcolithic Africa Near East c.33001200 BC Egypt Anatolia Caucasus Elam Levant Mesopotamia Sistan Canaan Late Bronze Age collapse Indian subcontinent c.33001200 BC Indus Valley Civilisation Bronze Age India Ochre Coloured Pottery Cemetery H Europe c.3200900 BC Aegean Cycladic Minoan Mycenaean Caucasus Catacomb culture Srubnaya culture Bell Beaker culture Apennine culture Terramare culture ntice culture Tumulus culture Urnfield culture ProtoVillanovan culture Hallstatt culture Canegrate culture Golasecca culture Argaric culture Atlantic Bronze Age Bronze Age Britain Nordic Bronze Age Eurasia and Siberia c.2700700 BC Poltavka culture Abashevo culture Sintashta culture Andronovo culture Mezhovskaya culture Cherkaskul culture East Asia c.3100300 BC Erlitou Erligang Gojoseon Jomon Majiayao Mumun Qijia Siwa Wucheng Xindian Yueshi Xia dynasty Shang dynasty Sanxingdui Zhou dynasty Topics Arsenical bronze writing literature Sword Chariot  Iron Age v t e History of technology By technological eras Premodern Prehistoric Stone Age lithic Neolithic Revolution Copper Age Bronze Age Iron Age Ancient Modern Protoindustrialization First Industrial Revolution Standardization Second Industrial Revolution Machine Age Atomic Age Jet Age Space Age Third Industrial Revolution Digital transformation Information Age Fourth Industrial Revolution Imagination Age AI era Future Emerging technologies By historical regions Ancient Africa Ancient Egypt Indian subcontinent Ancient China Maya civilization Hellenistic world Roman Empire Byzantine Empire Medieval Islamic world Arab Agricultural Revolution Medieval Europe Renaissance Europe By type of technology History of agriculture History of biotechnology History of communication History of computer hardware History of electrical engineering History of manufacturing History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of nuclear technology History of transport Technology timelines Timeline of historic inventions Complete list by category Article indices Outline of technology Outline of prehistoric technology v t e The Bronze Age is a historical period lasting from approximately 3300 to 1200 BC. It is characterized by the use of bronze the use of writing in some areas and other features of early urban civilization. The Bronze Age is the middle principal period of the threeage system between the Stone and Iron Ages.1 This system was proposed in 1836 by Christian Jrgensen Thomsen for classifying and studying ancient societies and history. Worldwide the Bronze Age generally followed the Neolithic period with the Chalcolithic serving as a transition. The periodisation of the Bronze Age is generally ended with the Late Bronze Age collapse a time of widespread societal collapse between c.1200 and 1150 BC. This collapse affected a large area of the Eastern Mediterranean including North Africa and Southeast Europe as well as the Near East in particular Egypt eastern Libya the Balkans the Aegean Anatolia and the Caucasus. It was sudden violent and culturally disruptive for many Bronze Age civilizations and it brought a sharp economic decline to regional powers most notably ushering in the Greek Dark Ages. An ancient civilization is deemed to be part of the Bronze Age if it either produced bronze by smelting its own copper and alloying it with tin arsenic or other metals or traded other items for bronze from producing areas elsewhere. Bronze Age civilizations gained a technological advantage due to bronzes harder and more durable properties than other metals available at the time. While terrestrial iron is naturally abundant the higher temperature required for smelting 1250 C 2280 F in addition to the greater difficulty of working with the metal placed it out of reach of common use until the end of the second millennium BC. Tins lower melting point of 232 C 450 F and coppers relatively moderate melting point of 1085 C 1985 F placed both these metals within the capabilities of Neolithic pottery kilns which date back to 6000 BC and were able to produce temperatures of at least 900 C 1650 F.2 Copper and tin ores are rare since there were no tin bronzes in West Asia before trading in bronze began in the 
3 rd millennium BC. Bronze Age cultures were the first to develop writing. According to archaeological evidence cultures in Mesopotamia which used cuneiform script and Egypt which used hieroglyphs developed the earliest practical writing systems. Metal useedit Further information Tin sources and trade in ancient times Diffusion of metallurgy in Europe and Asia Minorthe darkest areas are the oldest. The Bronze Age is characterized by the widespread use of bronze even if only by elites in the early years though the introduction and development of bronze technology were not universally synchronous.3 Tin bronze technology requires systematic techniques tin must be mined mainly as the tin ore cassiterite and smelted separately then added to hot copper to make bronze alloy. The Bronze Age was a time of extensive use of metals and of development of trade networks. A 2013 report suggests that the earliest tinalloy bronze was a foil dated to the mid
5 th millennium BC from a Vina culture site in Plonik Serbia although this culture is not conventionally considered part of the Bronze Age4 however the dating of the foil has been disputed.56 Near Eastedit Main article Ancient Near East West Asia and the Near East were the first regions to enter the Bronze Age beginning with the rise of the Mesopotamian civilization of Sumer in the mid
4 th millennium BC. Cultures in the ancient Near East practised intensive yearround agriculture developed writing systems invented the potters wheel created centralized governments usually in the form of hereditary monarchies written law codes citystates and nationstates and empires embarked on advanced architectural projects introduced social stratification economic and civil administration slavery and practised organized warfare medicine and religion. Societies in the region laid the foundations for astronomy mathematics and astrology. The following dates are approximate. For details consult linked articles. Near East Bronze Age divisionsedit The Bronze Age in the Near East can be conveniently divided into Early Middle and Late periods. The dates and phases below are applicable solely to the Near East not universally.789 However some archaeologists propose a high chronology which extend periods such as Intermediate Bronze Age by 300 to 500600 years based on material analysis of southern Levantine cities such as Hazor Jericho and Beit Shean.10 Early Bronze Age EBA 33002100 BC 33003000 EBA I 30002700 EBA II 27002200 EBA III 22002100 EBA IV Middle Bronze Age MBA or Intermediate Bronze Age IBA 21001550 BC 21002000 MBA I 20001750 MBA II A 17501650 MBA II B 16501550 MBA II C Late Bronze Age LBA 15501200 BC 15501400 LBA I 14001300 LBA II A 13001200 LBA II B Bronze Age collapse Anatoliaedit Further information Prehistory of Anatolia  Bronze Age Hittite bronze tablet from orumBoazky dating from 1235 BC Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ankara The Hittite Empire was established during the 
18 th century BC in Hattusa northern Anatolia. In the 
14 th century BC the Hittite Kingdom at its height encompassed central Anatolia southwestern Syria as far as Ugarit and upper Mesopotamia. After 1180 BC amid general turmoil in the Levant which is conjectured to have been associated with the sudden arrival of the Sea Peoples.1112 The kingdom disintegrated into several independent NeoHittite citystates some of which survived into the 
8 th century BC. Arzawa in Western Anatolia during the second half of the second millennium BC likely extended along southern Anatolia in a belt from near the Turkish Lakes Region to the Aegean coast. Arzawa was the western neighbour of the Middle and New Hittite Kingdoms at times a rival and at other times a vassal. The Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia defeated by the Hittites under the earlier Tudhaliya I around 1400 BC. Arzawa has been associated with the much more obscure Assuwa generally located to its north. It probably bordered it and may even have been an alternative term for it at least during some periods. Egyptedit Main article Ancient Egypt Early Bronze dynastiesedit Bronze mirror with a female human figure at the base Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt 15401296 BC Sphinxlion of Thutmose III 14791425 BC In Ancient Egypt the Bronze Age began in the Protodynastic Period c. 3150 BC. The archaic Early Bronze Age of Egypt known as the Early Dynastic Period of Egypt1314 immediately followed the unification of Lower and Upper Egypt c. 3100 BC. It is generally taken to include the First and Second Dynasties lasting from the Protodynastic Period until about 2686 BC or the beginning of the Old Kingdom. With the First Dynasty the capital moved from Abydos to Memphis with a unified Egypt ruled by an Egyptian godking. Abydos remained the major holy land in the south. The hallmarks of ancient Egyptian civilization such as art architecture and religion took shape in the Early Dynastic Period. Memphis in the Early Bronze Age was the largest city of the time. The Old Kingdom of the regional Bronze Age13 is the name given to the period in the 
3 rd millennium BC when Egyptian civilization attained its first continuous peak of complexity and achievementthe first of three Kingdom periods which mark the high points of civilization in the lower Nile Valley the others being the Middle Kingdom and the New Kingdom. The First Intermediate Period of Egypt15 often described as a dark period in ancient Egyptian history spanned about 100 years after the end of the Old Kingdom from about 2181 to 2055 BC. Very little monumental evidence survives from this period especially from the early part of it. The First Intermediate Period was a dynamic time when the rule of Egypt was roughly divided between two competing for power bases Heracleopolis in Lower Egypt and Thebes in Upper Egypt. These two kingdoms eventually came into conflict and the Theban kings conquered the north reunifying Egypt under a single ruler during the second part of the Eleventh Dynasty. Nubiaedit The Bronze Age in Nubia started as early as 2300 BC.16 Egyptians introduced copper smelting to the Nubian city of Mero in modernday Sudan around 2600 BC.17 A furnace for bronze casting found in Kerma dated to 23001900 BC.16 Middle Bronze dynastiesedit The Middle Kingdom of Egypt lasted from 2055 to 1650 BC. During this period the Osiris funerary cult rose to dominate Egyptian popular religion. The period comprises two phases the 
11 th Dynasty which ruled from Thebes and the 
12 th18 and 
13 th Dynasties centred on elLisht. The unified kingdom was previously considered to comprise the 
11 th and 
12 th Dynasties but historians now consider at least part of the 
13 th Dynasty to have belonged to the Middle Kingdom. During the Second Intermediate Period19 Ancient Egypt fell into disarray a second time between the end of the Middle Kingdom and the start of the New Kingdom best known for the Hyksos whose reign comprised the 
15 th and 
16 th dynasties. The Hyksos first appeared in Egypt during the 
11 th Dynasty began their climb to power in the 
13 th Dynasty and emerged from the Second Intermediate Period in control of Avaris and the Delta. By the 
15 th Dynasty they ruled lower Egypt and they were expelled at the end of the 
17 th Dynasty. Late Bronze dynastiesedit The New Kingdom of Egypt also referred to as the Egyptian Empire lasted from the 
16 th to the 
11 th century BC. The New Kingdom followed the Second Intermediate Period and was succeeded by the Third Intermediate Period. It was Egypts most prosperous time and marked the peak of Egypts power. The later New Kingdom i.e. the 
19 th and 
20 th Dynasties 12921069 BC is also known as the Ramesside period after the eleven pharaohs who took the name of Ramesses. Iranian plateauedit Late 
3 rd Millennium BC silver cup from Marvdasht Fars with linearElamite inscription Further information Iranian Plateau Elam was a preIranian ancient civilization located east of Mesopotamia. In the Old Elamite period Middle Bronze Age Elam consisted of kingdoms on the Iranian Plateau centred in Anshan and from the mid
2 nd millennium BC it was centred in Susa in the Khuzestan lowlands. Its culture played a crucial role in the Gutian Empire and especially during the Iranian Achaemenid dynasty that succeeded it. The Oxus civilization20 was a Bronze Age Central Asian culture dated to c. 23001700 BC and centred on the upper Amu Darya Oxus. In the Early Bronze Age the culture of the Kopet Dag oases and Altyndepe developed a protourban society. This corresponds to level IV at NamazgaTepe. Altyndepe was a major centre even then. Pottery was wheelturned. Grapes were grown. The height of this urban development was reached in the Middle Bronze Age c. 2300 BC corresponding to level V at NamazgaDepe.21 This Bronze Age culture is called the BactriaMargiana Archaeological Complex BMAC. The Kulli culture2223 similar to that of the Indus Valley civilisation was located in southern Balochistan Gedrosia c. 25002000 BC. The economy was agricultural. In several places dams were found providing evidence for a highly developed water management system. Master of Animals in chlorite Jiroft culture c.2500 BC Bronze Age I National Museum of Iran Konar Sandal is associated with the hypothesized Jiroft culture a 
3 rdmillenniumBC culture postulated based on a collection of artefacts confiscated in 2001. Levantedit Chalcolithic copper mine in Timna Valley Negev Desert Israel Further information History of the ancient Levant  Bronze Age Canaan Prehistory of the Levant and List of archaeological periods Levant In modern scholarship the chronology of the Bronze Age Levant is divided into EarlyProto Syrian corresponding to the Early Bronze. Old Syrian corresponding to the Middle Bronze. Middle Syrian corresponding to the Late Bronze. The term NeoSyria is used to designate the early Iron Age.24 The old Syrian period was dominated by the Eblaite first kingdom Nagar and the Mariote second kingdom. The Akkadians conquered large areas of the Levant and were followed by the Amorite kingdoms c. 20001600 BC which arose in Mari Yamhad Qatna and Assyria.25 From the 
15 th century BC onward the term Amurru is usually applied to the region extending north of Canaan as far as Kadesh on the Orontes River. The earliestknown contact of Ugarit with Egypt and the first exact dating of Ugaritic civilization comes from a carnelian bead identified with the Middle Kingdom pharaoh Senusret I 19711926 BC. A stela and a statuette of the Egyptian pharaohs Senusret III and Amenemhet III have also been found. However it is unclear when they got to Ugarit. In the Amarna letters messages from Ugarit c. 1350 BC written by Ammittamru I Niqmaddu II and his queen have been discovered. From the 
16 th to the 
13 th century BC Ugarit remained in constant touch with Egypt and Cyprus Alashiya. Mitanni was a loosely organized state in northern Syria and southeast Anatolia from c. 15001300 BC. Founded by an IndoAryan ruling class that governed a predominantly Hurrian population Mitanni came to be a regional power after the Hittite destruction of Kassite Babylon created a power vacuum in Mesopotamia. At its beginning Mitannis major rival was Egypt under the Thutmosids. However with the ascent of the Hittite empire Mitanni and Egypt allied to protect their mutual interests from the threat of Hittite domination. At the height of its power during the 
14 th century BC it had outposts centred on its capital Washukanni which archaeologists have located on the headwaters of the Khabur River. Eventually Mitanni succumbed to the Hittites and later Assyrian attacks eventually being reduced to a province of the Middle Assyrian Empire. The Israelites were an ancient Semiticspeaking people of the Ancient Near East who inhabited part of Canaan during the tribal and monarchic periods 
15 th to 
6 th centuries BC2627282930 and lived in the region in smaller numbers after the fall of the monarchy. The name Israel first appears c. 1209 BC at the end of the Late Bronze Age and the very beginning of the Iron Age on the Merneptah Stele raised by the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah. The Arameans were a Northwest Semitic seminomadic pastoral people who originated in what is now modern Syria Biblical Aram during the Late Bronze and early Iron Age. Large groups migrated to Mesopotamia where they intermingled with the native Akkadian Assyrian and Babylonian population. The Aramaeans never had a unified empire they were divided into independent kingdoms all across the Near East. After the Bronze Age collapse their political influence was confined to SyroHittite states which were entirely absorbed into the NeoAssyrian Empire by the 
8 th century BC. Mesopotamiaedit Main article History of Mesopotamia The Mesopotamian Bronze Age began about 3500 BC and ended with the Kassite period c. 1500 BC  c. 1155 BC. The usual tripartite division into an Early Middle and Late Bronze Age is not used in the context of Mesopotamia. Instead a division primarily based on art and historical characteristics is more common. The cities of the Ancient Near East housed several tens of thousands of people. Ur Kish Isin Larsa and Nippur in the Middle Bronze Age and Babylon Calah and Assur in the Late Bronze Age similarly had large populations. The Akkadian Empire 23352154 BC became the dominant power in the region. After its fall the Sumerians enjoyed a renaissance with the NeoSumerian Empire. Assyria along with the Old Assyrian Empire c. 18001600 BC became a regional power under the Amorite king ShamshiAdad I. The earliest mention of Babylon then a small administrative town appears on a tablet from the reign of Sargon of Akkad in the 
23 rd century BC. The Amorite dynasty established the citystate of Babylon in the 
19 th century BC. Over 100 years later it briefly took over the other citystates and formed the shortlived First Babylonian Empire during what is also called the Old Babylonian Period. Akkad Assyria and Babylonia all used the written East Semitic Akkadian language for official use and as a spoken language. By that time the Sumerian language was no longer spoken but was still in religious use in Assyria and Babylonia and would remain so until the 
1 st century AD. The Akkadian and Sumerian traditions played a major role in later Assyrian and Babylonian culture. Despite this Babylonia unlike the more militarily powerful Assyria was founded by nonnative Amorites and often ruled by other nonindigenous peoples such as the Kassites Aramaeans and Chaldeans as well as by its Assyrian neighbours. Asiaedit Map of the world in 2000 BC Central Asiaedit Agropastoralismedit For many decades scholars made superficial reference to Central Asia as the pastoral realm or alternatively the nomadic world in what researchers have come to call the Central Asian void a 50
00 year span that was neglected in studies of the origins of agriculture. Foothill regions and glacial melt streams supported Bronze Age agropastoralists who developed complex eastwest trade routes between Central Asia and China which introduced wheat and barley to China and millet to Central Asia.31 BactriaMargiana Archaeological Complexedit Main article BactriaMargiana Archaeological Complex The BactriaMargiana Archaeological Complex BMAC also known as the Oxus civilization was a Bronze Age civilization in Central Asia dated to c. 24001600 BC32 located in presentday northern Afghanistan eastern Turkmenistan southern Uzbekistan and western Tajikistan centred on the upper Amu Darya Oxus River. Its sites were discovered and named by the Soviet archaeologist Viktor Sarianidi 1976. Bactria was the Greek name for the area of Bactra modern Balkh in what is now northern Afghanistan and Margiana was the Greek name for the Persian satrapy of Margu the capital of which was Merv in modernday southeastern Turkmenistan. A wealth of information indicates that the BMAC had close international relations with the Indus Valley the Iranian Plateau and possibly even indirectly with Mesopotamia all civilizations were very familiar with lost wax casting.33 According to a 2019 study34 the BMAC was not a primary contributor to later SouthAsian genetics. SeimaTurbino phenomenonedit Main article SeimaTurbino phenomenon The Altai Mountains in what is now southern Russia and central Mongolia have been identified as the point of origin of a cultural enigma termed the SeimaTurbino Phenomenon.35 It is conjectured that changes in climate in this region around 2000 BC and the ensuing ecological economic and political changes triggered a rapid and massive migration westward into northeast Europe eastward into China and southward into Vietnam and Thailand 36 across a frontier of some 4000 mi 6000 km.35 This migration took place in just five to six generations and led to peoples from Finland in the west to Thailand in the east employing the same metalworking technology and in some areas horse breeding and riding.35 However recent genetic testings of sites in south Siberia and Kazakhstan Andronovo horizon would rather support spreading of the bronze technology via IndoEuropean migrations eastwards as this technology had been well known for quite a while in western regions.3738 It is further conjectured that the same migrations spread the Uralic group of languages across Europe and Asia some 39 languages of this group are still extant including Hungarian Finnish and Estonian.35 East Asiaedit Chinaedit Further information Erlitou culture Shang dynasty Sanxingdui and Lower Xiajiadian culture A Shang dynasty twohandled bronze gefuding gui 16001046 BC Spring and Autumn period pu bronze vessel with interlaced dragon design c. 770 to 481 BC In China the earliest bronze artefacts have been found in the Majiayao culture site between 3100 and 2700 BC.3940 The term Bronze Age has been transferred to the archaeology of China from that of Western Eurasia and there is no consensus or universally used convention delimiting the Bronze Age in the context of Chinese prehistory.41 Early Bronze Age in China is sometimes taken as equivalent to the Shang dynasty period 
16 th to 
11 th centuries BC42 and the Later Bronze Age as equivalent to the Zhou dynasty period 
11 th to 
3 rd centuries BC from the 
5 th century also called Iron Age although there is an argument to be made that the Bronze Age proper never ended in China as there is no recognizable transition to an Iron Age.43 Significantly together with the jade art that precedes it bronze was seen as a fine material for ritual art when compared with iron or stone.44 Bronze metallurgy in China originated in what is referred to as the Erlitou WadeGiles Erhlitou period which some historians argue places it within the Shang dynasty.45 Others believe the Erlitou sites belong to the preceding Xia WadeGiles Hsia dynasty.46 The U.S. National Gallery of Art defines the Chinese Bronze Age as the period between about 2000 BC and 771 BC a period that begins with the Erlitou culture and ends abruptly with the disintegration of Western Zhou rule.47 There is reason to believe that bronze work developed inside of China apart from outside influence.48 However the discovery of Europoid mummies in Xinjiang has caused some scholars such as Johan Gunnar Andersson Jan Romgard and An Zhimin zh to suggest a possible route of transmission from the West eastwards. According to An Zhimin It can be imagined that initially bronze and iron technology took its rise in West Asia first influenced the Xinjiang region and then reached the Yellow River valley providing external impetus for the rise of the Shang and Zhou civilizations. According to Jan Romgard bronze and iron tools seems to have traveled from west to east as well as the use of wheeled wagons and the domestication of the horse. There are also possible links to SeimaTurbino culture a transcultural complex across northern Eurasia the Eurasian steppe and the Urals.49 However the oldest bronze objects found in China so far were discovered at the Majiayao site in Gansu rather than at Xinjiang.50 The Shang dynasty also known as the Yin dynasty51 of the Yellow River Valley rose to power after the Xia dynasty around 1600 BC. While some direct information about the Shang dynasty comes from Shangera inscriptions on bronze artefacts most comes from oracle bonesturtle shells cattle scapulae or other boneswhich bear glyphs that form the first significant corpus of recorded Chinese characters. The production of Erlitou in Henan represents the earliest largescale metallurgy industry in the Central Plains of China. The influence of the SaimaTurbino metalworking tradition from the north is supported by a series of recent discoveries in China of many unique perforated spearheads with downward hooks and small loops on the same or opposite side of the socket which could be associated with the SeimaTurbino visual vocabulary of southern Siberia. The metallurgical centres of northwestern China especially Qijia in Gansu and Kexingzhuang culture in Shaanxi played an intermediary role in this process.52 Iron has been found from the Zhou dynasty but its use was minimal. Chinese literature dating to the 
6 th century BC attests to knowledge of iron smelting yet bronze continues to occupy the seat of significance in the archaeological and historical record for some time after this.53 Historian W.C. White argues that iron did not supplant bronze at any period before the end of the Zhou dynasty 256 BC and that bronze vessels make up the majority of metal vessels through the Later Han period or to 221 BC.54 The Chinese bronze artefacts generally are either utilitarian like spear points or adze heads or ritual bronzes which are more elaborate versions in precious materials of everyday vessels as well as tools and weapons. Examples are the numerous large sacrificial tripods known as dings in Chinese there are many other distinct shapes. Surviving identified Chinese ritual bronzes tend to be highly decorated often with the taotie motif which involves highly stylized animal faces. These appear in three main motif types those of demons symbolic animals and abstract symbols.55 Many large bronzes also bear cast inscriptions that are the great bulk of the surviving body of early Chinese writing and have helped historians and archaeologists piece together the history of China especially during the Zhou dynasty 1046256 BC. The bronzes of the Western Zhou dynasty document large portions of history not found in the extant texts that were often composed by persons of varying rank and possibly even social class. Further the medium of cast bronze lends the record they preserve a permanence not enjoyed by manuscripts.56 These inscriptions can commonly be subdivided into four parts a reference to the date and place the naming of the event commemorated the list of gifts given to the artisan in exchange for the bronze and a dedication.57 The relative points of reference these vessels provide have enabled historians to place most of the vessels within a certain time frame of the Western Zhou period allowing them to trace the evolution of the vessels and the events they record.58 Japanedit Main article Yayoi period 
2 nd century BC Yayoi dtaku bronze bell 
2 ndcentury BC Yayoi bronze spearhead The Japanese archipelago saw the introduction of bronze during the beginning of the Early Yayoi period 300 BC which saw the introduction of metalworking and agricultural practices brought in by settlers arriving from the continent. Bronze and iron smelting techniques spread to the Japanese archipelago through contact with other ancient East Asian civilizations particularly immigration and trade from the ancient Korean peninsula and ancient mainland China. Iron was mainly used for agricultural and other tools whereas ritual and ceremonial artefacts were mainly made of bronze.clarification needed59 Koreaedit Main articles Gojoseon and Mumun pottery period Further information in Korean Bronze Age in Korea ko Bronze artefacts from Daegokri Hwasun Korea On the Korean peninsula the Bronze Age began around 1000800 BC.6061 Initially centred around Liaoning and southern Manchuria Korean Bronze Age culture exhibits unique typology and styles especially in ritual objects.62 The Mumun pottery period is named after the Korean name for undecorated or plain cooking and storage vessels that form a large part of the pottery assemblage over the entire length of the period but especially 850550 BC. The Mumun period is known for the origins of intensive agriculture and complex societies in both the Korean Peninsula and the Japanese Archipelago. The Middle Mumun pottery period culture of the southern Korean Peninsula gradually adopted bronze production c. 700600 BC after a period when Liaoningstyle bronze daggers and other bronze artefacts were exchanged as far as the interior part of the Southern Peninsula c. 900700 BC. The bronze daggers lent prestige and authority to the personages who wielded and were buried with them in highstatus megalithic burials at southcoastal centres such as the Igeumdong site. Bronze was an important element in ceremonies and for mortuary offerings until 100 BC. South Asiaedit Dates are approximate consult linked articles for details Indus Valleyedit Main article Indus Valley Civilisation Dancing girl of Mohenjodaro c.2500 BC. The Bronze Age on the Indian subcontinent began around 3300 BC with the beginning of the Indus Valley Civilization. Inhabitants of the Indus Valley the Harappans developed new techniques in metallurgy and produced copper bronze lead and tin. The Late Harappan culture which dates from 1900 to 1400 BC overlapped the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age thus it is difficult to date this transition accurately. It has been claimed that a 60
00 yearold copper amulet manufactured in Mehrgarh in the shape of a wheel spoke is the earliest example of lostwax casting in the world.6364 The civilizations cities were noted for their urban planning baked brick houses elaborate drainage systems water supply systems clusters of large nonresidential buildings and new techniques in handicraft carnelian products seal carving and metallurgy copper bronze lead and tin.65 The large cities of Mohenjodaro and Harappa very likely grew to contain between 30000 and 60000 people66 and the civilization itself during its florescence may have contained between one and five million people.67 Southeast Asiaedit The Vilabouly Complex in Laos is a significant archaeological site for dating the origin of bronze metallurgy in Southeast Asia. Thailandedit In Ban Chiang Thailand Southeast Asia bronze artefacts have been discovered dating to 2100 BC.68 However according to the radiocarbon dating on the human and pig bones in Ban Chiang some scholars propose that the initial Bronze Age in Ban Chiang was in the late 
2 nd millennium.69 In Nyaunggan Burma bronze tools have been excavated along with ceramics and stone artefacts. Dating is still currently broad 3500500 BC.70 Ban Non Wat excavated by Charles Higham was a rich site with over 640 graves excavated that gleaned many complex bronze items that may have had social value connected to them.71 Ban Chiang however is the most thoroughly documented site and has the clearest evidence of metallurgy when in Southeast Asia. With a rough date range from the late 
3 rd millennium BC to the first millennium AD this site alone has artefacts such as burial pottery dating from 2100 to 1700 BC and fragments of bronze and copperbase bangles. This technology suggested onsite casting from the very beginning. The onsite casting supports the theory that bronze was first introduced in Southeast Asia from a different country.72 Some scholars believe that copperbased metallurgy was disseminated from northwest and central China south and southwest via areas such as Guangdong province and Yunnan province and finally into southeast Asia around 1000 BC.69 Archaeology also suggests that Bronze Age metallurgy may not have been as significant a catalyst in social stratification and warfare in Southeast Asia as in other regions and that social distribution shifted away from chiefdomstates to a heterarchical network.72 Data analyses of sites such as Ban Lum Khao Ban Na Di NonNok Tha Khok Phanom Di and Nong Nor have consistently led researchers to conclude that there was no entrenched hierarchy.73 Vietnamedit Further information Dong Son culture Dating back to the Neolithic Age the first bronze drums called the Dong Son drums were uncovered in and around the Red River Delta regions of Northern Vietnam and Southern China. These relate to the Dong Son culture of Vietnam.74 Archaeological research in Northern Vietnam indicates an increase in rates of infectious disease following the advent of metallurgy skeletal fragments in sites dating to the early and midBronze Age evidence a greater proportion of lesions than in sites of earlier periods.75 There are a few possible implications of this. One is the increased contact with bacterial andor fungal pathogens due to increased population density and land clearingcultivation. The other one is decreased levels of immunocompetence in the Metal Age due to changes in diet caused by agriculture. The last is that there may have been an emergence of infectious diseases that evolved into a more virulent form in the metal period.75 Myanmaredit Main article Nyaunggan Europeedit Main article Bronze Age Europe A few examples of named Bronze Age cultures in Europe in roughly relative order. Dates are approximate consult linked articles for details The chosen cultures overlapped in time and the indicated periods do not fully correspond to their estimated extents. Southeast Europeedit Main articles Old Europe archaeology and Varna culture Further information Prehistory of Southeastern Europe  Bronze Age and Bronze Age in Romania Valchitran Treasure from 1600 to 1100 BC Bronze chariot wheel Romania c.
13 th
12 th century BC76 Radivojevic et al. 2013 reported the discovery of a tin bronze foil from the Plonik archaeological site securely dated to c. 4650 BC as well as 14 other artefacts from Serbia and Bulgaria dated to before 4000 BC showing that early tin bronze was more common than previously thought and developed independently in Europe 1500 years before the first tin bronze alloys in the Near East. The production of complex tin bronzes lasted for about 500 years in the Balkans. The authors reported that evidence for the production of such complex bronzes disappears at the end of the 
5 th millennium coinciding with the collapse of large cultural complexes in northeastern Bulgaria and Thrace in the late fifth millennium BC. Tin bronzes using cassiterite tin were reintroduced to the area some 1500 years later.4 The oldest golden artefacts in the world 4600  4200 BC were found in the Necropolis of Varna. These artefacts are on display in the Varna Archaeological Museum777879 The Dabene Treasure was unearthed from 2004 to 2007 near Karlovo Plovdiv Province central Bulgaria. The whole treasure consists of 20000 gold jewellery items from 18 to 23 carats. The most important of them was a dagger made of gold and platinum with an unusual edge. The treasure was dated to the end of the 
3 rd millennium BC. Scientists suggest that the Karlovo valley used to be a major crafts centre that exported golden jewellery all over Europe. It is considered one of the largest prehistoric golden treasures in the world.80 Aegeanedit Main article Aegean civilization Gold Mask of Agamemnon produced during the Mycenaean civilization from Mycenae Greece 1550 BC The Aegean Bronze Age began around 3200 BC when civilizations first established a farranging trade network. This network imported tin and charcoal to Cyprus where copper was mined and alloyed with tin to produce bronze. Bronze objects were then exported far and wide and supported the trade. Isotopic analysis of tin in some Mediterranean bronze artefacts suggests that they may have originated from Great Britain.81 Knowledge of navigation was welldeveloped by this time and reached a peak of skill not exceeded except perhaps by Polynesian sailors until 1730 when the invention of the chronometer enabled the precise determination of longitude. The Minoan civilization based in Knossos on the island of Crete appears to have coordinated and defended its Bronze Age trade. Ancient empires valued luxury goods in contrast to staple foods leading to famine.82 Aegean collapseedit Main articles Bronze Age collapse and Greek Dark Ages Invasions destruction and possible population movements during the collapse of the Bronze Age c. 1200 BC Bronze Age collapse theories have described aspects of the end of the Bronze Age in this region. At the end of the Bronze Age in the Aegean region the Mycenaean administration of the regional trade empire followed the decline of Minoan primacy.83 Several Minoan client states lost much of their population to famine and pestilence. This would indicate that the trade network may have failed preventing the trade that would previously have relieved such famines and prevented illness caused by malnutrition. It is also known that in this era the breadbasket of the Minoan empirethe area north of the Black Seaalso suddenly lost much of its population and thus probably some capacity to cultivate crops.84 Drought and famine in Anatolia may have also led to the Aegean collapse by disrupting trade networks therefore preventing the Aegean from accessing bronze and luxury goods.85 The Aegean collapse has been attributed to the exhaustion of the Cypriot forests causing the end of the bronze trade.868788 These forests are known to have existed in later times and experiments have shown that charcoal production on the scale necessary for the bronze production of the late Bronze Age would have exhausted them in less than fifty years. The Aegean collapse has also been attributed to the fact that as iron tools became more common the main justification for the tin trade ended and that trade network ceased to function as it did formerly.89 The colonies of the Minoan empire then suffered drought famine war or some combination of the three and had no access to the distant resources of an empire by which they could easily recover. The Thera eruption occurred c. 1600 BC 110 km 68 mi north of Crete. Speculation includes that a tsunami from Thera more commonly known today as Santorini destroyed Cretan cities. A tsunami may have destroyed the Cretan navy in its home harbour which then lost crucial naval battles so that in the LMIBLMII event c. 1450 BC the cities of Crete burned and the Mycenaean civilization took Knossos over. If the eruption occurred in the late 
17 th century BC as most chronologists now believe then its immediate effects belong to the Middle to Late Bronze Age transition and not to the end of the Late Bronze Age but it could have triggered the instability that led to the collapse first of Knossos and then of Bronze Age society overall.citation needed One such theory highlights the role of Cretan expertise in administering the empire postThera. If this expertise was concentrated in Crete then the Mycenaeans may have made political and commercial mistakes in administering the Cretan empire.citation needed Archaeological findings including some on the island of Thera suggest that the centre of the Minoan civilization at the time of the eruption was actually on Thera rather than on Crete.90 According to this theory the catastrophic loss of the political administrative and economic centre due to the eruption as well as the damage wrought by the tsunami to the coastal towns and villages of Crete precipitated the decline of the Minoans. A weakened political entity with a reduced economic and military capability and fabled riches would have then been more vulnerable to conquest. Indeed the Santorini eruption is usually dated to c. 1630 BC91 while the Mycenaean Greeks first enter the historical record a few decades later c. 1600 BC.citation needed The later Mycenaean assaults on Crete c. 1450 BC and Troy c. 1250 BC would have been a continuation of the steady encroachment of the Greeks upon the weakened Minoan world.citation needed Central Europeedit Nebra sky disc Aunjetitz culture Germany 18001600 BC Bronze swords Urnfield culture Hungary 1200 BC In Central Europe the early Bronze Age Unetice culture 23001600 BC includes numerous smaller groups like the Straubing Adlerberg and Hatvan cultures. Some very rich burials such as the one located at Leubingen with grave gifts crafted from gold point to an increase of social stratification already present in the Unetice culture. All in all cemeteries of this period are small and rare. The Unetice culture was followed by the middle Bronze Age 16001200 BC tumulus culture characterized by inhumation burials in tumuli barrows. In the eastern Hungarian Krs tributaries the early Bronze Age first saw the introduction of the Mako culture followed by the Otomani and Gyulavarsand cultures. The late Bronze Age Urnfield culture 1300700 BC was characterized by cremation burials. It included the Lusatian culture in eastern Germany and Poland 1300500 BC that continues into the Iron Age. The Central European Bronze Age was followed by the Iron Age Hallstatt culture 700450 BC. Important sites include Biskupin Poland Nebra Germany Vrble Slovakia ZugSumpf Zug Switzerland German prehistorian Paul Reinecke described Bronze A1 Bz A1 period 23002000 BC triangular daggers flat axes stone wristguards flint arrowheads and Bronze A2 Bz A2 period 19501700 BC daggers with metal hilt flanged axes halberds pins with perforated spherical heads solid bracelets and phases Hallstatt A and B Ha A and B. Southern Europeedit Nuragic figurine Sardinia c.1000 BC The Apennine culture also called Italian Bronze Age is a technology complex of central and southern Italy spanning the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age proper. The Camuni were an ancient people of uncertain origin according to Pliny the Elder they were Euganei according to Strabo they were Rhaetians who lived in Val Camonicain what is now northern Lombardyduring the Iron Age although groups of hunters shepherds and farmers are known to have lived in the area since the Neolithic. Located in Sardinia and Corsica the Nuragic civilization lasted from the early Bronze Age 
18 th century BC to the 
2 nd century AD when the islands were already Romanized. They take their name from the characteristic Nuragic towers which evolved from the preexisting megalithic culture which built dolmens and menhirs. Bronze votive boat model Nuragic culture Sardinia c.1000 BC The towers are unanimously considered the bestpreserved and largest megalithic remains in Europe. Their purpose is still debated some scholars consider them monumental tombs others as Houses of the Giants other as fortresses ovens for metal fusion prisons or finally temples for a solar cult. Around the end of the 
3 rd millennium BC Sardinia exported to Sicily a culture that built small dolmens trilithic or polygonal shaped that served as tombs as in the Sicilian dolmen of Cava dei Servi. From this region they reached Malta and other countries of Mediterranean basin.92 The Terramare was an early IndoEuropean civilization in the area of what is now Pianura Padana in northern Italy before the arrival of the Celts and in other parts of Europe. They lived in square villages of wooden stilt houses. These villages were built on land but generally near a stream with roads that crossed each other at right angles. The whole complex was of the nature of a fortified settlement. The Terramare culture was widespread in the Pianura Padana especially along the Panaro river between Modena and Bologna and in the rest of Europe. The civilization developed in the Middle and Late Bronze Age between the 
17 th and the 
13 th centuries BC. The Castellieri culture developed in Istria during the Middle Bronze Age. It lasted for more than a millennium from the 
15 th century BC until the Roman conquest in the 
3 rd century BC. It takes its name from the fortified boroughs Castellieri Friulian cjastelir that characterized the culture. The Canegrate culture developed from the midBronze Age 
13 th century BC until the Iron Age in the Pianura Padana in what are now western Lombardy eastern Piedmont and Ticino. It takes its name from the township of Canegrate where in the 
20 th century some fifty tombs with ceramics and metal objects were found. The Canegrate culture migrated from the northwest part of the Alps and descended to Pianura Padana from the Swiss Alps passes and the Ticino. The Golasecca culture developed starting from the late Bronze Age in the Po plain. It takes its name from Golasecca a locality next to the Ticino where in the early 
19 th century abbot Giovanni Battista Giani it excavated its first findings some fifty tombs with ceramics and metal objects. Remains of the Golasecca culture span an area of about 20000 km2 4900000 acres south to the Alps between the Po Sesia and Serio rivers dating from the 
9 th to the 
4 th century BC. West Europeedit Great Britainedit Main article Bronze Age Britain Bronze shield Britain 13001000 BC In Great Britain the Bronze Age is considered to have been the period from around 2100 to 750 BC. Migration brought new people to the islands from the continent.93 Tooth enamel isotope research on bodies found in early Bronze Age graves around Stonehenge indicates that at least some of the migrants came from the area of modern Switzerland. Another example site is Must Farm near Whittlesey host to the most complete Bronze Age wheel ever to be found. The Beaker culture displayed different behaviours from earlier Neolithic people and cultural change was significant. Integration is thought to have been peaceful as many of the early henge sites were seemingly adopted by the newcomers. The rich Wessex culture developed in southern Britain at this time. Additionally the climate was deteriorating where once the weather was warm and dry it became much wetter as the Bronze Age continued forcing the population away from easily defended sites in the hills and into the fertile valleys. Large livestock farms developed in the lowlands and appear to have contributed to economic growth and inspired increasing forest clearances. The DeverelRimbury culture began to emerge in the second half of the Middle Bronze Age c. 14001100 BC to exploit these conditions. Devon and Cornwall were major sources of tin for much of western Europe and copper was extracted from sites such as the Great Orme mine in northern Wales. Social groups appear to have been tribal but with growing complexity and hierarchies becoming apparent. The burials which until this period had usually been communal became more individual. For example whereas in the Neolithic a large chambered cairn or long barrow housed the dead Early Bronze Age people buried their dead in individual barrows commonly known and marked on modern British Ordnance Survey maps as tumuli or sometimes in cists covered with cairns. The greatest quantities of bronze objects in England were discovered in East Cambridgeshire with the most important finds recovered in Isleham more than 6500 pieces.94 Alloying of copper with zinc or tin to make brass or bronze was practised soon after the discovery of copper itself. One copper mine at Great Orme in North Wales reached a depth of 70 metres.95 At Alderley Edge in Cheshire carbon dating has established mining at around 2280 to 1890 BC 95 probability.96 The earliest identified metalworking site Sigwells Somerset came much later dated by globular urnstyle pottery to approximately the 
12 th century BC. The identifiable sherds from over 500 mould fragments included a perfect fit of the hilt of a sword in the Wilburton style held in Somerset County Museum.97 Iberian Peninsulaedit Treasure of Vilena Spain 1000 BC. The Bronze Age began on the Iberian Peninsula in 2100 cal. BC according to radiocarbon datings of several key sites. According to the period sequence9899100 the Iberian Bronze Age is divided into three subperiods or phases with different diagnostic markers lithic tools decorated ceramics and types of metal tools Early Bronze Age Middle Bronze Age and Late Bronze Age. The Early Bronze Age began on the Northern Iberian Plateau in 2100 cal. BC and the Late Bronze Age equivalent to Atlantic Bronze Age phase in 1350 cal. BC.9899100 In the three phases of the Iberian Bronze Age different cultures emerged which have been defined by regions with typical names e.g. El Argar Las Motillas Bronce Atlntico Bronce Valenciano Montelavar Las Cogotas and others.9899 Atlantic Bronze Ageedit Main article Atlantic Bronze Age Sword of Jutphaas Netherlands c.1500 BC The Atlantic Bronze Age as cultural geographic region is a cultural complex c.2100800700 cal. BC that includes different cultures in the contex of the Atlantic Iberian Peninsula Portugal Andaluca Galicia Asturias Cantabria Pas Vasco Navarra and Castilla and Len the Atlantic France Britain and Ireland9899 while the Atlantic Bronze Age as cultural complex of the final phase of the Bronze Age period is dated between ca. 1350 and 700 BC. It is marked by economic and cultural exchange. Commercial contacts extend to Denmark and the Mediterranean. The Atlantic Bronze Age was defined by many distinct regional centres of metal production unified by a regular maritime exchange of products. Irelandedit Main articles Prehistoric Ireland  Bronze Age and Atlantic Bronze Age The Bronze Age in Ireland commenced around 2000 BC when copper was alloyed with tin and used to manufacture Ballybeg type flat axes and associated metalwork. The preceding period is known as the Copper Age and is characterised by the production of flat axes daggers halberds and awls in copper. The period is divided into three phases Early Bronze Age 20001500 BC Middle Bronze Age 15001200 BC and Late Bronze Age 12
00 c. 500 BC. Ireland is known for a relatively large number of Early Bronze Age burials. The countrys stone circles and stone rows were built during this period.101 One of the characteristic types of artefacts of the Early Bronze Age in Ireland is the flat axe. There are five main types of flat axes Lough Ravel crannog c. 2200 BC Ballybeg c. 2000 BC Killaha c. 2000 BC Ballyvalley c. 20001600 BC Derryniggin c. 1600 BC and a number of metal ingots in the shape of axes.102 Northern Europeedit Main article Nordic Bronze Age Trundholm sun chariot Denmark c. 1500 BC The Bronze Age in Northern Europe spans the entire 
2 nd millennium BC Unetice culture Urnfield culture Tumulus culture Terramare culture and Lusatian culture lasting until c. 600 BC. The Northern Bronze Age was both a period and a Bronze Age culture in Scandinavian prehistory c. 1700500 BC with sites as far east as Estonia. Succeeding the Late Neolithic culture its ethnic and linguistic affinities are unknown in the absence of written sources. It was followed by the PreRoman Iron Age. Even though Northern European Bronze Age cultures came relatively late and came into existence via trade sites present rich and wellpreserved objects made of wool wood and imported Central European bronze and gold. Many rock carvings depict ships and the large stone burial monuments known as stone ships suggest that shipping played an important role. Thousands of rock carvings depict ships most probably representing sewn plankbuilt canoes for warfare fishing and trade. These may have a history as far back as the neolithic period and continue into the PreRoman Iron Age as shown by the Hjortspring boat. There are many mounds and rock carving sites from the period. Numerous artefacts of bronze and gold are found. No written language existed in the Nordic countries during the Bronze Age. The rock carvings have been dated through comparison with depicted artefacts. Eastern Europeedit Bronze Age spread of Yamnaya steppe pastoralist ancestry into two subcontinentsEurope and South Asia and location of the Afanasievo culture which has the same genetic characteristics as the Yamnayas.93 The Yamnaya culture c.33002600 BC was a Late Copper AgeEarly Bronze Age culture of the PonticCaspian steppe103104 and is associated with early IndoEuropeans. It was followed on the steppe by the Catacomb culture c. 28002200 BC and the Poltavka culture c.28002200 BC. The closelyrelated Corded Ware culture in the foreststeppe region to the north c. 30002350 BC spread eastwards with the Fatyanovo culture c.29002050 BC which subsequently developed into the Abashevo culture c.22001850 BC and the Sintashta culture c. 22001750 BC. The earliest known chariots have been found in Sintashta burials and there is earlier evidence for chariot use in the Abashevo culture. The Sintashta culture expanded further eastwards into central Asia becoming the Andronovo culture whilst the Srubnaya culture c.19001200 BC continued the use of chariots in eastern Europe. Caucasusedit Arsenical bronze artefacts of the Maykop culture in the North Caucasus have been dated to around the 
4 th millennium BC.105 This innovation resulted in the circulation of arsenical bronze technology through southern and eastern Europe.106 Part of a series on Human history and prehistory  before Homo Pliocene epoch Prehistory Stone Age Lower Paleolithic Homo Homo erectus Middle Paleolithic Early Homo sapiens Upper Paleolithic Behavioral modernity Epipalaeolithic Mesolithic Neolithic Cradle of civilization Protohistory Copper Age Bronze Age Europe Near East South Asia East Asia Bronze Age collapse Iron Age Europe Near East South Asia Southeast Asia East Asia West Africa Recorded history Ancient history Earliest records Protohistory Postclassical history Modern history Early Late Contemporary  Future Holocene epoch v t e Africaedit SubSaharan Africaedit See also Copper metallurgy in Africa Iron and copper smelting appeared around the same time in most parts of Africa.17107 As such most African civilizations outside Egypt did not experience a distinct Bronze Age. Evidence for iron smelting appears earlier or at the same time as copper smelting in Nigeria c.900800 BC Rwanda and Burundi c.700500 BC and Tanzania c.300 BC.107108109 There is a longstanding debate about whether both copper and iron metallurgy were independently developed in subSaharan Africa or introduced from the outside across the Sahara Desert from North Africa or the Indian Ocean.107 Evidence for theories of independent development and outside introduction are scarce and the subject of active scholarly debate.107 Scholars have suggested that both the relative dearth of archeological research in subSaharan Africa as well as longstanding prejudices have limited or biased our understanding of prehistoric metallurgy on the continent.108110111 One scholar characterized the state of historical knowledge To say that the history of metallurgy in subSaharan Africa is complicated is perhaps an understatement.111 West Africaedit Copper smelting took place in West Africa prior to the appearance of iron smelting in the region. Evidence for copper smelting furnaces was found near Agadez Niger that has been dated as early as 2200 BC.108 However evidence for copper production in this region before 1000 BC is debated.11217108 Evidence of copper mining and smelting has been found at Akjoujt Mauretania that suggests small scale production c. 800 to 400 BC.108 Americasedit See also Metallurgy in preColumbian America and Metallurgy in preColumbian Mesoamerica The Moche civilization of South America independently discovered and developed bronze smelting.113 Bronze technology was developed further by the Incas and widely used both for utilitarian objects and for sculpture.1
14 unreliable source A later appearance of limited bronze smelting in western Mexico suggests either contact of that region with Andean cultures or separate discovery of the technology. The Calchaqu people of northwestern Argentina had bronze technology.115 Tradeedit See also Tin sources and trade in ancient times Trade and industry played a major role in the development of Bronze Age civilizations. With artefacts of the Indus Valley civilization found in ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt it is clear that these civilizations were not only in touch with one another but also trading. Early longdistance trade was limited almost exclusively to luxury goods like spices textiles and precious metals. Not only did this make cities with ample amounts of these products extremely rich but it also led to an intermingling of cultures for the first time in history.116 Trade routes were not just on land. The first and most extensive trade routes were along rivers such as the Nile the Tigris and the Euphrates which led to the growth of cities on the banks of these rivers. The later domestication of camels also helped encourage trade routes overland linking the Indus Valley with the Mediterranean. This further led to towns sprouting up everywhere there was a pitstop or caravantoship port. See alsoedit Dover Bronze Age Boat Ferriby Boats Hillfort Langdon Bay Kent hoard Middle Bronze Age migrations ancient Near East Oxhide ingot Shropshire bulla Timeline of human evolution Tollense valley battlefield Notesedit  The Metal Ages. Encyclopedia Britannica.  III James E. McClellan Dorn Harold 14 April 2006. Science and Technology in World History 
2 nd ed.. Baltimore MD JHU Press. p. 21. ISBN 9780801883606.  Bronze was independently discovered in the Maykop culture of the North Caucasus as early as the mid
4 th millennium BC which makes them the producers of the oldestknown bronze. However the Maykop culture only had arsenical bronze. Other regions developed bronze and its associated technology at different periods.  a b Radivojevic M Rehren T KuzmanovicCvetkovic J Jovanovic M Northover JP 2013. Tainted ores and the rise of tin bronzes in Eurasia c.6500 years ago. Antiquity. 87 338 10301045. doi
10.1 0
17 S00035
98 X00049
84 X.  Sljivar D. Boric D. et al. 2014. Context is everything comments on Radivojevic et al. 2013. Antiquity. 88 342 13101315. doi
10.1 0
17 s00035
98 x00115480. S
2 CID 163137272.  Radivojevic M. Rehren Th. KuzmanovicCvetkovic J. Jovanovic M. 2014. Context is everything indeed a response to Sljivar and Boric. Antiquity. 88 342 13151319. doi
10.1 0
17 s00035
98 x00115492. S
2 CID 163091248.  The Near East period dates and phases are unrelated to the bronze chronology of other regions of the world.  Piotr Bienkowski Alan Ralph Millard eds. Dictionary of the ancient Near East. p. 60.  Amlie Kuhr. The Ancient Near East c. 3000330 BC. p. 9.  Lev Ron Bechar Shlomit Boaretto Elisabetta 2021. HAZOR EB III CITY ABANDONMENT AND IBA PEOPLE RETURN RADIOCARBON CHRONOLOGY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS. Radiocarbon. 63 5  via Cambridge Core.  Killebrew Ann E. 2013. The Philistines and Other Sea Peoples in Text and Archaeology. Society of Biblical Literature Archaeology and biblical studies. Vol. 15. Society of Biblical Literature. p. 2. ISBN 9781589837218. Archived from the original on 3 September 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. First coined in 1881 by the French Egyptologist G. Maspero 1896 the somewhat misleading term Sea Peoples encompasses the ethnonyms Lukka Sherden Shekelesh Teresh Eqwesh Denyen Sikil  Tjekker Weshesh and Peleset Philistines. Footnote The modern term Sea Peoples refers to peoples that appear in several New Kingdom Egyptian texts as originating from islands tables 12 Adams and Cohen this volume see e.g. Drews 1993 57 for a summary. The use of quotation marks in association with the term Sea Peoples in our title is intended to draw attention to the problematic nature of this commonly used term. It is noteworthy that the designation of the sea appears only concerning the Sherden Shekelesh and Eqwesh. Subsequently this term was applied somewhat indiscriminately to several additional ethnonyms including the Philistines who are portrayed in their earliest appearance as invaders from the north during the reigns of Merenptah and Ramesses Ill see e.g. Sandars 1978 Redford 1992 243 n. 14 for a recent review of the primary and secondary literature see Woudhuizen 2006. Henceforth the term Sea Peoples will appear without quotation marks.  Drews Robert 1993. The End of the Bronze Age Changes in Warfare and the Catastrophe ca. 1200 B.C. Princeton University Press. pp. 4861. ISBN 0691025916. Archived from the original on 23 November 2022. The thesis that a great migration of the Sea Peoples occurred ca. 1200 B.C. is supposedly based on Egyptian inscriptions one from the reign of Merneptah and another from the reign of Ramesses III. Yet in the inscriptions themselves such a migration nowhere appears. After reviewing what the Egyptian texts have to say about the sea peoples one Egyptologist Wolfgang Helck recently remarked that although some things are unclear eins ist aber sicher Nach den gyptischen Texten haben wir es nicht mit einer Vlkerwanderung zu tun. Thus the migration hypothesis is based not on the inscriptions themselves but on their interpretation.  a b Karin Sowada and Peter Grave. Egypt in the Eastern Mediterranean during the Old Kingdom.  Lukas de Blois and R. J. van der Spek. An Introduction to the Ancient World. p. 14.  Hansen M.H. 2000. A comparative study of thirty citystate cultures An investigation conducted by the Copenhagen Polis Centre. Copenhagen Det Kongelike Danske Videnskabernes Selskab. p. 68.  a b Childs S. Terry Killick David 1993. Indigenous African Metallurgy Nature and Culture. Annual Review of Anthropology. 22 317337. doi
10.1 1
46 annurev.anthro.

22.1.3 17. JSTOR 2155851.  a b c Miller Duncan E. van der Merwe Nikolaas J. 1994. Early Metal Working in SubSaharan Africa A Review of Recent Research. The Journal of African History. 35 1 136. doi
10.1 0
17 s0021853700025949. JSTOR 182719. S
2 CID 162330270.  Othmar Keel and Christoph Uehlinger. Gods goddesses and images of God in ancient Israel 1998. p. 17. The first phase Middle Bronze Age IIA runs roughly parallel to the Egyptian Twelfth Dynasty.  Bruce G. Trigger. Ancient Egypt A Social History. 1983. p. 137. ... for the Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period it is the Middle Bronze Age.  Dalton O. M. Franks A. W. Read C. H. 1905. The treasure of the Oxus. London British Museum. Archived from the original on 23 November 2022.  Masson V. M. 10. Bronze Age in Khorasan and Transoxiana. In Dani A. H. Masson Vadim Mikhalovich eds.. History of civilizations of Central Asia. Vol. 1 The dawn of civilization earliest times to 700 BC.  Possehl G. L. 1986. Kulli An exploration of ancient civilization in Asia. Durham North Carolina Carolina Academic Press.  Piggott S. 1961. Prehistoric India to 1000 B.C. Baltimore Penguin.  Mogens Herman Hansen 2000. A Comparative Study of Thirty Citystate Cultures An Investigation. Vol. 21. Kgl. Danske Videnskabernes Selskab. p. 57. ISBN 9788778761774. Archived from the original on 20 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015.  under ShamshiAdad I  Finkelstein Israel 1996. Ethnicity and origin of the Iron I settlers in the Highlands of Canaan Can the real Israel stand up. The Biblical Archaeologist. 59 4 198212. doi
10.2 3073210562. JSTOR 3210562. S
2 CID 164201705.  Finkelstein Israel 1988. The archaeology of the Israelite settlement. Jerusalem Israel Exploration Society. ISBN 9652210072.  Finkelstein Israel Naaman Nadav eds. 1994. From nomadism to monarchy archaeological and historical aspects of early Israel. Yad Izhak BenZvi. ISBN 9652171174.  Finkelstein Israel 1996. The archaeology of the United Monarchy an alternative view. Levant. 28 1 177187. doi
10.1 1
79 lev.1996.

28.1.1 77.  Finkelstein Israel Silberman Neil Asher 2002. The Bible Unearthed Archaeologys New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Sacred Texts. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0684869136.  Spengler Robert N. 1 September 2015. Agriculture in the Central Asian Bronze Age. Journal of World Prehistory. 28 3 215253. doi
10.1 0
07 s1096301590873. ISSN 15737802. S
2 CID 161968192.  Vidale Massimo 2017. Treasures from the Oxus I.B. Tauris pp. 810  Table 1.  Possehl Gregory L. 2002. The Indus Civilization A Contemporary Perspective. Rowman Altamira. pp. 215232. ISBN 9780759101722.  Narasimhan Vagheesh M. et al. 2019. The formation of human populations in South and Central Asia. Science. 365 6457. bioRxiv 
10.1 101292581. doi
10.1 1
26 science.aat7487. PMC 6822619. PMID 31488661.  a b c d Keys David January 2009. Scholars crack the code of an ancient enigma. BBC History Magazine. 10 1 9.  White Joyce Hamilton Elizabeth 2009. The Transmission of Early Bronze Technology to Thailand New Perspectives. Journal of World Prehistory. 22 4 357397. doi
10.1 0
07 s1096300990
29 z. S
2 CID 9400588.  LaluezaFox C. Sampietro M.L. Gilbert M.T. Castri L. Facchini F. Pettener D. Bertranpetit J. 2004. Unravelling migrations in the steppe Mitochondrial DNA sequences from ancient central Asians. Proceedings. Biological Sciences. 271 1542 941947. doi
10.1 0
98 rspb.20
04.2 698. PMC 1691686. PMID 15255049.  Keyser Christine Bouakaze Caroline Crubzy Eric Nikolaev Valery G. Montagnon Daniel Reis Tatiana Ludes Bertrand 2009. Ancient DNA provides new insights into the history of south Siberian Kurgan people. Human Genetics. 126 3 395410. doi
10.1 0
07 s0043900906830. PMID 19449030. S
2 CID 21347353.  Martini I. Peter 2010. Landscapes and Societies Selected Cases. Springer. p. 310. ISBN 9789048194124.  Higham Charles 2004. Encyclopedia of ancient Asian civilizations. Infobase Publishing. p. 200. ISBN 9780816046409.  The archaeological term Bronze Age was first introduced for Europe in the 18
30 s and soon extended to the Near East. By the 18
60 s there was some debate as to whether the term should be extended to China John Lubbock Prehistoric Times 1868 cited after The Athenaeum No. 2121 20 June 1868 p. 870 Archived 23 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine.  Robert L. Thorp China in the Early Bronze Age Shang Civilization University of Pennsylvania Press 2013.   Without entering on the vexed question whether or not there ever was a bronze age in any part of the world distinguished by the sole use of that metal in China and Japan to the present day amid an iron age bronze is in constant use for cutting instruments either alone or in combination with steel. The Rectangular Review Volume 1 1871 p. 408 Archived 23 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine.  Wu Hung 1995. Monumentality in Early Chinese Art and Architecture. pp. 11 13 ISBN missing  Chang K.C. Studies of Shang Archaeology pp. 67 1. Yale University Press 1982.  Chang K.C. Studies of Shang Archaeology p. 1. Yale University Press 1982.  Teaching Chinese Archaeology Part Two. Nga.gov. Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Retrieved 24 September 2016.  LiLiu The Chinese Neolithic Cambridge University Press 2005. Shang and Zhou Dynasties The Bronze Age of China Heilbrunn Timeline Archived 10 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 13 May 2010  Jan Romgard 2008. Questions of Ancient Human Settlements in Xinjiang and the Early Silk Road Trade with an Overview of the Silk Road Research Institutions and Scholars in Beijing Gansu and Xinjiang PDF. SinoPlatonic Papers 185 3032. Archived from the original PDF on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2012.  Bai Yunxiang 2003 A Discussion on Early Metals and the Origins of Bronze Casting in China PDF Chinese Archaeology 3 1 157165 doi
10.1 5
15 char.20

03.3.1 .157 S
2 CID 164920328.  Thorp R.L. 2005. China in the Early Bronze Age Shang Civilization. Philadelphia Univ. of Pennsylvania Press.  Peng Peng 2020. Metalworking in Bronze Age China The LostWax Process. Cambria Press.  Barnard N. Bronze Casting and Bronze Alloys in Ancient China p. 14. The Australian National University and Monumenta Serica 1961.  White W.C. Bronze Culture of Ancient China p. 208. University of Toronto Press 1956.  von Erdberg Elizabeth 1993. Ancient Chinese Bronzes Terminology and Iconology. SiebenbadVerlag. p. 20. ISBN 9783877470633.  Shaughnessy E.L. Sources of Western Zhou History pp. xvxvi. University of California Press 1982.  Shaughnessy E.L. Sources of Western Zhou History pp. 7683. University of California Press 1982.  Shaughnessy E.L. Sources of Western Zhou History p. 107  Kyoto National Museum. Kyoto National Museum. Retrieved 2 August 2023.  Eckert Carter J. Lee KiBaik Lew Young Ick Robinson Michael Wagner Edward W. 1990. Korea Old and New A History. Korea Institute Harvard University. p. 9. ISBN 9780962771309.  1000 BC to 300 AD Korea. Asia for Educators. Columbia University. Archived from the original on 12 October 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2016.  Bronze Age Korea. KoreanHistory.info.  Bertrand L. Jarrige J.F. Rfrgiers M. Robbiola L. SverinFabiani T. Mille B. Thoury M. 15 November 2016. High spatial dynamicsphotoluminescence imaging reveals the metallurgy of the earliest lostwax cast object. Nature Communications. 7 13356. Bibcode20
16 NatCo...7133
56 T. doi
10.1 0
38 ncomms13356. ISSN 20411723. PMC 5116070. PMID 27843139.  Centre for Cultural Resources and Training CCRT. ccrtindia.gov.in. Retrieved 8 July 2020.  Wright Rita P. 2010. The Ancient Indus Urbanism Economy and Society. Cambridge University Press. pp. 115125. ISBN 9780521572194.  Dyson Tim 2018. A Population History of India From the First Modern People to the Present Day. Oxford University Press. p. 29. ISBN 9780198829058. Mohenjodaro and Harappa may each have contained between 30000 and 60000 people perhaps more in the former case. Water transport was crucial for the provisioning of these and other cities. That said the vast majority of people lived in rural areas. At the height of the Indus valley civilization the subcontinent may have contained 46 million people.  McIntosh Jane 2008. The Ancient Indus Valley New Perspectives. ABCClio. p. 387. ISBN 9781576079072. The enormous potential of the greater Indus region offered scope for huge population increase by the end of the Mature Harappan period the Harappans are estimated to have numbered somewhere between 1 and 5 million probably well below the regions carrying capacity.  Bronze from Ban Chiang Thailand A view from the Laboratory PDF. Museum.upenn.edu. Archived from the original PDF on 27 April 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2016.  a b Higham C. Higham T. Ciarla R. Douka K. Kijngam A. Rispoli F. 2011. The Origins of the Bronze Age of Southeast Asia. Journal of World Prehistory. 24 4 227274. doi
10.1 0
07 s1096301190546. S
2 CID 162300712.  Nyaunggan City  Archaeological Sites in Myanmar. Myanmartravelinformation.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2016.  Higham C.F.W. 2011. The Bronze Age of Southeast Asia New insight on social change from Ban Non Wat. Cambridge Archaeological Journal. 21 3 365389. doi
10.1 0
17 s0959774311000424. S
2 CID 162729367.  a b White J.C. 1995. Incorporating Heterarchy into Theory on Sociopolitical Development The Case from Southeast Asia. Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association. 6 1 101123. CiteSeerX 

10.1.1 .5
22.1 061. doi
10.1 5
25 ap
3 a.19

95.6.1 .101. S
2 CID 129026022.  OReilly D.J.W. 2003. Further evidence of heterarchy in Bronze Age Thailand. Current Anthropology. 44 2 300306. doi
10.1 086367973. S
2 CID 145310194.  Taylor Keith Weller 1991. The Birth of Vietnam. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520074170.  a b Oxenham M.F. Thuy N.K. Cuong N.L. 2005. Skeletal evidence for the emergence of infectious disease in bronze and iron age northern Vietnam. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 126 4 359376. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.20048. PMID 15386222.  Molloy Barry et al. 2023. Early Chariots and Religion in SouthEast Europe and the Aegean During the Bronze Age A Reappraisal of the Dupljaja Chariot in Context. European Journal of Archaeology 121. doi
10.1 0
17 eaa.20
23.3 9.  1 Archived 20221101 at the Wayback Machine Gems and Gemstones Timeless Natural Beauty of the Mineral World By Lance Grande  Magazine Smithsonian Curry Andrew. Mystery of the Varna Gold What Caused These Ancient Societies to Disappear. Smithsonian Magazine.  Magazine Smithsonian Daley Jason. Worlds Oldest Gold Object May Have Just Been Unearthed in Bulgaria. Smithsonian Magazine.  Gold treasure from Dabene. Ancient Civilization from 
3 th millennium BC.  Carl Waldman Catherine Mason. Encyclopedia of European peoples Volume 1. 2006. p. 524.  Lancaster H.O. 1990. Expectations of life A study in the demography statistics and history of world mortality. New York SpringerVerlag. p. 228.  Drews R. 1993. The end of the Bronze Age Changes in warfare and the catastrophe ca. 1200 B.C. Princeton New Jersey Princeton University Press  Middle Bronze Age History Trade Notes Further reading Wikipedia the free encyclopedia. Wiki. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2022.  Neer Richard T. 2012. Greek Art and Archaeology. New York Thames and Hudson Inc. p. 63. ISBN 9780500288771.  Cities on the Sea. Swiny S. Hohlfelder R.L.  Swiny H.W. 1998. Res maritime Cyprus and the eastern Mediterranean from prehistory to late antiquity proceedings of the Second International Symposium Cities on the Sea Nicosia Cyprus 1822 October 1994. Atlanta Ga Scholars Press.  Creevey B. 1994. The forest resources of Bronze Age Cyprus  A. Bernard Knapp Steve O. Held and Sturt W. Manning. The prehistory of Cyprus Problems and prospects.  Lockard Craig A. 2009. Societies Networks and Transitions To 600. Wadsworth Pub Co. p. 96.  Antonopoulos John 1 March 1992. The great Minoan eruption of Thera volcano and the ensuing tsunami in the Greek Archipelago. Natural Hazards. 5 2 153168. Bibcode19
92 NatHa...5..1
53 A. doi
10.1 0
07 BF00127003. ISSN 15730840. S
2 CID 129836887.  Rackham Oliver Moody Jennifer 1996. The Making of the Cretan Landscape. Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719036477.  Piccolo Salvatore op. cit. pp. 1 onwards.  a b Barras Colin 27 March 2019. Story of most murderous people of all time revealed in ancient DNA. New Scientist.  Hall and Coles pp. 8188.  OBrien W. 1997. Bronze Age Copper Mining in Britain and Ireland. Shire Publications Ltd. ISBN 9780747803218.  Timberlake S. and Prag A.J.N.W. 2005. The Archaeology of Alderley Edge Survey excavation and experiment in an ancient mining landscape. Oxford John and Erica Hedges Ltd. p. 396. doi
10.3 08619781841717159. ISBN 9781841717159.  Tabor Richard 2008. Cadbury Castle A hillfort and landscapes. Stroud The History Press. pp. 6169. ISBN 9780752447155.  a b c d Marcos Saiz 2006 pp. 225270.  a b c d Marcos Saiz 2016 pp. 686696.  a b Marcos Saiz  Dez 2017 pp. 4567.  Power 1992 p. 23  Waddell Eogan.  Kristiansen Kristian Allentoft Morten E. Willerslev Eske 2017. Retheorising mobility and the formation of culture and language among the Corded Ware Culture in Europe. Antiquity. 91 356. Antiquity Publications 334347. doi
10.1 51
84 aqy.20
17.1 7. hdl188770150. ISSN 00035
98 X.  VillalbaMouco Vanessa Oliart Camila Haak Wolfgang 19 November 2021. Genomic transformation and social organization during the Copper AgeBronze Age transition in southern Iberia. Science Advances. 7 47. American Association for the Advancement of Science AAAS eabi7038. Bibcode20
21 SciA....
7.7 0
38 V. doi
10.1 1
26 sciadv.abi7038. hdl1081054399. ISSN 23752548. PMC 8597998. PMID 34788096.  Philip L. Kohl. The making of Bronze Age Eurasia. p. 58.  Gimbutas 1973. The Beginning of the Bronze Age in Europe and the Indo Europeans 35002500 BC. Journal of IndoEuropean Studies. 1 177.  a b c d Childs S. Terry 2008. Metallurgy in Africa. In Selin Helaine ed.. Encyclopaedia of the History of Science Technology and Medicine in NonWestern Cultures. Netherlands Springer. pp. 15961601. doi
10.1 00797814020442508776. ISBN 9781402044250.  a b c d e Holl Augustin F. C. 2009. Early West African Metallurgies New Data and Old Orthodoxy. Journal of World Prehistory. 22 4 415438. doi
10.1 0
07 s1096300990306. S
2 CID 161611760.  Alpern Stanley B. 2005. Did They or Didnt They Invent It Iron in SubSaharan Africa. History in Africa. 32 4194. doi
10.1 3
53 hia.20
05.0 003. JSTOR 20065735. S
2 CID 162880295.  Killick David 2009. Cairo to Cape The Spread of Metallurgy Through Eastern and Southern Africa. Journal of World Prehistory. 22 4 399414. doi
10.1 0
07 s1096300990253. S
2 CID 162458882.  a b Chirikure Shadreck 2010. On Evidence Ideas and Fantasy The Origins of Iron in SubSaharan Africa Thoughts on . Zagato  A.F.C. Holls On the Iron Front. Journal of African Archaeology. 8 1 2528. doi
10.3 2131612165110156. JSTOR 43135498.  Killick David van der Merwe Nikolaas J. Gordon Robert B. Grebenart Danilo 1988. Reassessment of the Evidence for Early Metallurgy in Niger West Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science. 15 4 3673944. Bibcode19
88 JArSc..15..3
67 K. doi
10.1 0160305440388900362.  El bronce y el horizonte medio. lablaa.org. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2010.  Antonio Gutierrez. Inca Metallurgy. Incas.homestead.com. Archived from the original on 31 January 2009. Retrieved 24 September 2016.  Ambrosetti El bronze de la regin calchaqu Buenos Aires 19
04.2  accessed 28 March 2015.  Kristiansen Kristian 26 November 2015. Connected Histories the Dynamics of Bronze Age Interaction and Trade 15001100 BC. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society. 81 361392. doi
10.1 0
17 ppr.20
15.1 7. Referencesedit Eogan George 1983. The hoards of the Irish later Bronze Age Dublin University College 331 p. ISBN 0901120774 Hall David and Coles John 1994. Fenland survey  an essay in landscape and persistence Archaeological report 1 London  English Heritage 170 p. ISBN 1850744777 Marcos Saiz F. Javier 2006. La Sierra de Atapuerca y el Valle del Arlanzn. Patrones de asentamiento prehistricos. Editorial Dossoles. Burgos Spain. ISBN 9788496606289. Marcos Saiz F. Javier 2016. La Prehistoria Reciente del entorno de la Sierra de Atapuerca Burgos Espaa. British Archaeological Reports Oxford U.K. BAR International Series 2798. ISBN 9781407315195. Marcos Saiz F.J. Dez J.C. 2017. The Holocene archaeological research around Sierra de Atapuerca Burgos Spain and its projection in a GIS geospatial database. Quaternary International. 433 A 4567. Bibcode20
17 QuInt.433...
45 M. doi
10.1 0
16 j.quaint.20
15.1 
0.0 02. Pernicka E. Eibner C. ztunah . Wagener G.A. 2003. Early Bronze Age Metallurgy in the Northeast Aegean In Wagner G.A. Pernicka E. and Uerpmann HP. eds Troia and the Troad scientific approaches Natural science in archaeology Berlin London  Springer ISBN 3540437118 pp. 143172 Piccolo Salvatore 2013. Ancient Stones The Prehistoric Dolmens of Sicily. Abingdon GB Brazen Head Publishing ISBN 9780956510624 Power Denis. Archaeological inventory of County Cork Volume 3 Mid Cork. Stationery Office 1992. ISBN 9780707649337 Waddell John 1998. The prehistoric archaeology of Ireland Galway University Press 433 p. ISBN 1901421104 Further readingedit Childe V.G. 1930. The bronze age. New York The Macmillan Company. Figueiredo Elin 2010. Smelting and Recycling Evidences from the Late Bronze Age habitat site of Baioes PDF. Journal of Archaeological Science. 37 7 16231634. doi
10.1 0
16 j.jas.20
10.0 
1.0 23. hdl104519795. S
2 CID 53316689. Fong Wen ed. 1980. The great bronze age of China an exhibition from the Peoples Republic of China. New York The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9780870992261. Retrieved 13 September 2013. Kelleher Bradford 1980. Treasures from the Bronze Age of China An exhibition from the Peoples Republic of China the Metropolitan Museum of Art. New York Ballantine Books. ISBN 9780870992308. Wagner Donald B. 1993. Iron and Steel in Ancient China. Leiden Netherlands New York E.J. Brill. Kuijpers M.H.G. 2008. Bronze Age metalworking in the Netherlands c. 2000800 BC A research into the preservation of metallurgy related artefacts and the social position of the smith. Leiden Sidestone Press. ISBN 9789088900150. Archived from the original on 5 February 2013. Retrieved 2 February 2012. Li et al. 2010. Evidence that a WestEast admixed population lived in the Tarim Basin as early as the early Bronze Age. BMC Biology. 8 15. doi
10.1 18617417007815. PMC 2838831. PMID 20163704. MllerLyer F.C. Lake E.C. Lake H.A. 1921. The history of social development. New York Alfred A. Knopf. Pittman Holly 1984. Art of the Bronze Age southeastern Iran western Central Asia and the Indus Valley. New York The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9780870993657. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2013. Roberts B.W. Thornton C.P. Pigott V.C. 2009. Development of Metallurgy in Eurasia. Antiquity. 83 322 112122. doi
10.1 0
17 S00035
98 X00099312. S
2 CID 163062746. Siklosy et al. 2009. Bronze Age volcanic event recorded in stalagmites by combined isotope and trace element studies. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry. 23 6 801808. Bibcode20
09 RCMS...23..8
01 S. doi
10.1 0
02 rcm.3943. PMID 19219896. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bronze Age. Library resources about Bronze Age Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Bronze Age . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 4 
11 th ed.. 1911. Links to the Bronze Age in Europe and beyond Commented web index geographically structured private website Bronze Age Experimental Archeology and Museum Reproductions Umha Aois  Reconstructed Bronze Age metal casting Umha Aois  ancient bronze casting videoclip   Ancient bronze idol 13 Cent B.C. in Russian. Northern Russia. Archived from the original on 4 October 2010. Retrieved 21 December 2009. Aegean and Balkan Prehistory articles sitereports and bibliography database concerning the Aegean Balkans and Western Anatolia The Transmission of Early Bronze Technology to Thailand New Perspectives Human Timeline Interactive  Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History August 2016. Seafaring Divers unearth Bronze Age hoard off the coast of Devon v t e Bronze Age  Chalcolithic Bronze Age Abashevo culture Aegean civilization Andronovo culture Apennine culture Armorican Tumulus culture Atlantic Bronze Age BMAC Bronze Age Britain Bronze Age Europe Canegrate culture Catacomb culture Chinese Bronze Age Cycladic culture Deer stones culture DeverelRimbury culture Elp culture Ewart Park Phase Ezero culture Glazkov culture Argaric culture Hallstatt culture Helladic period Indus Valley Civilisation Late Jomon Karasuk culture Liaoning bronze dagger culture Lusatian culture Minoan civilization Mumun pottery period Mycenaean Greece Nordic Bronze Age Okunev culture Ordos culture Penard Period Samus culture SouthWestern Iberian Bronze Srubnaya culture Tagar culture Tarim Basin Terramare culture Trzciniec Tumulus culture ntice culture Urnfield culture Wessex culture WilburtonWallington Phase Bronze Age North Caucasus and Transcaucasia Kurgan Koban KuraAraxes ShulaveriShomu Colchian Trialeti Maykop culture LeylaTepe culture JarBurial KhojalyGadabay  Iron Age v t e Prehistoric Asia Paleolithic Dmanisi hominins Japanese Paleolithic Java Man List of Paleolithic sites in China Natufian culture Paleolithic Mesopotamia Peking Man Riwat Sangiran Soanian Solo Man South Asian Stone Age Ubeidiya Xiaochangliang Neolithic Fertile Crescent Early Neolithic settlements Khiamian culture Trialetian culture Nemrikian culture Zarzian culture Neolithic China Neolithic Tibet Neolithic Korea Neolithic Revolution Neolithic South Asia Ohalo PrePottery Neolithic A Mesopotamia PrePottery Neolithic B Mesopotamia Chalcolithic Daimabad Halaf culture Uruk period Bronze Age Andronovo culture BactriaMargiana Archaeological Complex Bronze Age Anatolia Bronze Age Caucasus Bronze Age China Bronze Age India Bronze Age Korea Bronze Age Levant List of Bronze Age sites in China SeimaTurbino phenomenon Archaeological periods Time periods v t e Threeage system Stone Age Prehistoric technology Stone tool Flint tool Paleolithic Lower Paleolithic Middle Paleolithic Upper Paleolithic Mesolithic Neolithic Middle Stone Age Later Stone Age Epipaleolithic PrePottery Neolithic PrePottery Neolithic A PrePottery Neolithic B Neolithic Revolution Continent Asia China India Japan Africa Europe Poland Nordic British Bronze Age Bronze Bronze Age collapse Continent Africa Asia Levant India Europe Atlantic British Chalcolithic Nordic Romania Iron Age History of ferrous metallurgy Iron meteorite Metallurgy Continent Africa Asian China India Europe British PreRoman Roman Germanic Scandinavia List of archaeological periods List of time periods Authority control databases National Germany Israel United States Japan Czech Republic Artists KulturNav Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBronzeAgeoldid1222572056 Categories Bronze Age Historical eras Hidden categories Pages using the EasyTimeline extension CS1 long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from January 2024 All articles needing copy edit Use British English from May 2021 Use dmy dates from January 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2024 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 Russianlanguage sources ru Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with KULTURNAV identifiers Articles with EMU identifiers Articles with HDS identifiers Articles which contain graphical timelines This page was last edited on 6 May 2024 at 1818 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width