Smendes - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Report of Wenamun 
3 Reign 
4 References 
5 Further reading 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Smendes 37 languages  Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Latina Lietuvi Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Polski Portugus    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Nesbanebdjed I Egyptian pharaoh For other bearers of the name see Smendes name. Smendes Nesbanebdjed Nesibanebdjedet Canopic jar of Smendes Metropolitan Museum of Art. Pharaoh Reign c. 107710761052 BC1 Predecessor Ramesses XI Successor Amenemnisu Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Meryre Suseramunkhepesheferseqaimaat K
3 ntmrjRswsrJmnpfrsq
3 jm
3 t Strong bull beloved of Ra Amun empowers his strike to reinforce the Maat Nebty name Sekhempehti Hureqiufbehatuf Hepetem... Smptjwjrqwfbh3.twftpm ... Mighty of power he who beats his opponents they flee before him he encircles ... Golden Horus ...khesefdenden ... sfdndn ... wards off the wrath Prenomen Praenomen Hedjkheperre Setepenre2 prRstp.nR Radiant manifestation of Ra the chosen one of Ra Nomen Nesbanebdjed Meriamun3 4 MrjJmn nswb
3 nbdt He of the Ba ram lord of Mendes beloved of Amun Consort Tentamun B Children Amenemnisu  Mother probably Hrere Died 1052 BC Burial Unknown Dynasty 
21 st Dynasty Hedjkheperre Setepenre Smendes was the founder of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt and succeeded to the throne after burying Ramesses XI in Lower Egypt  territory which he controlled. His Egyptian nomen or birth name was actually Nesbanebdjed5 meaning He of the Ram Lord of Mendes6 but it was translated into Greek as Smendes by later classical writers such as Josephus and Sextus Africanus. According to the Story of Wenamun from c.1000 BC Smendes was a governor of Lower Egypt during the Era of the Renaissance under the reign of Ramesses XI however Egyptologists have questioned the historical accuracy of this story.7 Familyedit Smendes may have been a son of a lady named Hrere. Hrere was a Chief of the Harem of AmunRe and likely the wife of a high priest of Amun. If Hrere was Smendes mother then he was a brother of Nodjmet and through her brotherinlaw of the High Priests Herihor and Piankh. Smendes was married to Tentamun B likely a daughter of Ramesses IX. They may have been the parents of his successor Amenemnisu.8 Report of Wenamunedit Smendes features prominently in the Report of Wenamun. This story is set in an anonymous Year 5 generally taken to be year 5 of the socalled Renaissance of Pharaoh Ramesses XI the tenth and last ruler of the Twentieth Dynasty of Ancient Egypt 11901077 BC. However since Karl JansenWinkeln has proposed to reverse the order of the High Priests of Amun Herihor and Piankh this ascription has become disputed.9 With the pontificate of Herihor falling later than that of Piankh who is attested in year 7 of the Renaissance10 the date in the heading of Wenamun should rather refer to the successor of Ramesses XI. Following JansenWinkeln Arno Egberts 1991 therefore argues that the story is set in the fifth regnal year of Smendes. As the story begins the principal character Wenamun a priest of Amun at Karnak is sent by the High Priest of Amun Herihor to the Phoenician city of Byblos to acquire lumber probably cedar wood to build a new ship to transport the cult image of Amun. Wenamun first visits Smendes at Tanis and personally presented his letters of accreditation to Smendes in order to receive the latters permission to travel north to modern Lebanon. Smendes responds by dispatching a ship for Wenamuns travels to Syria and the Levant. Smendes appears as a person of the highest importance in Tanis. Reignedit Detail of the Banishment Stela which bears the highest known regnal date 25 years of Smendes. Louvre C 256 Smendes nominal authority over Upper Egypt is attested by a single inscribed stela found in a quarry at EdDibabiya opposite Gebelein on the right bank of the Nile as well as by a separate graffito inscription on an enclosure Wall of the Temple of Monthu at Karnak the Temple that was originally constructed during the reign of Thutmose III.11 The quarry stela describes how Smendes while residing in Memphis heard of danger to the temple of Luxor from flooding gave orders for repairs hence the quarry works and received news of the success of the mission.12 Smendes is assigned a reign of 26 Years by Manetho in his Epitome.13 This figure is supported by the Year 25 date on the Banishment Stela which recounts that the High Priest Menkheperre suppressed a local revolt in Thebes in Year 25 of a king who can only be Smendes because there is no evidence that the High Priests counted their own regnal years even when they assumed royal titles like Pinedjem I did.14 Menkheperre then exiled the leaders of the rebellion to the Western Desert Oases. These individuals were pardoned several years later during the reign of Smendes successor Amenemnisu. Smendes ruled over a divided Egypt and only effectively controlled Lower Egypt during his reign while Middle and Upper Egypt was effectively under the suzerainty of the High Priests of Amun such as Pinedjem I Masaharta and Menkheperre. His prenomen or throne name Hedjkheperre SetepenreSetepenamunwhich means Bright is the Manifestation of R Chosen of RAmun
4 became very popular in the following 
22 nd Dynasty and 
23 rd Dynasty. In all five kings Shoshenq I Shoshenq IV Takelot I Takelot II and Harsiese A adopted it for their own use. On the death of Smendes in 1052 BC he was succeeded by Neferkare Amenemnisu who may have been this kings son. No trace has yet been found of the tomb of Smendes. The sole funerary object linked to Smendes is a Canopic jar of his that once contained his liver that currently resides in the Metropolitan Museum of Art acc. no. 
47.6 0. This may indicate his tomb was looted in antiquity but this hypothesis is unproven.citation needed Referencesedit  R. Krauss  D.A. Warburton Chronological Table for the Dynastic Period in Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006. p. 493  Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs. Thames  Hudson. 2006. p. 178  Digital Egypt for Universities  a b Clayton p. 178  Nesbanebdjed  Mansikka Pekka 2020. New Chronology Using Solar Eclipses Volume III. p. 180. ISBN 9789528023142.  Hagens Graham 1996. A Critical Review of DeadReckoning from the 
21 st Dynasty. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 33. American Research Center in Egypt 156. doi
10.2 30740000612. ISSN 00659991. JSTOR 40000612.  Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 2004 ISBN 0500051283 pp. 196209  Karl JansenWinkeln Das Ende des Neuen Reiches Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache 119 1992 pp.2237  Nims Journal of Near Eastern Studies 7 1948 157162  J. Cerny Egypt from the Death of Ramesses III to the End of the TwentyFirst Dynasty in The Middle East and the Aegean Region c. 13801000 BC Cambridge University Press p. 645 ISBN 0521086914  K.A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC 
3 rd ed. Warminster Aris  Phillips 1996 p. 256  Manetho fragments 58  59 translation in W.G. Waddell Manetho Cambridge Harvard University 1997 pp. 1557 ISBN 0674993853  Kitchen p. 260 Further readingedit G. Daressy Les Carrires de Gebelein et le roi Smends Receuil de Travaux Relatifs  la Philologie et  lArcheologie gyptiennes et Assyriennes 10 1988 1338. Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Blackwell Books 1992 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Smendes. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSmendesoldid1213365662 Categories 
11 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 1052 BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Commons category link from Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 12 March 2024 at 1633 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width