Tanis - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 Ruins 
3 Cultural references 
4 Gallery 
5 See also 
6 Notes 
7 References 
8 Bibliography 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Tanis 44 languages Afrikaans    Catal Cebuano etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska   Trke   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 3058
37 N 3152
48 E  
30.9 76
94 N 
31.8 80
00 E  
30.9 7694 
31.8 8000 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Tanis Egypt This article is about ruins in Egypt. For the archaeological site in North Dakota see Tanis fossil site. For other uses see Tanis disambiguation. Not to be confused with Tinnis. City in Sharqia Egypt Tanis    San alHagar   City The ruins of Tanis today Tanis Coordinates 3058
37 N 3152
48 E  
30.9 76
94 N 
31.8 80
00 E  
30.9 7694 
31.8 8000 Country Egypt Governorate Sharqia Map of ancient Lower Egypt showing Tanis Tanis Ancient Greek  or  tens TAYniss123 or San alHagar Arabic   romanized n alaar Ancient Egyptian n.t cunat4 Akkadian URUaanu5 Coptic  or  or 67 Hebrew  an Zoan is the Greek name for ancient Egyptian n.t an important archaeological site in the northeastern Nile Delta of Egypt and the location of a city of the same name. It is located on the Tanitic branch of the Nile which has long since silted up. The first study of Tanis dates to 1798 during Napoleon Bonapartes expedition to Egypt. Engineer Pierre Jacotin drew up a map of the site in the Description de lgypte. It was first excavated in 1825 by JeanJacques Rifaud who discovered the two pink granite sphinxes now in the Muse du Louvre and then by Franois Auguste Ferdinand Mariette between 1860 and 1864 and subsequently by William Matthew Flinders Petrie from 1883 to 1886.clarification needed The work was taken over by Pierre Montet from 1929 to 1956 who discovered the royal necropolis dating to the Third Intermediate Period in 1939. The Mission franaise des fouilles de Tanis MFFT has been studying the site since 1965 under the direction of Jean Yoyotte and Philippe Brissaud and Franois Leclre since 2013. Today the main parts of the temple dedicated to AmunRa can still be distinguished by the presence of large obelisks that marked the various pylons as in other Egyptian temples. Now fallen to the ground and lying in a single direction they may have been knocked down by a violent earthquake during the Byzantine era. They form one of the most notable aspects of the Tanis site. Archaeologists have counted more than twenty. This accumulation of remnants from different epochs contributed to the confusion of the first archaeologists who saw in Tanis the biblical city of Zoan in which the Hebrews would have suffered pharaonic slavery. Pierre Montet in inaugurating his great excavation campaigns in the 19
30 s began from the same premise. He was hoping to discover traces that would confirm the accounts of the Old Testament. His own excavations gradually overturned this hypothesis even if he was defending this biblical connection until the end of his life. It was not until the discovery of QantirPiRamesses and the resumption of excavations under Jean Yoyotte that the place of Tanis was finally restored in the long chronology of the sites of the delta. Historyedit or Djanet nt86 in hieroglyphs Tanis is unattested before the 
19 th Dynasty of Egypt when it was the capital of the 
14 th nome of Lower Egypt.
9 a A temple inscription datable to the reign of Ramesses II mentions a Field of Tanis while the city in se is securely attested in two 
20 th Dynasty documents the Onomasticon of Amenope and the Story of Wenamun as the home place of the pharaohtobe Smendes.11921 The earliest known Tanite buildings are datable to the 
21 st Dynasty. Although some monuments found at Tanis are datable earlier than the 
21 st Dynasty most of these were in fact brought there from nearby cities mainly from the previous capital of PiRamesses for reuse.12 Indeed at the end of the New Kingdom the royal residence of PiRamesses was abandoned because the Pelusiac branch of the Nile in the Delta became silted up and its harbour consequently became unusable.11922 After PiRamesses abandonment Tanis became the seat of power of the pharaohs of the 
21 st Dynasty and later of the 
22 nd Dynasty along with Bubastis.912 The rulers of these two dynasties supported their legitimacy as rulers of Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt with traditional titles and building works although they pale compared to those at the height of the New Kingdom.13 A remarkable achievement of these kings was the building and subsequent expansions of the Great temple of AmunRa at Tanis at the time AmunRa replaced Seth as the main deity of the eastern Delta while minor temples were dedicated to Mut and Khonsu whom along with AmunRa formed the Theban Triad.12 The intentional emulation towards Thebes is further stressed by the fact that these gods bore their original Theban epithets leading to Thebes being more commonly mentioned than Tanis itself.11922 Furthermore the new royal necropolis at Tanis successfully replaced the one in the Theban Valley of the Kings.12 After the 
22 nd Dynasty Tanis lost its status of royal residence but became in turn the capital of the 
19 th nome of Lower Egypt. Starting from the 
30 th Dynasty Tanis experienced a new phase of building development which endured during the Ptolemaic Period.11922 It remained populated until its abandonment in Roman times.9 In Late Antiquity it was the seat of the bishops of Tanis who adhered to the Coptic Orthodox Church.14 By the time of John of Niki in the 
7 th century Tanis appears to have already declined significantly as it was grouped together with four other towns under a single prefect.15 The 1885 Census of Egypt recorded San elHagar as a nahiyah in the district of Arine in Sharqia Governorate at that time the population of the city was 1569 794 men and 775 women.16 Ruinsedit Though Tanis was briefly explored in the early 
19 th century the first largescale archaeological excavations there were made by Auguste Mariette in the 18
60 s.17 In 1866 Karl Richard Lepsius discovered a copy of the Canopus Decree an inscription in both Greek and Egyptian at Tanis. Unlike the Rosetta Stone discovered 67 years earlier this inscription included a full hieroglyphic text thus allowing a direct comparison of the Greek text to the hieroglyphs and confirming the accuracy of JeanFranois Champollions approach to deciphering hieroglyphs.18 During the subsequent century the French carried out several excavation campaigns directed by Pierre Montet then by Jean Yoyotte and subsequently by Philippe Brissaud.11921 For some time the overwhelming amount of monuments bearing the cartouches of Ramesses II or Merenptah led archaeologists to believe that Tanis and PiRamesses were in fact the same. Furthermore the discovery of the Year 400 Stela at Tanis led to the speculation that Tanis should also be identified with the older former Hyksos capital Avaris. The later rediscovery of the actual neighbouring archaeological sites of PiRamesses Qantir and Avaris Tell elDaba made clear that the earlier identifications were incorrect and that all the Ramesside and preRamesside monuments at Tanis were in fact brought here from PiRamesses or other cities.119212 The Royal Tombs of Tanis There are ruins of a number of temples including the chief temple dedicated to Amun and a very important royal necropolis of the Third Intermediate Period which contains the only known intact royal pharaonic burials the tomb of Tutankhamun having been entered in antiquity. The burials of three pharaohs of the 
21 st and 
22 nd Dynasties  Psusennes I Amenemope and Shoshenq II  survived the depredations of tomb robbers throughout antiquity. They were discovered intact in 1939 and 1940 by Pierre Montet and proved to contain a large catalogue of gold jewelry lapis lazuli and other precious stones as well as the funerary masks of these kings. The chief deities of Tanis were Amun his consort Mut and their child Khonsu forming the Tanite triad. This triad was however identical to that of Thebes leading many scholars to speak of Tanis as the northern Thebes. In 2009 the Egyptian Culture Ministry reported archaeologists had discovered a sacred lake in the temple of Mut at Tanis. The lake built out of limestone blocks had been 15 meters long and 5 meters deep. It was discovered 12 meters below ground in good condition. The lake could have been built during the late 
25 thearly 
26 th Dynasty.19 In 2011 analysis of highresolution satellite imagery led by archaeologist Sarah Parcak of the University of Alabama at Birmingham found numerous related mudbrick walls streets and large residences amounting to an entire city plan in an area that appears blank under normal images.2021 A French archeological team selected a site from the imagery and confirmed mudbrick structures approximately 30 cm below the surface.22 However the assertion that the technology showed 17 pyramids was denounced as completely wrong by the Minister of State for Antiquities at the time Zahi Hawass.23 Cultural referencesedit The Biblical story of Moses being found in the marshes of the Nile River Book of Exodus Exodus 235 is often set at Tanis24 which is often identified with Zoan Hebrew  an. In the 1981 Indiana Jones film Raiders of the Lost Ark Tanis is fictitiously portrayed as a lost city which was buried in antiquity by a massive sandstorm before being rediscovered by a Nazi expedition looking for the Ark of the Covenant.25 The Tanis fossil site which may preserve unique remains from the CretaceousPaleogene extinction event is named after the city. The paleontologist Robert de Palma chose the name based on the significance of Tanis in the decipherment of hieroglyphs as well as its role in Raiders of the Lost Ark as the hiding place of the Ark of the Covenant.26 Galleryedit Wendjebauendjeds funerary mask Wendjebauendjeds cups from Tanis Pharaoh Osorkon IIs tomb at Tanis The gold funerary mask of Psusennes I See alsoedit List of ancient Egyptian towns and cities List of ancient Egyptian sites including sites of temples List of historical capitals of Egypt Notesedit  Biblical archaeologist Benjamin Mazar believed that the Year 400 Stela found in Tanis and datable to the 
13 th century BC can be an evidence that the site had some settlement in the 
18 th or 
17 th century BC.10 Referencesedit  Tanis. The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language 
5 th ed.. HarperCollins. Retrieved 21 September 2019.  Tanis. Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Retrieved 21 September 2019.  Tanis. MerriamWebster.com Dictionary. Retrieved 21 September 2019.  Loprieno Antonio 1995. Ancient Egyptian A linguistic introduction. pp. 39 245.  Oracc RINAP Ashurbanipal 011.  a b Gauthier Henri 1929. Dictionnaire des noms gographiques contenus dans les textes hiroglyphiques Vol. 6. p. 111.  Vycichl W. 1983. Dictionnaire tymologique de la Langue Copte p. 328.  Wallis Budge E. A. 1920. An Egyptian hieroglyphic dictionary with an index of English words king list and geological list with indexes list of hieroglyphic characters Coptic and Semitic alphabets etc. Vol II. John Murray. p. 1064.  a b c Snape Steven 2014. The Complete Cities of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p. 335. ISBN 9780500772409.  Benjamin Mazar Encyclopedia Miqrait Eretz Yisrael p. 682  a b c d e f Bard Kathryn A. ed. 1999. Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. London Routledge. ISBN 0203982835.  a b c d Robins Gay 1997. The Art of Ancient Egypt. London British Museum Press. pp. 195197. ISBN 0714109886.  De Mieroop Marc Van 2007. A History of Ancient Egypt. Malden MA Blackwell Publishing. p. 400. ISBN 9781405160711.  Simon Vailh Tanis in The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 14. Robert Appleton Company 1912.  Maspero Jean Wiet Gaston 1919. Matriaux pour servir  la gographie de lgypte. Cairo Institut franais darchologie orientale. p. 116.  Egypt min. of finance census dept 1885. Recensement gnral de lgypte. p. 289. Retrieved 21 June 2020.  Graham Geoffrey. Tanis. In Redford Donald B. ed.. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Vol. 3. p. 350.  Parkinson Richard. Cracking Codes The Rosetta Stone and Decipherment. pp. 1920 42.  Bossone Andrew. Sacred Lake found in Delta. Egypt Independent October 15 2009.  Space Archaeology  Street plan of Tanis.  Tucker Abigail. Space Archaeologist Sarah Parcak Uses Satellites to Uncover Ancient Egyptian Ruins. Smithsonian Magazine.  Pringle Heather Satellite Imagery Uncovers Up to 17 Lost Egyptian Pyramids 27 May 2011  Theodoulou Michael May 29 2011. Idea of 17 hidden pyramids is wrong. The National. Retrieved October 18 2016.  Lindsay Falvey 2013. Musing on AgriHistory. Asian AgriHistory 172 p. 184.  Handwerk Brian 21 January 2017. Lost City of Tanis. National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 9 2019.  Mitchell Alanna May 19 2019. Why this stunning dinosaur fossil discovery has scientists stomping mad. Macleans. Bibliographyedit Association franaise dAction artistique. 1987. Tanis LOr des pharaons. Paris Ministre des Affaires trangres and Association franaise dAction artistique. Brissaud Phillipe. 1996. Tanis The Golden Cemetery. In Royal Cities of the Biblical World edited by Joan Goodnick Westenholz. Jerusalem Bible Lands Museum. 110149. Kitchen Kenneth Anderson. 1996. The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC. 
3 rd ed. Warminster Aris  Phillips Limited. Loth Marc 2014. Tanis  Thebes of the North. In Egyptian Antiquities from the Eastern Nile Delta Museums in the Nile Delta Vol. 2 ser. ed. by Mohamed I. Bakr Helmut Brandl and Faye Kalloniatis. CairoBerlin Opaion. ISBN 9783000453182 Montet Jean Pierre Marie. 1947. La ncropole royale de Tanis. Volume 1 Les constructions et le tombeau dOsorkon II  Tanis. Fouilles de Tanis ser. ed. Jean Pierre Marie Montet. Paris . . 1951. La ncropole royale de Tanis. Volume 2 Les constructions et le tombeau de Psousenns  Tanis. Fouilles de Tanis ser. ed. Jean Pierre Marie Montet. Paris . . 1960. La ncropole royale de Tanis. Volume 3 Les constructions et le tombeau de Chechanq III  Tanis. Fouilles de Tanis ser. ed. Jean Pierre Marie Montet. Paris. Stierlin Henri and Christiane Ziegler. 1987. Tanis Trsors des Pharaons. Fribourg Seuil. Yoyotte Jean. 1999. The Treasures of Tanis. In The Treasures of the Egyptian Museum edited by Francesco Tiradritti. Cairo The American University in Cairo Press. 302333. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tanis Egypt. Archaeology Magazine article on Treasures of Tanis Tanis in Encyclopaedia of the Orient Travel information for Tanis Preceded by PiRamesses Historical capital of Egypt 1078  945 BC Succeeded by Bubastis Preceded by Bubastis Historical capital of Egypt 818  720 BC Succeeded by Sais v t e Cities and towns of Egypt Cairo Governorate Cairo Giza Governorate Giza 
6 th of October City Sheikh Zayed City El Hawamdeya El Badrashein El Saff Atfih El Ayyat Bawiti Manshiyat al Qanater Awsim Kerdasa Abu El Numrus Qalyubia Governorate Benha Qalyub Shubra El Kheima El Qanater El Khayreya Khanka Kafr Shukr Toukh Qaha Obour City Khusus Shibin El Qanater Saryaqos El Kulzom Alexandria Governorate Alexandria Borg El Arab New Borg El Arab Beheira Governorate Damanhur Kafr El Dawwar Rosetta Edku Abu El Matamir Abu Hummus El Delengat El Mahmoudiyah El Rahmaniya Itay El Barud Hosh Issa Shubra Khit Koum Hamada Badr Wadi El Natrun New Nubariya Matrouh Governorate Mersa Matruh El Hamam El Alamein El Dabaa El Negaila Sidi Barrani Sallum Siwa Oasis Damietta Governorate Damietta New Damietta Ras El Bar Faraskur Kafr Saad El Zarqa Assarw Arrawda Kafr El Battikh Ezbet El Borg Mit Abu Ghaleb Dakahlia Governorate Mansoura Talkha Mit Ghamr Dekernes Aga Minyat AnNasr El Senbellawein El Kurdi Bani Ebaid El Manzala Temay El Amdeed El Gammalia Sherbin El Matareya Dakahlia Belqas Mit Salsil Gamasa Mahallat Damana Nabaruh Kafr El Sheikh Governorate Kafr El Sheikh Desouk Fuwwah Metoubes Baltim El Hamool Biyala El Reyad Sidi Salem Qallin Sidi Ghazi Borg El Burulus Gharbia Governorate Tanta El Mahalla El Kubra Kafr AzZayyat Zefta El Santa Qutur Basyoun Sebennytos Monufia Governorate Shibin El Kom Sadat city Menouf Sirs AlLayyan Ashmoun El Bagour Quesna Birket El Sab Tala Shuhada Sharqia Governorate Zagazig 
10 th of Ramadan city Minya El Qamh Bilbeis Mashtool El Souk AlQinayat Abu Hammad El Qurein Hihya Abu Kebir Faqous El Salheya El Gedida El Ibrahimiya Diyarb Negm Kafr Saqr Awlad Saqr El Husseiniya Tanis Minshat Abu Omar Qantir Port Said Governorate Port Said Port Fuad Ismailia Governorate Ismailia Fayed El Qantara Tell El Kebir Abu Suwir Kassassin Suez Governorate Suez North Sinai Governorate Arish Sheikh Zuweid Rafah Bir alAbd El Hasana Nekhel South Sinai Governorate El Tor Sharm El Sheikh Dahab Nuweiba Taba Saint Catherine Abou Redis Abu Zenima Ras Sedr Beni Suef Governorate Beni Suef New Beni Suef Al Wasta Nasser Heracleopolis Magna Biba Sumusta El Fashn Faiyum Governorate Faiyum New Faiyum Tamiya Sinnuris Itsa Ibsheway Yousef El Seddik Minya Governorate Minya New Minya El Idwa Maghagha Beni Mazar Matai Samalut Mallawi Dir Mawas Aba alWaqf Dir Mawas Dalga Bahnasa Idmo Tuna elGebel Al Madinah Al Fikriyyah Asyut Governorate Asyut New Asyut Dairut Dayrut alSharif Manfalut El Quseyya Abnub Abu Tig El Ghanayem Sahel Selim El Badari Sidfa Manqabad Musha New Valley Governorate El Kharga Baris Mut Farafra Balat Abu Minqar Red Sea Governorate Hurghada Ras Ghareb Safaga El Qoseir Marsa Alam Shalateen Halayeb Sohag Governorate Sohag New Sohag Akhmim New Akhmim El Balyana El Maragha Ptolemais Hermiou Dar El Salam Girga West Juhayna Saqultah Tima Tahta Qena Governorate Qena New Qena Abu Tesht Nag Hammadi Dishna El Waqf Qift Naqada Qus Farshut Shaarani Luxor Governorate Luxor New Luxor New Thebes Zainiya Bayadiya Kurna Armant ElTod Esna Medamud Aswan Governorate Aswan New Aswan Daraw Kom Ombo Nasr AlNuba Kalabsha Edfu Radisia Busylia Sebaiya Abu Simbel Capital cities are in bold font. Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Geographic Pleiades Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTanisoldid1222928245 Categories Tanis Populated places established in the 
2 nd millennium BC Populated places disestablished in the 
6 th century 1798 archaeological discoveries Hebrew Bible cities Former populated places in Egypt Nile Delta 
10 th century BC in Egypt Former capitals of Egypt Cities in ancient Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Copticlanguage text Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Pages with undetermined IPA Articles containing Akkadianlanguage text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2023 Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Pleiades identifiers This page was last edited on 8 May 2024 at 2015 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width