File:Seal Aakheperre Osorkon Petrie.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileSeal Aakheperre Osorkon Petrie.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Size of this preview 400  600 pixels. Other resolutions 160  240 pixels  470  705 pixels. Original file 470  705 pixels file size 70 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionSeal Aakheperre Osorkon Petrie.jpg English Drawing of a faience seal with double royal cartouche. Right Aakheperresetepenamun left Osorkonmeryamun. For long time this object was attributed to pharaoh Osorkon IV but Aidan Dodson The Coming of the Kushites and the Identity of Osorkon IV in Pischikova et al. eds. 2014 Thebes in the First Millennium BC recently pointed out that this object should be attributed to the earlier pharaoh Osorkon the Elder instead. Faience unknown provenience 
21 st Dynasty Third Intermediate Period. Now in Leiden Museum L. cat. XCVII. 330  F.197
19.1 . Date 19 June 2014 100904 Source A History of Egypt part III 1905 p. 264 fig. 107. Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic     Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 19 June 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0828 19 June 2014 470  705 70 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Osorkon the Elder Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org       Usage on arz.wikipedia.org        Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirmi birinci slal Misir Usage on bg.wikipedia.org   Usage on bn.wikipedia.org    Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on el.wikipedia.org     Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XXI dinasta exipcia Usage on he.wikipedia.org   Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Oszorkhr Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Osorkon il Vecchio Usage on mk.wikipedia.org      Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Enaindvajseta egipanska dinastija Usage on ta.wikipedia.org    Usage on th.wikipedia.org  FrameHotep 212223   Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org   Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Osorkon Gi Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q708389 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileSealAakheperreOsorkonPetrie.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width