File:Relief Siamun Petrie.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileRelief Siamun Petrie.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. ReliefSiamunPetrie.jpg 272  408 pixels file size 27 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionRelief Siamun Petrie.jpg English Closeup of a relief depicting pharaoh Siamun. From Memphis 
21 st dynasty Third Intermediate Period. Date 12 May 2014 114632 Source Egypt and Israel Society for promoting christian knowledge London 1911 f. 32. Author W. M. Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 12 May 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0955 12 May 2014 272  408 27 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Khepresh List of pharaohs Siamun Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  Usage on el.wikipedia.org  Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Siamun Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Annes 970 av. J.C. Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Siamom Usage on th.wikipedia.org   FrameHotep 212223   Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Siamun Danh sch pharaon Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileReliefSiamunPetrie.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width