Psusennes II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Secure attestation of Psusennes II 
2 Reign length 
3 Timeline 
4 References 
5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Psusennes II 31 languages   Bosanski Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog     Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Last king of the 
21 st Dynasty of Egypt This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedias quality standards. The specific problem is The article is divided into three sections all of which seem to deal with the same chronological issue and seems to discuss the same pieces of evidence multiple times i.e. the induction of Hori son of Nespaneferhor. Please help improve this article if you can. August 2021 Learn how and when to remove this message Psusennes II Pasebakhaenniut II1 Statue with dedication to Psusennes II and Shoshenq I originally for Thutmose III. Cairo CG 42192 JE 37005 Pharaoh Reign 967  943 BC Predecessor Siamun Successor Shoshenq I Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Titkheperure Setepenre TjtprwRstpnR Image of the transformations of Ra the chosen one of Ra Nomen Hor Pasebakhaenniut rp
3 sb
3 jnnjwt Psusennes litt. Horus the star who appears in the city of Thebes Variant Hor Pasebakhaenniut Meriamun rp
3 sb
3 jnnjwtmrjJmn Psusennes litt. Horus the star who appears in the city of Thebes beloved of Amun Children Maatkare B Father Pinedjem II Mother Isetemkheb D Died 943 BC Burial Unknown possibly reburied in NRT III at Tanis Dynasty 
21 st Dynasty Titkheperure or Tyetkheperre Psusennes II Greek  or HorPasebakhaenniut II Egyptian rp
3 sb
3 nnwt was the last king of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt. His royal name means Image of the transformations of Re in Egyptian.2 Psusennes II is often considered the same person as the HighPriest of Amun known as Psusennes III.3 The Egyptologist Karl JansenWinkeln notes that an important graffito from the Temple of Abydos contains the complete titles of a king Tyetkheperre Setepenre Pasebakhaenniut Meryamun who is simultaneously called the HPA i.e. High Priest of Amun and supreme military commander.4 This suggests that Psusennes was both king at Tanis and the High Priest in Thebes at the same time meaning he did not resign his office as High Priest of Amun during his reign.5 The few contemporary attestations from his reign include the aforementioned graffito in Seti Is Abydos temple an ostracon from Umm elQaab an affiliation at Karnak and his presumed burial  which consists of a gilded coffin with a royal uraeus and a Mummy found in an antechamber of Psusennes Is tomb at Tanis. He was a High Priest of Amun at Thebes and the son of Pinedjem II and Istemkheb. His daughter Maatkare B was the Great Royal Wife of Osorkon I.citation needed Secure attestation of Psusennes IIedit Items which can be added to the list of secure attestations of Psusennes II include a Year 5 Mummy linen that was written with the High Priest Psusennes IIIs name. It is generally assumed that a Year 13 III Peret 
10 X date in fragment 
3 B line 6 of the Karnak Priestly Annals belongs to his reign.6 Unfortunately however the kings name is not stated and the only thing which is certain is that the fragment must be dated after Siamuns reign whose Year 17 is mentioned in lines 
35.7  Hence it belongs to either Psusennes II or possibly Shoshenq Is reign. More impressive are the number of objects which associate Psusennes II together with his successor Shoshenq I such as an old statue of Thutmose III Cairo CG 42192 which contains two parallel columns of texts  one referring to Psusennes II and the other to Shoshenq I  a recently unearthed block from Tell Basta which preserves the nomen of Shoshenq I together with the prenomen of Psusennes II and a now lost graffito from Theban Tomb 
18.8  Recently the first conclusive date for king Psusennes II was revealed in a newly published priestly annal stone block. This document which has been designated as Block Karnak 94 CL 2149 records the induction of a priest named Nesankhefenmaat into the chapel of AmunRe within the Karnak precinct in Year 11 the first month of Shemu day 13 of a king named Psusennes according to Frederic Payraudeau.9 The preceding line of this document recorded the induction of Nesankhefenmaats father a certain Nesamun into the priesthood of AmunRe in king Siamuns reign.10 Siamun was the predecessor of Psusennes II at Tanis. The identification of the aforementioned Psusennes with Psusennes II is certain since the same fragmentary annal document next recordsin the following linethe induction of Hor the son of Nesankhefenmaat into the priesthood of the chapel of AmunRe at Karnak in Year 3 the second month of Akhet day 14 of king Osorkon Is reign just one generation later.
10 with Shoshenq Is 
21 year reign being skipped over. This would not be unexpected since most Egyptologists believe that a generation in Egyptian society lasted a minimum of 25 years and a maximum of 30 years.11 Therefore the Year 11 date can only be assigned to Psusennes II and constitutes the first securely attested date for this pharaohs reign. The British Egyptologist Aidan Dodson also accepts this new evidence from Frederic Payraudeaus discovery of this new unknown fragment of the Karnak priestly annals and has now discarded his previously published the late 19
80 s theory that Psusennes IIs reign lay entirely within the reign of Shoshenq I.12 Dodson notes the recently found annal block document establishes that Psusennes II was indeed a real king with a reign that was recognized at Thebes.13 Dodson also writes that Psusennes IIs royal status was confirmed when Jean Yoyotte realized that a batch of crude faience shabtis bearing the name of a king Pasebkhanut i.e. Psusennes found in the antechamber of Tanis Tomb NRTIII did not belong to the tombs original owner Pasebkhanut I as had originally been assumed but to the later king of the same name.1415 This means that Psusennes IIs longdecayed coffin and mummy is located in the debris of this antechamber of Psusennes Is Tanis tomb where Heqakheperre Shoshenq IIs coffin and mummy mask was also discovered.16 Reign lengthedit Unlike his immediate predecessor and successor  Siamun and Shoshenq I respectively Psusennes II is generally less well attested in contemporary historical records even though various versions of Manethos Epitome credit him with either a 14 or a 
35 year reign generally amended to 15 years by most scholars including the British Egyptologist Kenneth Kitchen.17 The German scholar Rolf Krauss has recently argued that Psusennes IIs reign was 24 years rather than Manethos original figure of 14 years.18 This is based on personal information recorded in the Large Dakhla stela which dates to Year 5 of Shoshenq I the stela preserves a reference to a landregister from Year 19 of a Pharaoh Psusennes. However since this document was composed under Shoshenq I the use of the title Pharaoh before Psusennes here cannot establish whether the king was Psusennes I. The use of Pharaoh as title as in Pharaoh Shoshenq or Pharaoh Psusennes I is first attested in the historical records under Siamun.19 Moreover Frederic Payraudeau has observedin his BIFAO 108 paper which first document the first secure attestation of Psusennes II in the historical recordthat the annal document is a geneaological document recording the induction of Nesankhefenmaat into the chapel of AmunRe in Year 11 of Psusennes II followed by Hor Nesankhefenmaats son in Year 3 of Osorkon II. Since a generation was close to 25 to 30 years in Ancient Egypt and the 21 year reign of Shoshenq Ithe successor of Psusennes II and predecessor of Osorkon IIwas already skipped over this strongly suggests that Psusennes IIs reign was much closer to 14 years rather than 24 years for a father Nesankhefenmaat to be succeeded by his son Hor within a short 2530 year period argues Payraudeau.20 In Year 5 of Shoshenq I this king and the founder of the 
22 nd Dynasty dispatched a certain Ma i.e. Libyan subordinate named Wayheset to the desert oasis town of Dakhla in order to restore Shoshenq Is authority over the western oasis region of Upper Egypt. Wayhesets titles include Prince and Governor of the Oasis. His activities are recorded in the Large Dakhla stela.21 This stela states that Wayheset adjudicated in a certain water dispute by consulting a landregister which is explicitly dated to Year 19 of a Pharaoh Psusennes in order to determine the water rights of a man named NysuBastet.22 Kitchen notes that this individual made an appeal to the Year 19 cadastral landregister of king Psusennes belonging to his mother which historians assumed was made some 80 years before during the reign of Psusennes I.21 The land register recorded that certain water rights were formerly owned by NysuBastets mother Tewhunet in Year 19 of a king Psusennes. This ruler was generally assumed by Egyptologists to be Psusennes I rather than Psusennes II since the latters reign was believed to have lasted only 1415 years. Based on the land register evidence Wayheset ordered that these watering rights should now be granted to NysuBastet himself. However if the oracle dated to Year 19 of Psusennes I as many scholars traditionally assumed NysuBastet would have been separated from his mother by a total of 80 years from this date into Year 5 of Shoshenq Ia figure which is highly unlikely since NysuBastet would not have waited until extreme old age to uphold his mothers watering rights. This implies that the aforementioned king Psusennes here must be identified with Psusennes II insteadShoshenq Is immediate predecessor and more significantly that Psusennes II enjoyed a minimum reign of 19 years. The term mother in ancient Egypt could also be an allusion to an ancestress the matriarch of a lineage whereby NysuBastet may have been petitioning for his hereditary water rights that belonged to his grandmother whose family name was Tewhunet. However this argument does not account for the use of Pharaoh as a title in the Dakhla stelaa literary device which first occurs late during the reign of Siamun an Egyptian king who ruled between 45 and 64 years after Year 19 of Psusennes I. The most significant component of the Great Dakhla stela is its palaeography the use of the title Pharaoh Psusennes. A scholar named Helen JacquetGordon believed in the 19
70 s that the large Dakhla stela belonged to Shoshenq IIIs reign due to its use of the title Pharaoh directly with the ruling kings birth namei.e. Pharaoh Shoshenqwhich was an important palaeographical development in Egyptian history. Throughout the Old Middle and New Kingdoms of Ancient Egypt the word pharaoh was never employed as a title such as Mr. and Mrs. or attached to a kings nomen such as Pharaoh Ramesses or Pharaoh Amenhotep instead the word pr3 or pharaoh was used as a noun to refer to the activities of the king i.e. it was Pharaoh who ordered the creation of a temple or statue or the digging of a well etc.. Rolf Krauss aptly observes that the earliest attested use of the word pharaoh as a title is documented in Year 17 of the 
21 st Dynasty king Siamun from Karnak Priestly Annals fragment 
3 B23 while a second use of the title Pharaoh birth name occurs during Psusennes IIs reign where a hieratic graffito in the Ptah chapel of the Abydos temple of Seti I explicitly refers to Psusennes II as the High Priest of AmenRe King of the Gods the Leader Pharaoh Psusennes.2425 Consequently the practice of attaching the title pr3 or pharaoh with a kings royal birth name had already started prior to the beginning of Shoshenq Is reign let alone Shoshenq III. Hence the Shoshenq mentioned in the large Year 5 Dakhla stela must have been Shoshenq I while the Psusennes mentioned in the same document likewise can only be Psusennes II which means that only 5 years or 10 years if Psusennes II ruled Egypt for 24 years would separate NysuBastet from his mother.26 The additional fact that the Large Dakhla stela contains a Year 5 IV Peret day 25 lunar date has helped date the aforementioned king Shoshenqs accession to 943 BC and demonstrates that the ruler here must be Shoshenq I not Shoshenq III who ruled a century later.26 Helen JacquetGordon did not know of the two prior examples pertaining to Siamun and Psusennes II. Timelineedit The editors of the Handbook on Ancient Egyptian Chronology 20
06 Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss and David Warburtonaccept this logical reasoning and have amended Manethos original figure of 14 years for Psusennes II to 24 years for Psusennes II.27 This is not unprecedented since Egyptologists had previously amended the reign of Siamun by a decade from 9 yearsas preserved in surviving copies of Manethos Epitometo 19 years based on certain Year 16 and Year 17 dates attested for the latter.7 Psusennes II ruled Egypt for a minimum of 19 years based on the internal chronology of the Large Dakhla stela. However a calculation of a lunar Tepi Shemu feast which records the induction of Hori son of Nespaneferhor into the Amun priesthood in regnal year 17 of Siamun Psusennes IIs predecessordemonstrates that this date was equivalent to 970 BC.28 Since Siamun enjoyed a reign of 19 years he would have died 2 years later in 968967 BC and been succeeded by Psusennes II by 967 BC at the latest. Consequently a reign of 24 years or 967943 BC is now likely for Psusennes II hence his reign has been raised from 14 to 24 years. Psusennes IIs royal name has been found associated with his successor Shoshenq I in a graffito from tomb TT18 and in an ostracon from Umm elQaab.29 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Psusennes II. Referencesedit  Pasebakhenniut II  Peter Clayton Chronology of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. p.178  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 p.221 Karl JansenWinkeln in his treatment for the Dynasty 21 chapter of this book writes that the evidence weighs heavily in favour of his ie. Psusennes III being one and the same man who was first HP and then successor to King Siamun in Tanis without giving up his Theban office.  JansenWinkeln in Hornung Krauss  Warburton p.222  JansenWinkeln in Hornung Krauss  Warburton p.223  K.A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC 
3 rd ed. Warminster Aris  Phillips Ltd p.423  a b Kitchen p.423  Aidan Dodson Psusennes II and Shoshenq I JEA 791993 pp.267268  Frederic Payraudeau De nouvelles annales sacerdotales de Siamon Psousenns II et Osorkon Ier. BIFAO 108 2008 p.294  a b Payraudeau BIFAO 108 p.294  Karl JansenWinkeln The Relevance of Genealogical Information for Egyptian Chronology egypte und Levante 16 2006 pp.266271  Aidan Dodson The Transition between the 
21 st and 
22 nd Dynasties Revisited in The Libyan Period in Egypt Historical and Cultural Studies into the 
21 st
24 th Dynasties Proceedings of a Conference at Leiden University 2527 October 2007 GPF Broekman R.J. Demaree  O.E. Kaper eds. Peeters Leuven 2009. p.103  Dodson p.103  Jean Yoyotte LOr des pharaons Paris 1987 1367 19  Dodson pp.103104  Dodson p.104  K.A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt c.1100650 BC Aris  Phillips Ltd. 1996. p.531  Rolf Krauss Das wrDatum aus Jahr 5 von Shoshenq I Discussions in Egyptology 62 2005 pp.4348  K.A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt TIPE 1100650 BC 
3 rd ed. Warminster Aris  Phillips Ltd p.423  F. Payraudeau De nouvelles annales sacerdotales de Siamon Psousenns II et Osorkon Ier Bulletin de lInstitut Franais dArchologie Orientale 108 2008 293308  a b Kitchen p.290  Alan H. Gardiner The Large Dakhla stela JEA 19 1930 pp.1930  JM Kruchten Les annales des prtres de Karnak OLA 1989. pp.4748  M.A. Murray The Osireion at Abydos London 1989 36 pl. XXI  Krauss DE 62 pp.4344  a b Krauss DE 62 pp.4348  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Handbook of Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 p.474  p.488  Hornung Krauss  Warburton pp.474475  Aidan Dodson Psusennes II and Shoshenq I JEA 791993 pp.267268 Further readingedit Aidan Dodson Psusennes II Revue dgyptologie 38 1987 4954. Jean Yoyotte A propos de Psousennes II BSSFT 11988. F. Payraudeau De nouvelles annales sacerdotales de Siamon Psousenns II et Osorkon Ier Bulletin de lInstitut Franais dArchologie Orientale 108 2008 293308. Aidan Dodson 2009. The Transition between the 
21 st and 
22 nd Dynasties Revisited. In G. P. F. Broekman R. J. Demare  O. E. Kaper eds The Libyan Period in Egypt 103112. Egyptologische Uitgaven 23.. 2009 Leiden Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten Leuven Peeters. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePsusennesIIoldid1118518183 Categories 
10 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from August 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from August 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from August 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 October 2022 at 1241 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width