File:Payankh stele Mariette.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FilePayankh stele Mariette.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Size of this preview 476  599 pixels. Other resolutions 191  240 pixels  573  721 pixels. Original file 573  721 pixels file size 112 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionPayankh stele Mariette.jpg English Drawing of the funerary stele of the High Priest of Amun Payankh. From Abydos now in Cairo Museum. 
20 th dynasty New Kingdom. Date 9 January 2014 152453 Source Abydos description des fouilles Paris 1880 vol. 2 pl. 57. Author Auguste Mariette 18211881 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1881 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1436 9 January 2014 573  721 112 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed High Priest of Amun List of pharaohs Piankh UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on arz.wikipedia.org  Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Piankh Usage on es.wikipedia.org Pianj Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Piankh Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Pinkh Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Payankh Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Pianki Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Pianque Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org   FrameHotep 212223  Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Dakilang Saserdote ni Amun Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Amon Barahibi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q428633 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFilePayankhsteleMariette.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width