Cartouche - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 See also 
2 References 
3 External links Toggle the table of contents Cartouche 48 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca   Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latvieu Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska   Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Cartouches Oval enclosing hieroglyphs of a royal name in Ancient Egypt For other uses see Cartouche disambiguation. Not to be confused with Louis Dominique Bourguignon who had Cartouche as his nickname. Birth and throne cartouches of Pharaoh Seti I from KV17 at the Valley of the Kings Egypt. Neues Museum Berlin In Egyptian hieroglyphs a cartouche krtu is an oval with a line at one end tangent to it indicating that the text enclosed is a royal name.1 The first examples of the cartouche are associated with pharaohs at the end of the Third Dynasty but the feature did not come into common use until the beginning of the Fourth Dynasty under Pharaoh Sneferu. While the cartouche is usually vertical with a horizontal line if it makes the name fit better it can be horizontal with a vertical line at the end in the direction of reading. The ancient Egyptian word for cartouche was shenu and the cartouche was essentially an expanded shen ring. Demotic script reduced the cartouche to a pair of brackets and a vertical line. Of the five royal titularies it was the prenomen the throne name and the Son of Ra titulary2 the socalled nomen name given at birth which were enclosed by a cartouche.3 At times amulets took the form of a cartouche displaying the name of a king and placed in tombs. Archaeologists often find such items important for dating a tomb and its contents.4 Cartouches were formerly only worn by pharaohs. The oval surrounding their name was meant to protect them from evil spirits in life and after death. The cartouche has become a symbol representing good luck and protection from evil.
5 need quotation to verify The term cartouche was first applied by French soldiers who fancied that the symbol they saw so frequently repeated on the pharaonic ruins they encountered resembled a muzzleloading firearms paper powder cartridge cartouche in French.
6 need quotation to verify7 Cartouche in hieroglyphs As a hieroglyph a cartouche can represent the Egyptianlanguage word for name. It is listed as no. V10 in Gardiners Sign List. The cartouche in halfsection Gardiner no. V11 as seen below has a separate meaning in the Egyptian language as a determinative for actions and nouns dealing with items to divide to exclude.8 The cartouche hieroglyph is used as a determinative for Egyptian language nshn for circuit or ringlike the shen ring or the cartouche. Later it was used for rn the word name.8 The word can also be spelled as r with n the mouth over the horizontal n. See alsoedit Serekh a predecessor to the cartouche Referencesedit  Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Cartouche . Encyclopdia Britannica 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press.  Royal Titulary. The Ancient Egypt Site. 20141029. Archived from the original on 20141115.  Allen James Peter Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs Cambridge University Press 2000 p. 65.  Compare Thomas Eric Peet William Leonard Stevenson Loat The Cemeteries of Abydos. Part 3. 19121913 Adamant Media Corporation ISBN 1402157150 p.23  2. Ancient Egyptian Cartouche. Dcsd.org. Archived from the original on 20110721. Retrieved 20130822.  White Jon Manchip Everyday Life in Ancient Egypt Courier Dover 2002 p.175  Compare Najovits Simson R. May 2003. The Social Context of the Egyptian PoliticoReligious System. Egypt Trunk of the Tree. Espiritualidad y religion. Vol. 1 The Contexts. New York Algora Publishing published 2003. p. 251. ISBN 9780875862347. Retrieved 25 January 2020. The shenu has come to be known as the cartouche  it was so named after a rifle cartridge whose shape it resembled by the French scientific team that accompanied Napoleons occupying force in Egypt between 1798 and 1801.  a b Betr Maria Carmela 1995. Hieroglyphics The Writings of Ancient Egypt. New York London Paris Abbeville Press Publishers. p. 195. ISBN 0789202328. External linksedit Look up cartouche in Wiktionary the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Egyptian cartouches. Ancient Egyptian Cartouche Lesson. Artyfactory.com. Archived from the original on 20231019. Retrieved 20240227. Cartouches PDF in Arabic. Egypt State Information Service. Archived from the original PDF 
8.8 7 MB on June 15 2011. Retrieved 13 July 2010. Ancient Egyptian Cartouche facts The Ancient Egyptian Cartouche v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCartoucheoldid1210966386 Categories 
3 rdmillennium BC establishments in Egypt Ornaments architecture Ancient Egyptian symbols Royal titles Egyptian hieroglyphs ropefiberbasketsbags Egyptian hieroglyphs Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2020 Articles containing Frenchlanguage text Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 Arabiclanguage sources ar This page was last edited on 29 February 2024 at 0516 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width