File:Mummy Masaherta Smith.JPG - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileMummy Masaherta Smith.JPG Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Size of this preview 400  600 pixels. Other resolutions 160  240 pixels  574  861 pixels. Original file 574  861 pixels file size 80 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionMummy Masaherta Smith.JPG English Mummy of Masaharta High Priest of Amun during the 
21 st dynasty found in DB320. Date 4 May 2014 192205 Source Catalogue General Antiquites Egyptiennes du Musee du Caire The Royal Mummies. Le Caire Imprimerie de Linstitut Francais Darcheologie Orientale 1912. Catalogue General Antiquites Egyptiennes du Musee du Caire DT57.C2 vol 59 plate LXXIX Author G. Elliott Smith 18711937 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1937 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 4 May 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1726 4 May 2014 574  861 80 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed High Priest of Amun List of Egyptian mummies officials nobles and commoners List of pharaohs Masaharta Mummification Museum Royal Cache UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org      Usage on arz.wikipedia.org       Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Llista de mmies reials egpcies Masaharta Usage on el.wikipedia.org  Usage on es.wikipedia.org Masaharta Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Masaharta Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Masaharta Usage on fr.wikivoyage.org Louxor Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Masuharte Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Masaharta Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org   FrameHotep 212223  Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Dakilang Saserdote ni Amun Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Amon Barahibi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Masaharta Usage on www.wikidata.org Q724676 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileMummyMasahertaSmith.JPG Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width