Psusennes I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign 
2 Burial 
3 References 
4 Further reading 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents Psusennes I 35 languages  Bikol Central  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Third pharaoh of the 
21 st Dynasty of Egypt Psusennes I Pasebakhenniut I1 Gold burial mask of King Psusennes I discovered in 1940 by Pierre Montet Pharaoh Reign 10471001 BC Predecessor Amenemnisu Successor Amenemope Royal titulary Horus name Kanakhtemauiamun Userefaw Sekhajemwaset kntmwjJmnwsrfwsjmWst Strong bull embraced by Amun full of power who shines in Thebes Nebty name WermenuemIpetsut Nebpehti Waftawywahnesitmiraempet WrmnwmJptswt nbptjwftwjwnsjtmjRmpt Great of monuments in Ipetsut powerful Lord royal protector of the two lands like Ra in the sky Golden Horus Semakheperuder Pedjet9 Itjiemsekhemef Tawnebu smprwdrpt
9 jjmsm.ftwnbw Golden Horus who unifies the manifestations who overpowers the nine bows the enemies of Egypt and conquers all the lands with its strength Prenomen Praenomen Akheperre Setepenamun prRstp.nJmn Great is the manifestation of Ra the chosen one of Amun Nomen Pasebakhaenniut Meriamun psbjnnjwtmrjJmn Psusennes lit. The star who appears in the city of Thebes beloved of Amun Consort Mutnodjmet Wiay Children Amenemope Ankhefenmut Isetemkheb C Father Pinedjem I Mother Henuttawy Died c. 1001 BC Burial NRT III Tanis Monuments Great Temple of Amun Tanis now in ruined fragments Dynasty 
21 st Dynasty Psusennes I Ancient Egyptian psbnnjwt Greek  was the third pharaoh of the 
21 st Dynasty who ruled from Tanis between 1047 and 1001 BC. Psusennes is the Greek version of his original name Pasibkhanu or Pasebakhaenniut in reconstructed Late Egyptian psiwenne which means The Star Appearing in the City while his throne name Akheperre Setepenamun translates as Great are the Manifestations of Ra chosen of Amun.2 He was the son of Pinedjem I and Henuttawy Ramesses XIs daughter by Tentamun. He married his sister Mutnedjmet. Psusenness tomb discovered in 1940 is notable for the condition in which it was found. Almost all pharaonic tombs were entirely graverobbed but Psusenness tomb was one of only two royal tombs discovered in fully intact condition the other being the tomb of Pharaoh Amenemope. However the humid climate of Lower Egypt meant only the metal objects had survived. Reignedit Psusennes Is precise reign length is unknown because different copies of Manethos records credit him with a reign of either 41 or 46 years. Some Egyptologists have proposed raising the 41 year figure by a decade to 51 years to more closely match certain anonymous Year 48 and Year 49 dates in Upper Egypt. However the German Egyptologist Karl JansenWinkeln has suggested that all these dates should be attributed to the serving High Priest of Amun Menkheperre instead who is explicitly documented in a Year 48 record.3 JansenWinkeln notes that in the first half of Dyn. 21 the HP Herihor Pinedjem I and Menkheperre have royal attributes and royal titles to differing extents whereas the first three Tanite kings Smendes Amenemnisu and Psusennes I are almost never referred to by name in Upper Egypt with the exception of one graffito and rock stela for Smendes.4 In contrast the name of Psusennes Is Twentyfirst Dynasty successors such as Amenemope Osorkon the Elder and Siamun appear frequently in various documents from Upper Egypt while the Theban High Priest Pinedjem II who was a contemporary of the latter three kings never adopted any royal attributes or titles in his career.5 Hence two separate Year 49 dates from Thebes and Kom Ombo6 could be attributed to the ruling High Priest Menkheperre in Thebes instead of Psusennes I but this remains uncertain. Psusennes Is reign has been estimated at 46 years by the editors of the Handbook to Ancient Egyptian Chronology.7 Psusennes I must have enjoyed cordial relations with the serving High Priests of Amun in Thebes during his long reign since the High Priest Smendes II donated several grave goods to this king which were found in Psusennes IIs tomb. During his long reign Psusennes built the enclosure walls and the central part of the Great Temple at Tanis which was dedicated to the triad of Amun Mut and Khonsu.8 Psusennes was ostensibly the ruler responsible for turning Tanis into a fullyfledged capital city surrounding its temple with a formidable brick temenos wall with its sanctuary dedicated to Amun being composed of blocks salvaged from the derelict PiRamesses. Many of these blocks were unaltered and kept the name of PiRamesses builder Ramesses II including obelisks still bearing the name of Ramesses II transported from the former capital of PiRamesses to Tanis.9 Psusennes had taken his sister Mutnedjmet in marriage in addition to the Lady Wiay. Only two of Psusennes Is children remain identifiable.10 Burialedit Gold and lapis lazuli collar of Psusennes I Cairo Museum Silver anthropoid coffin of Psusennes I Cairo Museum Professor Pierre Montet discovered pharaoh Psusennes Is intact tomb No.3 or NRT III in Tanis in 194011 or 1939. Due to its moist Lower Egypt location most of the perishable wood objects were destroyed by water  a fate not shared by KV62 the tomb of Tutankhamun in the drier climate of Upper Egypt. In contrast to KV62 Psusennes Is tomb holds the distinction of being the only pharaonic grave ever found unscathed by any tomb robbing attempts.12 The tomb of Tutankhamun had been robbed twice in antiquity.13 In spite of the destruction of wooden artifacts within the tomb due to the moist Nile delta area the kings magnificent funerary mask was recovered intact it proved to be made of gold and lapis lazuli and held inlays of black and white glass for the eyes and eyebrows of the object.14 Psusennes Is mask is considered to be one of the masterpieces of the treasures of Tanis and is currently housed in Room 2 of the Cairo Museum.15 It has a maximum width and height of 38 cm and 48 cm respectively.16 The pharaohs fingers and toes had been encased in gold stalls and he was buried with gold sandals on his feet. The finger stalls are the most elaborate ever found with sculpted fingernails. Each finger wore an elaborate ring of gold and lapis lazuli or some other semiprecious stone.17 Psusennes Is outer and middle sarcophagi had been recycled from previous burials in the Valley of the Kings through the statesanctioned tomb robbing that was common practice in the Third Intermediate Period. A cartouche on the red outer sarcophagus shows that it had originally been made for Pharaoh Merenptah the 
19 th Dynasty successor of Ramesses II. Psusennes I himself was interred in an inner silver coffin which was inlaid with gold.18 Since silver was considerably rarer in Egypt than gold Psusennes Is silver coffin represents a sumptuous burial of great wealth during Egypts declining years.19 Dr. Douglas Derry who worked as the head of Cairo Universitys Anatomy Department examined the kings remains in 1940 and determined that the king was an old man when he died.20 Derry noted that Psusennes Is teeth were badly worn and full of cavities that he had an abscess that left a hole in his palate and observed that the king suffered from extensive arthritis and was probably crippled by this condition in his final years.21 Referencesedit  Pasebakhaenniut  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. p.178  Karl JansenWinkeln Das Ende des Neuen Reiches Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache 119 1992 p.26  Karl JansenWinkeln Dynasty 21 in Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss and David Warburton editors Handbook of Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 pp. 226227 229  Hornung Krauss  Warburton p. 229  Kenneth Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC third edition Aris  Philips 1996 pp. 421 573  Hornung Krauss  Warburton p. 493  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Oxford Blackwell Books 1992 pp. 315317  Dodson Aidan 1995. Monarchs of the Nile. London Rubicon. pp. 155156. ISBN 0948695
20 X. OCLC 32925121.  Dodson Aidan 1995. Monarchs of the Nile. London Rubicon. p. 156. ISBN 0948695
20 X. OCLC 32925121.  Bob Brier Egyptian Mummies Unravelling the Secrets of an Ancient Art William Morrow  Company Inc. New York 1994. p.145  A. Clayton Peter 1994. Chronicle of the Pharaohs  the reignbyreign record of the rulers and dynasties of ancient Egypt. New York N.Y. pp. 180. ISBN 0500050740. OCLC 31639364.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  Edwards I.E.S 1976. Treasures of Tutankhamun. pp. 1314. ISBN 9780870991561.  Lorna Oakes Pyramids Temples and Tombs of Ancient Egypt Hermes House 2003. p.216  Alessandro Bongioanni  Maria Croce ed. The Treasures of Ancient Egypt From the Egyptian Museum in Cairo Universe Publishing a division of Ruzzoli Publications Inc. 2003. p.422  Bongioanni  Croce p.422  Brier pp.146147  Christine Hobson Exploring the World of the Pharaohs A complete Guide to Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 1987. p.123  Hobson p.123  Douglass E. Derry Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte Vol. 40 1940 pp.969970.  Brier p.147 Further readingedit Bob Brier Egyptian Mummies Unraveling the Secrets of an Ancient Art William Morrow  Co 1994 pp. 146147. Jean Yoyotte BSSFT 11988 46 n.2. External linksedit Secrets of the Dead episode The Silver Pharaoh 2010 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Psusennes I. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePsusennesIoldid1217100481 Categories 
11 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint location missing publisher CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 3 April 2024 at 2056 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width