Pinedjem I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign 
2 Family 
3 Bibliography 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Pinedjem I 22 languages   Catal  etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski     Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian high priest Pinedjem I Representation of Pinedjem I in the Temple of Khonsu Karnak. Pharaoh High Priest of Amun Reign 10701032 BC Predecessor Piankh or Herihor Successor Masaharta Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Meriamun K
3 ntmrjJmn Strong bull beloved of Amun Second Horus name Kanakht Khaemwaset kntmwst Strong bull who appears in Thebes Prenomen Praenomen Kheperkhawra Setepenamun prwRstpnJmn The manifestation of Ra appears the chosen one of Amun Nomen Pinedjem Meriamun pynmmrjJmn Pinedjem litt. The pleasant beloved of Amun Consort DuathathorHenuttawy Isetemkheb A Tentnabehenut Children Psusennes I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Maatkare Mutnedjmet Henuttawy Nesipaneferhor Nauny Father Piankh Mother Nodjmet Dynasty Concurrent with the 
21 st Dynasty Pinedjem I was the High Priest of Amun at Thebes in Ancient Egypt from 1070 to 1032 BC and the de facto ruler of the south of the country from 1054 BC. He was the son of the High Priest Piankh. However many Egyptologists today believe that the succession in the Amun priesthood actually ran from Piankh to Herihor to Pinedjem I.12 Reignedit According to the new hypothesis regarding the succession of the Amun priesthood Pinedjem I was too young to succeed to the High Priesthood of Amun after the death of Piankh. Herihor instead intervened to assume this office. After Herihors death Pinedjem I finally claimed this office which had once been held by his father Piankh. This interpretation is supported by the decorations from the Temple of Khonsu at Karnak where Herihors wall reliefs here are immediately followed by those of Pinedjem I with no intervening phase for Piankh and also by the long career of Pinedjem I who served as High Priest of Amun and later as king at Thebes. A pectoral of the High Priest Pinedjem I. He inherited a political and religious base of power at Thebes. Pinedjem strengthened his control over both Middle and Upper Egypt and asserted his kingdoms virtual independence from the Twentyfirst Dynasty based at Tanis. He married DuathathorHenuttawy a daughter of Ramesses XI to cement his relations with the other powerful families of the period. Their son Psusennes I went on to become Pharaoh at Tanis thereby removing at a stroke the gap between the two families. In practice however the 
21 st dynasty kings and the Theban high priests were probably never very far apart politically since they respected each others political autonomy. Around Year 15 or 16 of Smendes Pinedjem I proclaimed himself pharaoh over Upper Egypt3 and his priestly role was inherited by his two sons Masaharta and Menkheperre. His daughter Maatkare held the position of Divine Adoratrice of Amun. Pinedjems mummy was found in the cache at Deir elBahri.citation needed Familyedit Ushabti of Pinedjem I from Deir elBahari now in Brooklyn Museum. His parents Piankh and Nodjmet had several children three brothers Heqanefer Heqamaat Ankhefenmut and one sister Faienmut of Pinedjem I are known.4 Three of his wives are known. DuathathorHenuttawy the daughter of Ramesses XI bore him several children the future pharaoh Psusennes I the Gods Wife of Amun Maatkare Princess Henuttawy and probably Queen Mutnedjmet the wife of Psusennes.5 Another wife was Isetemkheb Singer of Amun. She is mentioned along with Pinedjem I on bricks found at elHiban.6 A possible third wife is Tentnabekhenu who is mentioned on the funerary papyrus of her daughter Nauny.7 Nauny was buried at Thebes and is called a Kings Daughter thus it is likely that Pinedjem was her father.8 Other than Psusennes Pinedjem had four other sons whose mother is unidentified but one or more of them must have been born to DuathathorHenuttawy6 Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre all of whom became High Priests of Amun9 and Nesipaneferhor a Gods Father priest of Amun whose name replaced that of a son of Herihor in the Karnak temple of Khonsu.10 Bibliographyedit Gabriella Dembitz Inscriptions of the high priest Pinudjem I on the walls of the Eighteenth Dynasty Temple at Medinet Habu in E. Bechtold  A Gulys  A. Hasznos eds. From Illahun to Djeme. Studies Presented to Professor Ulrich Luft. 3141. BAR International series 2311. Oxford. 2011. Gabriella Dembitz Une scne doffrande de Mat au nom de Pinedjem Ier sur la statue colossale dite Ramss II  Karnak. Karnak Varia 3 in Cahiers de Karnak 15 2015 173180. Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pinedjem I.  John H. Taylor Nodjmet Payankh and Herihor The Early TwentyFirst Dynasty Reconsidered in Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Egyptologists 39 September 1995 ed. C.J. Eyre Leuven 1998. pp.11431155  Arno Egberts Hard Times The Chronology of The Report of Wenamun Revised Zeitschrift fur gyptischen Sprache 125 1998 pp.93108  Taylor p.1148  Dodson Aidan Hilton Dyan 2004. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500051283. pp.200201  Dodson  Hilton p.200  a b Dodson  Hilton p.206  Dodson  Hilton p.209  Dodson  Hilton p.202  Dodson  Hilton pp.200201 205 206  Dodson  Hilton p.208 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePinedjemIoldid1217873708 Categories Theban High Priests of Amun People of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 
11 thcentury BC clergy Ancient Egyptian mummies Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 April 2024 at 1113 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width