Piankh - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Chronological and genealogical position 
2 Family 
3 Military activity 
4 Piankh and the Theban Necropolis 
5 References 
6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Piankh 15 languages Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Italiano Magyar  Nederlands Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski     Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Piankh Payankh Funerary stele of Piankh drawn by Auguste Mariette. Pharaoh High Priest of Amun Reign 10741070 BC Predecessor Amenhotep Successor Herihor or Pinedjem I Royal titulary Consort Hrere or Nodjmet Children Pinedjem I Hekanefer Hekamaat Ankhefenmut Faienmut Dynasty Concurrent with the 
21 st Dynasty Piankh was a High Priest of Amun during the 
21 st Dynasty. Chronological and genealogical positionedit While the High Priest of Amun Piankh or Payankh has been assumed to be a soninlaw of Herihor and his heir to the Theban office of the High Priest of Amun recent studies by Karl JansenWinkeln of the surviving temple inscriptions and monumental works by Herihor and Piankh in Upper Egypt imply that Piankh was actually Herihors predecessor.12 Piankh held a number of official positions including High Priest of Amun3 Kings scribe Kings son of Kush Overseer of the foreign countries to the South overseer of the granaries and commander of the archers of the whole of Upper Egypt.4 He was succeeded in office by either Herihor or his son Pinedjem. Familyedit The identity of Piankhs wife has not been established beyond doubt. In the Temple of Luxor there is a graffito of which only rudimentary traces of the beginning of her name have survived. These have been interpreted as either an h Gardiners Sign List V28 supporting Hrere or as ndjm Gardiners Sign List M
29.5  The latter solution would favour a model in which Piankh was married to a lady Nodjmet. Recently it has been argued that there were actually two ladies called Nodjmet the first one Nodjmet A the wife of Piankh and mother of Herihor the second one Nodjmet B the wife of Herihor.6 Whereas the identity of his wife remains uncertain it is beyond doubt that he had a son called Pinedjem.7 Military activityedit In year 10 of the Whm Mswt Piankh in his position as Viceroy of Kush led an army into Nubia with the apparent aim to meet a certain Pinehesy probably the former Viceroy of Kush. Some ten years earlier just before the start of the Whm mswt Pinehesy had been chased out of the Thebaid following his role in suppressing the High Priest of Amun Amenhotep. It is believed that since then he lived in Nubia as an enemy of the state. Although it is often postulated that it was the aim of this expedition to fight Pinehesy8 this is by no means certain. The sources are actually ambiguous on this point and the political climate may well have changed over the years. There is some evidence that at this time Piankh may no longer have been a loyal servant of Ramesses XI which allows for the possibility that he was secretly negotiating with Pinehesy9 E. Wente wrote One has the impression that the viceroy and his Nubian troops were loyalists for the remarks made by his opponent Piankh in letter No. 301 are quite disparaging of the pharaoh Ramesses XI.10 In this letter better known as LRL no. 21 Piankh remarks11 As for Pharaoh l.p.h. how shall he reach this land And of whom is Pharaoh l.p.h. superior still In the same letter and two others LRL no. 34 and no. 35 Piankh gives the order to the Scribe of the Necropolis Tjaroy Dhutmose Nodjmet and a certain Payshuuben to secretly arrest and question two Medjay policemen about certain things they had apparently said12 If they find out that it is true you shall place them in two baskets and they shall be thrown into this water by night. But do not let anybody in the land find out. It has been argued that given Piankhs prominent position at the time the secrecy can only have concerned the king.1314 If this is correct it follows that the political situation of the time must have been very complex. Unfortunately due to the very limited nature of the sources the exact relationships between the three main protagonists Piankh Pinehesy and Ramesses XI remain far from clear. Some scholars believe that the Nubian campaign was part of an ongoing power struggle between the High Priest of Amun and the Viceroy of Kush.15 However it is equally possible that Piankh came to the rescue of Pinehesy against some common enemy. The verb often translated as to attack only means to meet to go to.16 In fact neither the aim of the expedition nor its outcome are beyond doubt. Piankh and the Theban Necropolisedit It seems that under Piankhs pontificate a beginning was made with locating and opening old tombs either with the aim of protecting them against tomb violation or in order to use their buried treasures to finance affairs of the state.17 Eventually the priests of Amun scoured the valleys to find tombs tombs and mummies were stripped of valuables rewrapped and placed in group graves caches. Referencesedit  Karl JansenWinkeln Das Ende des Neuen Reiches ZAS 119 1992 pp.2237  Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.309  Petrie A History of Egypt Part Three p. 203  Cerny Ostraca Hier. CGC pp. 7576  Taylor in Eyre ed. Proceedings of the 
7 th International Congress of Egyptologists 1149.  Ad Thijs Nodjmet A Daughter of Amenhotep Wife of Piankh and Mother of Herihor ZS 140 2013 5469  Michael Rice Whos Who in Ancient Egypt Routledge 1999 pp.1
53 f.  Lszl Trk The Kingdom of Kush Handbook of the NapatanMeriotic Civilization Brill Academic Publishers 1997  A. Niwiski in I. GamerWallert  W. Helck eds Gegengabe Festschrift Emma BrunnerTraut Tbingen 1992 257258  E. Wente Letters from Ancient Egypt Atlanta 1990 171 the number 301 is only given to this letter in this particular publication  E. Wente Late Ramesside Letters SAOC 33 1967 53.  E. Wente Late Ramesside Letters SAOC 33 1967 53.  Ad Thijs The Troubled Careers of Amenhotep and Panehsy The High Priest of Amun and the Viceroy of Kush under the Last Ramessides SAK 31 2003 301302  Jennifer Palmer Birmingham Egyptology Journal 20
14.2  1011  e.g. Jennifer Palmer Birmingham Egyptology Journal 20
14.2  11  E. Wente Late Ramesside Letters SAOC 33 1967 24 25  Nicholas Reeves and Richard Wilkinson The Complete Valley of the Kings Thames  Hudson p. 205 Further readingedit Morris L. Bierbrier Hrere Wife of the High Priest Paiankh JNES 32 1973 311 Gerard P.F. Broekman The founders of the twentyfirst dynasty and their family relationships GM 191 2002 1118 Arno Egberts Piankh Herihor Dhutmose and Butehamun a fresh look at O. Cairo CG 25744 and 25745 GM 160 1997 2325 Jeremy Goldberg Was Piankh the Son of Herihor After All GM 174 2000 4958 Steven R.W. Gregory Piankh and Herihor Art Ostraca and Accession in Perspective Birmingham Egyptology Journal 2013 1 518 Karl JansenWinkeln Das Ende des Neuen Reiches Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde ZS 119 1992 2237 Jennifer Palmer The High Priests of Amun at the End of the Twentieth Dynasty Birmingham Egyptology Journal 20
14.2  122 V. Polek Quelques remarques sur les Procs Secrets en Ancienne gypte Cd 37 1962 2330 Ursula RlerKhler Piankh  Nedjemet  Anchefenmut  eine Kleinigkeit GM 167 1998 78 Ramadan ElSayed Piankh Fils de Hrihor BIFAO 78 1978 199218 John Taylor Nodjmet Payankh and Herihor The end of the New Kingdom reconsidered in Christopher J. Eyre ed Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Egyptologists Leuven 1998 11431155 Ad Thijs The Troubled Careers of Amenhotep and Panehsy The High Priest of Amun and the Viceroy of Kush under the Last Ramessides SAK 31 2003 289306 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Payankh. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePiankholdid1203343883 Categories 
11 thcentury BC clergy Theban High Priests of Amun Viceroys of Kush People of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 February 2024 at 1754 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width