Help:Contents - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk HelpContents 187 languages Ach Afrikaans Alemannisch   nglisc  Aragons  Asturianu Avae  Aymar aru Azrbaycanca   Banjar   Bnlmg Basa Banyumasan      Bislama Boarisch  Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  Cebuano etina Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk  Davvismegiella Deutsch Din bizaad Dolnoserbski   Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Froyskt Franais Frysk Gaeilge Gidhlig Galego   Hakkng  Hausa   Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue  slenska Italiano  Jawa Kalaallisut       Kernowek Ikirundi Kiswahili Kreyl ayisyen Kurd  Ladin Ladino  Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Li Niha Limburgs Lingla Lombard Magyar   Malti Mori   Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau   Mngdngng Mirands   Nederlands Nedersaksies     Napulitano  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan  Ozbekcha    Papiamentu   Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Qrmtatarca Ripoarisch Romn Rumantsch Runa Simi     Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina    lnski Soomaaliga    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara     Lea fakaTonga Tsetshesthese  Trke Trkmene Twi   Basa Ugi     Uyghurche Vneto Vepsn kel Ting Vit Volapk Vro Walon WestVlams    Zazaki emaitka  Edit links Help page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki MetaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikifunctions Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Main page of the help namespace This page provides help with the most common questions about Wikipedia. You can also search Wikipedias help pages using the search box below or browse the Help menu or the Help directory. ns12 ns4 Read or find an article The Readers FAQ and our about page contain the most commonly sought information about Wikipedia. For simple searches there is a search box at the top of every page. Type what you are looking for in the box. Partial matches will appear in a dropdown list. Select any page in the list to go to that page. Or select the magnifying glass Go button or press  Enter to go to a full search result. For advanced searches see HelpSearching. There are other ways to browse and explore Wikipedia articles many can be found at WikipediaContents. See our disclaimer for cautions about Wikipedias limitations. For mobile access press the mobile view link at the very bottom of every desktop view page. Edit an article Contributing is easy see how to edit a page. For a quick summary on participating see contributing to Wikipedia and for a friendly tutorial see our introduction. For a listing of introductions and tutorials by topic see getting started. The Simplified Manual of Style and Cheatsheet can remind you of basic wiki markup. Be bold in improving articles When adding facts please provide references so others may verify them. If you are affiliated with the article subject please see our conflict of interest guideline. The simple guide to vandalism cleanup can help you undo malicious edits. If youre looking for places you can help out the Task Center is the place to go or check out what else is happening at the community portal. You can practice editing and experiment in a sandboxyour sandbox. Report a problem with an article If there is a problem with an article about yourself a family member a friend or a colleague please read Biographies of living personsHelp. If you spot a problem with an article you can fix it directly by clicking on the Edit link at the top of that page. See the edit an article section of this page for more information. If you dont feel ready to fix the article yourself post a message on the articles talk page. This will bring the matter to the attention of others who work on that article. There is a Talk link at the beginning of every article page. You can contact us. If its an article about you or your organization see Contact us  Subjects. Create a new article or upload media Check Your first article to see if your topic is appropriate then the Article wizard will walk you through creating the article. Once you have created an article see Writing better articles for guidance on how to improve it and what to include like reference citations. For contributing images audio or video files see the Introduction to uploading images. Then the Upload wizard will guide you through that process. Stuck Answers to common problems can be found at frequently asked questions. Or check out where to ask questions or make comments. New users should seek help at the Teahouse if theyre having problems editing Wikipedia. More complex questions can be posed at the Help desk. Volunteers will respond as soon as theyre able. Or ask for help on your talk page and a volunteer will visit you there You can get live help with editing in the help chatroom. For help with technical issues ask at the Village pump. Factual questions If searching Wikipedia has not answered your question for example questions like Which country has the worlds largest fishing fleet try the Reference Desk. Volunteers there will attempt to answer your questions on any topic or point you toward the information you need. Directories Directory main list of directories and indexes. Help related Help directory for informative instructional and consultation pages. Request directory for services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia. Protocols and conventions Policy directory official policies for English Wikipedia. Guideline directory official guidelines for English Wikipedia. Manual of Style directory pages related to the style manual of Wikipedia articles. Community related Departments for the different divisions of Wikipedia. Editors index for everything an editor needs to know to work on Wikipedia. Essay directory for Wikipedia namespace essays. Dashboard for current discussions taking place throughout Wikipedia. WikiProjects for people who want to work together as a team to improve Wikipedia. MediaWiki software Wikitext for the syntax used by Wikipedia to format a page. HTML for HTML5 elements or tags and their attribute. Templates for templates used within Wikipedia. Help by topic Help Menu for searching by subject matter. Navigating Wikipedia for searching and browsing the encyclopedia. Joining Wikipedia how to get involved. Editing Wikipedia has general help for editors. Links and references has help for creating links or dealing with references Images and media how to use images videos and sound files. Keeping track of changes how to track the evolution of a page or follow a user. Policies and guidelines for community standards. Asking questions volunteers will attempt to answer. The Wikipedia community how to submit or debate a proposal. Resources and lists has resources for editors. Account settings has tips and tools for registered users. Technical information has tools for advanced users and troubleshooting. Site map is the above thirteen pages on one single page. Tip of the day Displaying one page within another  Transclusion Including the contents of a template page on a different page by surrounding the page name with double braces i.e.  and leaving out the Template prefix is called transclusion. This allows the other page to be automatically updated whenever the template page is updated. Besides templates pages in the following namespaces can be transcluded Category Help Portal User Wikipedia The only difference between transcluding these and templates is that you must include the prefix followed by a colon with the pages name inside the double braces. Images also can be transcluded but this is done using double square brackets instead of braces. Here are some examples of transclusion Pic of the day  HelpContents  ImageWikipedialogo.png Prior tip  Tips library  Next tip Read more WikipediaTransclusion Become a Wikipedia tipster  Tips library by subject To add this autoupdating daily tip to your user page use totd Additional searches Search Frequently Asked Questions Search the help desk archives v t e Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Teahouse interactive help for new editors About Wikipedia Readers index to Wikipedia Statistics Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia Organization Censorship In brief General disclaimer Readers FAQ Student help Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Parental advice Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Copyright Introductions to contributing Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and donts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset The Missing Manual Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Wikipedia Adventure Accounts Why create an account Logging in Email confirmation Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Pillars policies and guidelines Five pillars Manual of Style Simplified Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks What Wikipedia is not Getting help Help menu Help desk Reference Desk Category Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Contact us Wikipedia community Departments Meetups WikiProjects Overview FAQ Village pump policy technical proposals idea lab wikimedia misc Newsletters Signpost Library Newsletter GLAM Newsletter Informational Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Maintenance Task Center Essays Sourcing and referencing Research Research desk Wikipedia Library Request Resources Free resources Request access to major databases WikiProject Resource Exchange Shared resources Guidelines Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Howto guides Category Tools Infoboxes Writing articles Development Better writing Files Images Media files Uploading Deletion User contribution pages Editing pages Diffs Namespaces Deletion Merging Renaming Requests Redirecting Reverting Vandalism cleanup Talk pages Archiving Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Substitution Transclusion Image and video markup Tutorial Linking Directories and glossaries Category Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index Shortcuts Tips Shortcuts to this page WPHELP WPH Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHelpContentsoldid1191833923 Categories Help Wikipedia help contents Hidden categories Wikipedia semiprotected project pages Wikipedia moveprotected project pages This page was last edited on 26 December 2023 at 0306 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width