File:Nesbanebdjed II statuette Petrie.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileNesbanebdjed II statuette Petrie.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. NesbanebdjedIIstatuettePetrie.png 238  346 pixels file size 56 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionNesbanebdjed II statuette Petrie.png English Bronze statuette of the High Priest of Amun Nesbanebdjed Smendes datable to the 
21 st
22 nd Dynasty of Egypt. The statuette belongs to the Warocqu Collection of the Muse Royal de Mariemont Morlanwelz Belgium. NOTE Although Petrie identified the owner as Smendes II this statue actually may represent both Smendes II and Smendes III. More infos here Date 22 December 2013 133545 Source A History of Egypt  vol 3  From the XIXth to the XXXth Dynasties 1905 available copyrightfree here p. 214 f. 87 Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts copyright status public domain media type imagepng checksum b216
52 d01595
91 cdb58
21 a9
22 edc09
16 db4
63 c
0 a determination method SHA1 data size 57587 byte height 346 pixel width 238 pixel inception 22 December 2013 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1306 22 December 2013 238  346 56 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed High Priest of Amun List of pharaohs Second Prophet of Amun Smendes II UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Esmendes II Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org Esmendes II Segundo Profeta de Amn Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Esmendes II.a Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Nesbanebdjed II Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org     Usage on hu.wikipedia.org II. Neszubanebdzsed Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Nisubanebdjed Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  II Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org   2 FrameHotep 212223  Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Dakilang Saserdote ni Amun Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Amon Barahibi Amonun kinci Rahibi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  II  III Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Smendes II Usage on www.wikidata.org Q724742 Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.8  dpc Vertical resolution 
37.8  dpc File change date and time 1948 20 December 2013 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileNesbanebdjedIIstatuettePetrie.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width