Meshwesh - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Libyan origins 
2 History 
3 References 
4 Sources 
5 See also Toggle the table of contents Meshwesh 15 languages  Asturianu Catal Deutsch Espaol Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Nederlands  Srpskohrvatski   Suomi   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Meshwesh in hieroglyphs 1 Mw.w  Mw.w Meshwesh The Meshwesh often abbreviated in ancient Egyptian as Ma was an ancient Libyan tribe2 along with other groups like Libu and TehenuTjemehu.3 Early records of the Meshwesh date back to the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt from the reign of Amenhotep III c. 1390  1350 BC. During the 
19 th and 
20 th dynasties c. 1295  1075 BC the Meshwesh were in almost constant conflict with the Egyptian state. During the late 
21 st Dynasty increasing numbers of Meswesh Libyans began to settle in the Western Delta region of Egypt. They would ultimately take control of the country during the late 
21 st Dynasty first under Osorkon the Elder. After an interregnum of 38 years during which the native Egyptian kings Siamun and Psusennes II assumed the throne the Meshwesh ruled Egypt throughout the 
22 nd and 
23 rd Dynasties under many pharaohs as Shoshenq I Osorkon I Osorkon II Shoshenq III and Osorkon III. Libyan originsedit That the Meshwesh were of Libyan origin is explicitly stated in a genealogy contained on the stela of Pasenhor dated to the reign of Shoshenq V where the great chiefs of the Meshwesh including the kings of the 
22 nd Dynasty are stated to be the descendants of Buyuwawa the Libyan. The LibyoBerber origin of the Meshwesh is also indicated in their personal names such as Osorkon Takelot Nimlot Shoshenq etc. and a handful of nonEgyptian titles used by these people that are related to the Berber languages. After the Egyptians the Greeks Romans and Byzantines mentioned various other tribes in Libya. Later tribal names differ from the Egyptian ones but probably some tribes were named in the Egyptian sources and the later ones as well. The Meshwesh tribe represents this assumption. Some scholars argue it would be the same tribe called Mazyes by Hecataeus of Miletus and Maxyes by Herodotus while the tribe was called Mazices and Mazax in Latin sources. Historyedit Granite block mentioning the Meshwesh bottom row middle among captured foreign populations during the reign of Ramesses II. British Museum The Meshwesh are known from ancient Egyptian texts as early as the 
18 th Dynasty where they are mentioned as a source of cattle provided to king Amenhotep IIIs palace at Malkata. This indicates there may have been some trade relations between the Meshwesh and the Egyptians at the time. At the very least it can be said that the Egyptians were familiar with the Meshwesh. For the remainder of the 
18 th Dynasty information about Meshwesh or Libyans in general is sketchy. There are however representations of Libyans perhaps Meshwesh from the reign of Akhenaten including a remarkable papyrus depicting a group of Libyans slaying an Egyptian. However the papyrus is fragmentary so it is not known what the historical context was. The Meshwesh or Ma were nomad hunter pastoralists living off their goats camels and other livestock while hunting and gathering at the same time. Milk meat hides and wool were gathered from their livestock for food tents and clothing. The first ancient Egyptian sources described the Meshwesh men with tattoos and long hair with longer side locks in the front while centuries later they appear with shorter hair of Egyptian influence but braided and beaded neatly parted in both sides from their temples and decorated with one or two feathers attached to leather bands around the crown of the head. They still used the same robes as before a thin mantle of antelope hide dyed and printed crossing one of their shoulders and coming down until mid calf length to make an open robe over a loincloth with an adorned phallus sheath being the only exception of the new addition of a kilt above the knees and an animal tail in the Egyptian manner of king Narmer and the phallus adornment over it. Men wore facial hair trimmed except at their chin and the older men kept their longer chin tufts braided. Women wore the same robes as men plaited decorated hair and both genders wore heavy jewelry. Later images showed them to have accepted and adapted some Greek or Macedonian tunics. Weapons included bows and arrows hatchets spears and daggers. The relations between the Libyans and the Egyptians during the Ramesside Period were typically one of constant conflict. Battle reliefs at Karnak from the reign of Seti I depict the king in combat with Libyan masses however the text only describes the Libyans as being Tjehenu one of the generic terms for Libyan in the Egyptian language rather than a specific tribal designation. During the following reign that of Ramesses II the Egyptians constructed a series of coastal fortresses running west to the region of Marsa Matruh including at alAlamayn and Zawayat Umm alRakham. The presence of these fortresses indicates a serious threat from the west and Ramesses does claim to have overthrown Libyans in various rhetorical texts. However as with Seti I he does not specify if Meshwesh were involved or not. Kneeling statue of Nesbanebdjedet V Great Chief of the Ma at Mendes ca. 755730 BC. Brooklyn Museum4 During the reign of Merneptah it seems that the earlywarning system from his fathers time had fallen into disrepair as there was an unexpected Libyan invasion into the Nile Delta and the Western Oases in Year 5 of his reign. Unlike his predecessors Merenptah states in his battle reliefs at Karnak that it was primarily the Libu tribe who led the conflict but that Meshwesh and Sea People allies were also involved. Indeed Merenptah claims that 9100 swords of the Meshwesh were captured. This conflict is also described on the Merneptah Stele also known as the Israel Stele. About twentyfive years later during the reign of Ramesses III the growing conflict between the Egyptians and Libyans came to a head. This time it was the Meshwesh who instigated the conflict though other Libyan tribes and their Sea People allies were involved in fighting two major campaigns against the Egyptian king in Ramesses IIIs Regnal Years 5 and 11. The Year 11 campaign was concerned almost exclusively with the Meshwesh however. Ramesses claimed victory and settled the Meshwesh in military concentration camps in Middle Egypt in order to force their assimilation into Egyptian culture and press them into military service for the Egyptian state. According to Papyrus Harris I Ramesses settled them in strongholds of the Victorious King they hear the language of the Egyptian people serving the King he makes their language disappear. A Third Intermediate Period text mentions there being at least five Fortresses of the Meshwesh in the area of Herakleopolis Magna these were probably the ones established by Ramesses. Throughout the 
20 th Dynasty various texts on ostraca and papyri mention attacks by Meshwesh tribesmen as far south as Thebes where the workmen of Deir elMedina were forced to seek protection inside the mortuary temple of Medinet Habu. During the late Third Intermediate Period the Nile Delta hosted the four great chiefdoms of the Meshwesh each ruled by a Great Chief of the Ma whose seats of power were in the cities of Mendes Sebennytos Busiris and PerSopdu respectively other lesser chiefdoms led by a simple Chief of the Ma were located at Sais and Pharbaithos.5 Referencesedit  Thesaurus Linguae Aegyptiae lemma 76410  Oyeniyi Bukola A. 20190322. The History of Libya. ABCCLIO. ISBN 9781440856075.  Zimmermann K. 20080101. LebouLibou. Encyclopdie berbre in French 2829 43614363. doi
10.4 0
00 encyclopedieberbere.319. ISSN 10157344.  Kitchen 1996. Revised table 
22 a.  Kitchen 1996. Tables 4 22 23. Sourcesedit Bates Oric. 1914. The Eastern Libyans An Essay. Cass Library of African Studies 87. London Frank Cass and Company Limited. ISBN 0714616346 Dodson Aidan Mark. 1995. Rise  Fall of The House of Shoshenq The Libyan Centuries of Egyptian History. KMT A Modern Journal of Ancient Egypt 6 35267. Goma Farouk. 1974. Die libyschen Frstentmer des Deltas von Tod Osorkons II. bis zur Wiedervereinigen gyptens durch Psametik I. Tbinger Atlas des Vorderen Orients Reihe B Geistewissenschaften 6. Wiesbaden Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag. Haring Bernardus Johannes Jozef. 1992. Libyans in the Late Twentieth Dynasty. In Village Voices Proceedings of the Symposium Texts from Deir elMedna and Their Interpretation Leiden May 
31 June 1 1991 edited by Robert Johannes Demare and Arno Egberts. Centre of NonWestern Studies Publications 13. Leiden Centre of NonWestern Studies Leiden University. 7180. Kitchen Kenneth Anderson. 1996. The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC. 
3 rd ed. Warminster Aris  Phillips Limited. Leahy M. Anthony. 1985. The Libyan Period in Egypt An Essay in Interpretation. Libyan Studies 165165.  ed. 1990. Libya and Egypt c1300750 BC. London School of Oriental and African Studies Centre of Near and Middle Eastern Studies and The Society for Libyan Studies. Snape Steven. 2003. The Emergence of Libya on the Horizon of Egypt. In Mysterious Lands edited by David B. OConnor and Stephen G. J. Quirke. Encounters with Ancient Egypt 5. London Institute of Archaeology University College London and UCL Press. 93106. Wainwright Geoffrey Avery. 1962. The Meshwesh. Journal of Egyptian Archology 488999. White Donald. 1994. Before the Greeks Came A Survey of the Current Archaeological Evidence for the PreGreek Libyans. Libyan Studies 25 Cyrenaican Archaeology An International Colloquium3139 4344. Yoyotte Jean. 1961. Les principauts du Delta au temps de lanarchie libyenne tudes dhistoire politique. In Mlanges Maspero. Volume 1 Orient ancien. Mmoires publis par les membres de lInstitut franais darchologie orientale du Caire 661 fascicle 4. Cairo Imprimerie de lInstitut franais darchologie orientale du Caire. 121181. See alsoedit Ancient Libya Libu Phut v t e Berbers Ancient Bavares Banioubae Gaetuli Garamantes KoidamousiiUcutumani Leuathae Libu Libya Macae Machlyes Marmaridae Mauri Bakouatae Makanitae Mauretania Meshwesh Musulamii Nasamones Numidae Masaesyli Massylii Numidia Quinquegentiani Psylli Medieval Adjissa Awerba Awregha Azdeja Bahlula Barghawata Fazaz Fendelawa Ghumara Gazoula Ghiatta Godala Guanches Haskura Hawwara Kutama Luwata Madyuna Masmuda Hintata Matmata Nafzawa Sanhaja Lamtuna Zanata Banu Ifran Jarawa Maghrawa Modern Brabers Chaouis Chenouas Ghomaras Hawwara Jerbis Berber Jews Kabyles Matmatas Mozabites Nafusis Riffians Sanhajas de Srayr Shilha Siwis Teknas Tuaregs Zayanes Related topics Script Latin script Religion Islam ArabBerbers Arabized Berbers Berber diaspora Belgium Canada France Netherlands United States Berberism Kabyle nationalism flag Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMeshwesholdid1218548825 Categories Military history of ancient Egypt Sea Peoples African nomads Nile Delta Ancient Libya EgyptLibya relations Ancient Libyans Berber peoples and tribes Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr This page was last edited on 12 April 2024 at 1112 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width