Shishak - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biblical narrative 
2 Shishaks name 
3 Identified as Pharaoh Shoshenq I Toggle Identified as Pharaoh Shoshenq I subsection 
3.1 Campaign records 
3.2 Critical questions 
4 Fringe theories 
5 In popular culture 
6 References 
7 Further reading 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Shishak 7 languages  Bahasa Indonesia  Jawa  Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Shishaq Egyptian pharaoh mentioned in the Hebrew Bible identified with Shoshenq I Not to be confused with Sheshach. Shishak also spelled Shishaq or Susac Hebrew  romanized aq Tiberian iaq Ancient Greek  romanized Sousakim was according to the Hebrew Bible an Egyptian pharaoh who sacked Jerusalem in the 
10 th century BC. He is usually identified with the pharaoh Shoshenq I.1 He supported Jeroboam against king Rehoboam of Judah and led a successful campaign through that country with a large army. Shishak did not destroy Jerusalem but took the treasures of Solomons Temple and the kings house. His campaign records found in the Bubastite Portal at Karnak and a relief at elHibeh list several conquered towns but fail to mention Jerusalem. The omission has sparked various theories with some scholars questioning the historical accuracy of the Biblical account and others suggesting possible explanations for the omission. Shishak has also appeared in popular culture notably in the film Raiders of the Lost Ark. Biblical narrativeedit The Bubastite Portal at Karnak depicting a list of city states conquered by Shoshenq I in his Near Eastern military campaigns. Jerusalem does not occur in the list.2174175 Shishaks campaign against the Kingdom of Judah and his sack of Jerusalem are recounted in the Hebrew Bible in 1 Kings 1425 and 2 Chronicles 12112. According to these accounts Shishak had provided refuge to Jeroboam during the later years of Solomons reign and upon Solomons death Jeroboam became king of the tribes in the north which separated from Judah to become the Kingdom of Israel. In the fifth year of Rehoboams reign commonly dated ca. 926 BC2 Shishak swept through Judah with a powerful army of 60000 horsemen and 1200 chariots in support of Jeroboam. According to 2 Chronicles 123 he was supported by the Lubim Libyans the Sukkiim and the Kushites Ethiopians in the Septuagint. Shishak took away treasures of the Solomons Temple and the kings house as well as shields of gold which Solomon had made3 Rehoboam replaced them with brass ones. According to Second Chronicles When Shishak king of Egypt attacked Jerusalem he carried off the treasures of the temple of the Lord and the treasures of the royal palace. He took everything including the gold shields Solomon had made. 2 Chronicles 129 Flavius Josephus in Antiquities of the Jews adds to this a contingent of 400000 infantrymen. According to Josephus his army met with no resistance throughout the campaign taking Rehoboams most fortified cities without fighting. Finally he conquered Jerusalem without resistance because Rehoboam was afraid. Shishak did not destroy Jerusalem but forced King Rehoboam of Judah to strip the Temple and his treasury of their gold and movable treasures.4 Shishak was also related by marriage to Jeroboam. The wife of Jeroboam is unnamed in the Masoretic Text but according to the Septuagint she was an Egyptian princess called Ano And Sousakim gave to Jeroboam Ano the eldest sister of Thekemina his wife to him as wife she was great among the kings daughters... 5 Shishaks nameedit The spelling and pronunciation of Shishaks name is not consistent throughout the Hebrew Bible. It occurs three times as aq  three times as q  and once as aq . Identified as Pharaoh Shoshenq Iedit In the very early years after the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs on chronological historical and linguistic grounds nearly all Egyptologists identified Shishak with Shoshenq I of the 
22 nd dynasty who invaded Canaan following the Battle of Bitter Lakes.1 A common variant of Shoshenqs name omits its n glyphs resulting in a pronunciation like Shoshek.6 This position has been maintained by most scholars ever since and remains the majority position today. Campaign recordsedit The Bubastite Portal at Karnak showing the cartouches of Shoshenq I. Shoshenq I left behind explicit records of a campaign into Canaan scenes a long list of Canaanite placenames from the Negev to Galilee stelae including a stela found at Megiddo which supports the traditional interpretation.78910 The Bubastite Portal a relief discovered at Karnak in Upper Egypt and similar reliefs on the walls of a small temple of Amun at elHibeh shows Pharaoh Shoshenq I holding in his hand a bound group of prisoners. The names of captured towns are located primarily in the territory of the kingdom of Israel including Megiddo with a few listed in the Negeb and perhaps Philistia.789 Some of these include a few of the towns that Rehoboam had fortified according to Chronicles.11 However the inscription makes no mention of Jerusalem itself nor of Rehoboam or Jeroboam. Various explanations of this omission of Jerusalem have been proposed its name may have been erased the list may have been copied from an older pharaohs list of conquests or Rehoboams ransoming the city as described in the Second Book of Chronicles12 would have saved it from being listed. Critical questionsedit It has been claimedwho that the numbers of Egyptian soldiers given in Chronicles can be safely ignored as impossible on Egyptological grounds similarly the numbers of chariots reported in 2 Chronicles is likely exaggerated by a factor of tenleading 60000 horses through the Sinai and Negev would have been logistically impossible and no evidence of Egyptian cavalry exists from before the 
27 th Dynasty.13 Some authors such as Israel Finkelstein deem the treasures taken by Shishak as unlikely alleging the material culture of 
10 th century Jerusalem and surroundings to have been too primitive to allow for any treasure that an Egyptian pharaoh would have been interested in. Finkelstein concludes that the looting narrative should probably be seen as a theological construct rather than as historical references.2175 By contrast Krystal V. L. Pierce has pointed that a relief from Karnak records Sheshonq I presenting the tribute from his Levantine campaign to AmunRe and that the Pharaoh used the tribute to finance the construction of several monumental structures across Egypt.10 Fringe theoriesedit Other identifications of Shishak have been put forward by chronological revisionists arguing that Shoshenqs account does not match the Biblical account very closely but these are considered fringe theories. In his book Ages in Chaos Immanuel Velikovsky identified him with Thutmose III of the 
18 th dynasty.14 More recently David Rohls New Chronology identified him with Ramesses II of the 
19 th dynasty15 and Peter James has identified him with Ramesses III of the 
20 th dynasty.16 In popular cultureedit Shishak is mentioned in Steven Spielbergs actionadventure film Raiders of the Lost Ark as the pharaoh who seized the Ark of the Covenant from the Temple of Solomon during his raids on Jerusalem and hid it in the Well of Souls in Tanis. Referencesedit  a b Troy Leiland Sagrillo. 2015. Shoshenq I and biblical aq A philological defense of their traditional equation. In Solomon and Shishak Current perspectives from archaeology epigraphy history and chronology proceedings of the third BICANE colloquium held at Sidney Sussex College Cambridge 2627 March 2011 edited by Peter J. James Peter G. van der Veen and Robert M. Porter. British Archaeological Reports International Series 2732. Oxford Archaeopress. 6181.  a b c Finkelstein Israel 2006. The Last Labayu King Saul and the Expansion of the First North Israelite Territorial Entity. In Amit Yairah Ben Zvi Ehud Finkelstein Israel et al. eds.. Essays on Ancient Israel in Its Near Eastern Context A Tribute to Nadav Naaman. Eisenbrauns. pp. 171 ff. ISBN 9781575061283.  1 Kings 1425 2 Chronicles 12112 EnglishHebrew  Antiquities of the Jews  Book VIII Chapter X.  1 Kings 12
24 e New English Translation of the Septuagint  von Beckerath Jrgen 1984 Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Mnchen Deutscher Kunstverlag page 257258 260262 264  a b K.A. Kitchen On the Reliability of the Old Testament William Eerdmans  Co 2003. pp. 10 3234 607. Page 607 of Kitchens book depicts the surviving fragment of Shoshenq Is Megiddo stela which bears this kings cartouche.  a b The Jerusalem Archaeological Park  timeline. Archpark.org.il. Retrieved 20220430.  a b The First Oppressors Shishak of Egypt  BiblicalStudies.org pg1  a b Pierce Krystal V. L. 2022. Egypt and the Levant in the Third Intermediate Period Iron IBIIIA. In Keimer Kyle H. Pierce George A. eds.. The Ancient Israelite World. Taylor  Francis. p. 662. ISBN 9781000773248.  2 Chronicles 11512  2 Chronicles 12 7  10  Sagrillo Troy Leiland 2012. aqs army 2 Chronicles 1223 from an Egyptological perspective. The ancient Near East in the 
12 th
10 th Centuries BC Culture and history Proc. of the international conference held at the University of Haifa 25 May 2010. Alter Orient und Altes Testament Verffentlichungen zur Kultur und Geschichte des Alten Orients und des Alten Testaments. Vol. 392. Mnster UgaritVerlag. pp. 425450.  Velikovsky Immanuel 1977 1953. Ages in Chaos. London Sidgwick and Jackson. ISBN 0283352574.  Rohl David 1995. A Test of Time. London Century. ISBN 9780712659130.  James Peter 2017. The Levantine Warrecords of Ramesses III Changing Attitudes Past Present and Future. Antiguo Oriente. 15 57147. Further readingedit Rohl David M. 1995. Pharaohs and Kings A Biblical Quest. New York Crown Publishers inc. Kenneth Kitchen Egyptian interventions in the Levant in Iron Age II. In Dever William G. ed.. Symbiosis symbolism and the power of the past Canaan ancient Israel and their neighbors from the Late Bronze Age through Roman Palaestina. Eisenbrauns Seymour Gitin 2003 pp. 113132 Yigal Levin Sheshonq I and the Negev Haserim Maarav 17 2010 pp. 189215. Yigal Levin Sheshonqs Levantine Conquest and Biblical History. In Jonathan S. Greer John W. Hilber  John H. Walton eds. Behind the Scenes of the Old Testament Cultural Social and Historical Contexts Grand Rapids Baker Academic 2018. Troy Leiland Sagrillo. 2015. Shoshenq I and biblical aq A philological defense of their traditional equation. In Solomon and Shishak Current perspectives from archaeology epigraphy history and chronology proceedings of the third BICANE colloquium held at Sidney Sussex College Cambridge 2627 March 2011 edited by Peter J. James Peter G. van der Veen and Robert M. Porter. British Archaeological Reports International Series 2732. Oxford Archaeopress. 6181. Muchiki Yoshiyuki 1999. Egyptian Proper Names and Loanwords in NorthWest Semitic. Atlanta Society of Biblical Literature. External linksedit The Campaign of Pharaoh Shoshenq I in Palestine by Kevin A. Wilson The Palestine Campaign of Sheshonq I The Sack of Jerusalem on Templemount.org v t e The Bible and warfare Hebrew Bible battles Torah  Pentateuch battles Battle of Siddim Crossing the Red Sea Battle of Refidim Golden calf War against the Midianites Joshua and Judges battles Battle of Jericho Battle of Ai Battle of Hazor Battle of the Waters of Merom Battle of Mount Tabor Gideons campaign Well of Harod Micahs Idol  Sack of Laish Benjamite War  Battle of Gibeah Battle of Aphek Battle of Mizpah United monarchy period Battle of Michmash David or Elhanan versus Goliath Battle of Mount Gilboa Pool of Gibeon Siege of Jebus Battle of the Wood of Ephraim Baalperazim Jeroboams Revolt Shishaks raid of Jerusalem Battle of Mount Zemaraim Israel and Judah period Battle of Zephath IsraeliteAramean War SyroEphraimite War Sennacheribs campaign in Judah Siege of Lachish Assyrian siege of Jerusalem Battle of Megiddo 609 BC Judahs revolts against Babylon Siege of Jerusalem 597 BC Siege of Jerusalem 587 BC Exilic period Purim war Book of Esther Bible Portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleShishakoldid1214694643 Category Pharaohs in the Bible Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text Pages with Hebrew IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text All articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from March 2023 This page was last edited on 20 March 2024 at 1544 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width