Osorkon II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Foreign policy and monumental program 
2 Reign length 
3 Marriages and children 
4 Tomb 
5 Successor 
6 References 
7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Osorkon II 27 languages Afrikaans   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski   Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian king Osorkon II Pendant bearing the cartouche of Osorkon II seated King Osorkon flanked by Horus and Isis Pharaoh Reign 872837 BC Predecessor Takelot I Successor Shoshenq III Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht MeryMaat Sekhaisewer Nesutawy k
3 ntmrjM
3 tsjswrnswt
3 wj Strong bull beloved of Maat whom Ra causes to be king of the two lands Nebty name Zemapeseshtimizaiset Golden Horus Werpehti huimentiu Prenomen Praenomen Usermaatre Setepenamun wsr.M
3 tRstpnJmn Rich in Maat is Ra the chosen one of Amun Nomen Userken Meriamun WsrknmrjJmn Osorkon beloved of Amun Consort Karomama I Children Tjesbastperu Nimlot C Shoshenq D Hornakht Father Takelot I Mother Kapes Died 837 BC Burial NRTI Tanis Dynasty 
22 nd Dynasty Usermaatre Setepenamun Osorkon II was the fifth king1 of the Twentysecond Dynasty of Ancient Egypt and the son of King Takelot I and Queen Kapes. He ruled Egypt from approximately 872 BC to 837 BC from Tanis the capital of that dynasty. After succeeding his father Osorkon II was faced with the competing rule of his cousin King Harsiese A who controlled both Thebes and the Western Oasis of Egypt. Potentially Harsieses kingship could have posed a serious challenge to the authority of Osorkon however when Harsiese died in 860 BC Osorkon II acted to ensure that no king would replace Harsiese. He appointed his son Nimlot C as the high priest of Amun at Thebes which would have been the source for a successor to Harsiese. This consolidated the kings authority over Upper Egypt and thereafter Osorkon II ruled over a united Egypt. Osorkon IIs reign was a time of prosperity for Egypt and largescale monumental building ensued. Osorkon II was the last king of the Twentysecond dynasty to rule Egypt from the Delta to Upper Egypt. His successor Shoshenq III lost the effective control of Middle and Upper Egypt that Osorkon II had achieved. Foreign policy and monumental program Entrance to the Tomb of Osorkon II Osorkon II was forced to be aggressive on the international scene. The growing power of Assyria was accompanied with increased meddling in the affairs of Israel and Syriaterritories well within Egypts sphere of influence. Osorkon II devoted considerable resources into his building projects by adding to the temple of Bastet at Bubastis2 which featured a substantial new hall decorated with scenes depicting his Sed festival and images of his queen Karomama. Monumental construction during his reign also was performed at Thebes Memphis Tanis and Leontopolis. Osorkon II also built Temple J at Karnak during the final years of his reign and it was decorated by his high priest Takelot F the future king Takelot II. Takelot F was the son of the deceased high priest Nimlot C and thus Osorkon IIs grandson. All of Osorkon IIs sizeable stone statues are known to be reused works of earlier periods that were reinscribed for Osorkon II including the famous CairoPhiladelphia statue of Osorkon II.3 Many officials may be dated to the reign of Osorkon II. Ankhkherednefer was inspector of the palace Paanmeny probably was his chief physician Djeddjehutyiuefankh was the fourth prophet of Amun4 and Bakenkhons was another prophet of Amun during his reign.5 Reign length Statue of Osorkon II from the Temple of Baalat Gebal in Byblos displayed in the National Museum of Beirut. Approximately 837 BC Osorkon II died and he was buried in Tomb NRT I at Tanis. Currently he is believed to have reigned for more than 30 years rather than just 25 years as had been interpreted earlier. The celebration of his first Sed Jubilee previously was thought to have occurred in his Year 22 but the Heb Sed date in his Great Temple of Bubastis is damaged and also may be read as Year 30 as Edward Wente notes.6 The fact that this kings own grandson Takelot F served him as High Priest of Amun at Thebesas the inscribed walls of Temple J prove  supports the hypothesis of a longer reign for Osorkon II. Recently it has been demonstrated that Nile Level Text 14 dated to Year 29 of an Usimare Setepenamun belongs to Osorkon II on palaeographical grounds.7 This finding suggests that Osorkon II likely did celebrate his first Heb Sed in his Year 30 as was traditionally the case with other Libyan era kings such as Shoshenq III and Shoshenq V. In addition a Year 22 Stela from his reign preserves no mention of any Heb Sed celebrations in that year as would be expected see Von Beckerath infra. While Osorkon IIs precise reign length is unknown some Egyptologists such as Jrgen von Beckerath  in his 1997 book Chronology of the Egyptian Pharaohs8  and Aidan Dodson have suggested a range of between 38 and 39 years.9 However these much higher figures are not verified by the current monumental evidence. Gerard Broekman gives Osorkon II a slightly shorter reign of 34 years.10 English Egyptologist Kenneth Kitchen in a 2006 Agypten und Levante article now accepts that if Nile Level Text 14 is correctly attributed to Year 29 of Osorkon II then the reference to Osorkons Sed Festival jubilee should be amended from Year 22 to Year 
30.1 1 Kitchen suggests that Osorkon II would have died shortly afterward in his Year 
31.1 2 Reliefs from the Tomb of Osorkon II Marriages and children Osorkon II is known to have had at least four wives Osorkon II and queen Karomama I. From a gateway in the temple at Bubastis Egypt. 
22 nd Dynasty c. 850 BCE. British Museum Queen Karomama is the best known of Osorkons wives. Karomama was the mother of at least two sons and three daughters1314 Isetemkheb is known to be the mother of a daughter named Tjesbastperu who was married to the High Priest of Ptah Takelot B.13 Djedmutesakh IV was the mother of the High Priest of Amun Nimlot C.13 Nimlot C was a son of Osorkon II and the father of Takelot F who would become Takelot II. Mutemhat was another of his wives. Other children of record included Prince Shoshenq D was High Priest of Ptah Prince Hornakht was the High Priest of Amun in Tanis15 Osorkon II appointed Hornakht as the chief priest of Amun at Tanis to strengthen his authority in Lower Egypt however this was clearly a political move since Hornakht died prematurely before the age of ten.16 Princess Tashakheper may have served as Gods Wife of Amun during the reign of Takelot III Princess Karomama C who may be identical to Karomama Meritmut a Gods Wife of Amun Princess Taiirmer Other possible children attributed to Osorkon II include his successor Shoshenq III and the Kings Daughter Tentsepeh D the wife of General Ptahudjankhef who was a son of Nimlot C and hence a grandson of Osorkon II.13 Tomb Interior photograph of the tomb of Osorkon II showing the burial chamber of Takelot I The French excavator Pierre Montet discovered Osorkon IIs plundered royal tomb at Tanis on February 27 1939. It revealed that Osorkon II was buried in a massive granite sarcophagus with a lid carved from a Ramessideera statue. Only some fragments of a hawkheaded coffin and canopic jars remained in the robbed tomb to identify him.17 While the tomb had been looted in antiquity what jewellery that remained was of such high quality that existing conceptions of the wealth of the northern Twentyfirst and Twentysecond dynasties had to be revised.18 Successor Osorkon IIs sarcophagus David Aston has argued in a JEA 75 1989 paper that Osorkon II was succeeded by Shoshenq III at Tanis rather than Takelot II SiEse as Kitchen presumed because none of Takelot IIs monuments have been found in Lower Egypt where other genuine Tanite kings such as Osorkon II Shoshenq III and even the shortlived Pami at 67 years are attested on donation stelas temple walls and annal documents.19 Other Egyptologists such as Gerard Broekman Karl JansenWinkeln Aidan Dodson and Jrgen von Beckerath have endorsed this position as well. Von Beckerath also identifies Shoshenq III as the immediate successor of Osorkon II and places Takelot II as a separate king in Upper Egypt.20 Gerard Broekman writes in a recent 2005 GM article that in light of the monumental and genealogical evidence Astons chronology for the position of the twentysecond dynasty kings is highly preferable to Kitchens chronology.21 The only documents that mention a king Takelot in Lower Egypt such as a royal tomb at Tanis a Year 9 donation stela from Bubastis and a heart scarab featuring the nomen Takelot Meryamun  now have been attributed exclusively to king Takelot I by Egyptologists today including Kitchen.22 The English Egyptologist Aidan Dodson in his book The Canopic Equipment of the Kings of Egypt observes that Shoshenq III built a dividing wall with a double scene showing Osorkon II and him each adoring an unnamed deity in the antechamber of Osorkon IIs tomb.23 Dodson concludes that while one may argue Shoshenq III erected the wall to hide Osorkon IIs sarcophagus it made no sense for Shoshenq to create such an elaborate relief if Takelot II really had intervened between him and Osorkon II at Tanis for 25 years unless Shoshenq III was Osorkon IIs immediate successor. Shoshenq III must hence have wished to associate himself with his predecessor  Osorkon II.24 Consequently the case for establishing Takelot II as a Twentysecond Dynasty king and successor to Osorkon II disappears as Dodson writes. Takelot II instead founded the twentythird dynasty of Egypt and ruled a divided Egypt by administering Middle and Upper Egypt. References  Osorkon II Usermaatre Digital Egypt for Universities.  Mohamed I. Bakr and Helmut Brandl Bubastis and the Temple of Bastet in M.I. Bakr H. Brandl and F. Kalloniatis eds. Egyptian Antiquities from Kufur Nigm and Bubastis. M.i.N. Museums in the Nile Delta 1 CairoBerlin 2010 pp. 2736  H. Sourouzian Seti I not Osorkon II. A new join to the statue from Tanis CG 1040 in the Cairo Museum in O. ElAguizy  M. Sherif Ali eds Echoes of Eternity. Studies presented to Gaballa Aly Gaballa Philippika 35 Wiesbaden 2010 pp. 97105 Helmut Brandl Bemerkungen zur Datierung von libyerzeitlichen Statuen aufgrund stilistischer Kriterien in G. P. F. Broekman R. J. Demare O. E. Kaper eds. The Libyan Period in Egypt. Egyptologische Uitgaven 23 Leiden 2008 pp. 6066 pl. III. httpswww.academia.edu82415
77 BemerkungenzurDatierungvonlibyerzeitlichenStatuenaufgrundstilistischerKriterien  Statue Cairo CG 42206 42207  Cairo CG 42213  Edward Wente Review of Kenneth Kitchens The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt c.1100650 BC JNES 351976 pp.275278  Gerard Broekman The Nile Level Records of the TwentySecond and TwentyThird Dynasties in Karnak JEA 882002 pp.174178  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten MASPhilipp von Zabern 1997 p.98  p.191  Aidan Dodson A new King Shoshenq confirmed GM 1371993 p.58  Gerard Broekman The Reign of Takeloth II a Controversial Matter GM 2052005 pp.31  33  Kenneth Kitchen Agypten und Levante 16 2006 p.299 point No.7  Kitchen Agypten und Levante 16 2006 p.301 section 16  a b c d Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson 2004 ISBN 0500051283  Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC. 
3 rd ed. Warminster Aris  Phillips Limited. 1996  .Nos anctres de lAntiquit 1991. Christian Settipani p.153 and 166  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Blackwell Books 1992. p.325  San elHagar. Archived from the original on 20090120. Retrieved 20060218.  Bob Brier Egyptian Mummies Unravelling the Secrets of an Ancient Art William Morrow  Company Inc. New York 1994. p.144  Aston pp.139153  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten MS 46 Philipp von Zabern Mainz 1997. p.94  Gerard Broekman The Reign of Takeloth II a Controversial Matter GM 2052005 pp.31  K.A. Kitchen in the introduction to his 
3 rd 1996 edition of The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt c.1100650 BC Aris  Phillips Ltd. pp.xxxiixxxiii  Aidan Dodson The Canopic Equipment of the Kings of Egypt Kegan Paul Intl 1994 p.95  Dodson The Canopic Equipment of the Kings of Egypt p.95 Further reading Bernard V. Bothmer The PhiladelphiaCairo Statue of Osorkon II JEA 46 1960 311. M.G. Daressy une Stle de Mit Yaich ASAE 22 1922 77. Helen K. JaquetGordon The Inscriptions on the PhiladelphiaCairo Statue of Osorkon II JEA 46 1960 1223. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Israel Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleOsorkonIIoldid1206969862 Categories 837 BC deaths 
9 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semiprotected from banned users Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 13 February 2024 at 1632 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width