File:Takelot I a.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileTakelot I a.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 800  600 pixels. Other resolutions 320  240 pixels  640  480 pixels  900  675 pixels. Original file 900  675 pixels file size 137 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. DescriptionTakelot I a.jpg The Sarcophagus of Takelot I at Tanis Date 15 March 2004 Source httpwww.egyptarchive.co.ukTanisEgypt2004328.jpg Author Jon Bodsworth Permission Reusing this file This file was transferred from Egypt Archive website under the license Copyrighted free use see permission here. In short you are free to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. This is Mr. Jon Bodsworths statement about his pictures from Egypt Archive All the photographs on this site are from my own originals and are copyright free. They can be reproduced in any medium. If you use any on the web I would appreciate an email. This site was designed to put as many photographs on the web as possible in an easy to use format. I have deliberately kept captions to a minimum but if you would like more information on any of the photographs let me know. The photographs on this website are only a small proportion of over 3500 that I have covering many areas of Egypt. If there is a specific photograph that you are looking for please let me know. If you use any of the pictures on the web the author Jon Bodsworth would appreciate an email jonegyptarchive.co.uk As of March 2011 Egypt Archive website was closed so if a file is uploaded after that time we need further proof of permission. The copyright holder of this work allows anyone to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. Please check the source to verify that this is correct. In particular note that publication on the Internet like publication by any other means does not in itself imply permission to redistribute. Files without valid permission should be tagged with substnpd. Usage notes If the work requires attribution use Attribution instead. If this is your own work please use Cczero instead. Copyrighted free useCopyrighted free usefalsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic     Items portrayed in this file depicts copyright status copyrighted copyright license copyrighted free use captured with Olympus C50
50 Z inception 15 March 2004 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0736 7 July 2008 900  675 137 KB Leoboudv Information DescriptionThe Sarcophagus of Takelot I at Tanis Source httpwww.egyptarchive.co.ukTanisEgypt2004328.jpg Date2004 AuthorJon Bodsworth PermissionAll low resolution photographs on www.egyptarchive.co.uk are copyright free an File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Takelot I Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org            Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirmi ikinci slal Misir Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  I Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Takelot I Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Takelot I Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Taklot Ier NRT I Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org I. Takelot Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Takelot I Usage on it.wikipedia.org Takelot I Lista dei faraoni Usage on mwl.wikipedia.org Takelot I Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Takelot I Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Takelot I Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Taquelote I Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  I Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Takelot I Usage on th.wikipedia.org   1  Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Takelot I Ikadalawamput dalawang dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  I Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Takelot I Usage on www.wikidata.org Q548623 UserIvan A. KrestininPortraitsVIII   . . TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Takelot 
1 k Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Image title OLYMPUS DIGITAL CAMERA Camera manufacturer OLYMPUS OPTICAL CO.LTD Camera model C50
50 Z Exposure time 130 sec 
0.0 33333333333333 Fnumber f
1.8  ISO speed rating 100 Date and time of data generation 1538 15 March 2004 Lens focal length 
7.1  mm Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 72 dpi Vertical resolution 72 dpi Software used Adobe Photoshop CS2 Macintosh File change date and time 1931 3 July 2008 Y and C positioning Cosited Exposure Program Normal program Exif version 
2.2  Date and time of digitizing 1538 15 March 2004 Image compression mode 2 Exposure bias 0 Maximum land aperture 
1.7  APEX f
1.8  Metering mode Pattern Light source Unknown Flash Flash fired auto mode Color space Uncalibrated Custom image processing Normal process Exposure mode Auto exposure White balance Auto white balance Digital zoom ratio 0 Scene capture type Standard Contrast Normal Saturation Normal Sharpness Normal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileTakelotIa.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width