File:Sarcophage Harsiesis.JPG - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileSarcophage Harsiesis.JPG Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 450  600 pixels. Other resolutions 180  240 pixels  360  480 pixels  576  768 pixels  768  1024 pixels  1536  2048 pixels. Original file 1536  2048 pixels file size 903 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary Sarcophage du pharaon thbain Harsisis  XXIIe dynastie gyptienne  Muse du Caire Source DescriptionSarcophage Harsiesis.JPG English Hieracocephalic sarcophagus of Herarsiesis Franais  Sarcophage hiracocphale dHarsisis Date August 2005 Source Minolta Co. Ltd. Author Sebi. Other versions Derivative works of this file Sarcophage Harsiesis  large.jpg Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse I the copyright holder of this work release this work into the public domain. This applies worldwide. In some countries this may not be legally possible if so I grant anyone the right to use this work for any purpose without any conditions unless such conditions are required by law. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts copyright status copyrighted dedicated to the public domain by copyright holder copyrighted copyright license released into the public domain by the copyright holder inception August 2005 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1824 4 November 2006 1536  2048 903 KB Neithsabes Sarcophage du pharaon thbain Harsisis  XXIIe dynastie gyptienne  Muse du Caire File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Harsiese A List of pharaohs Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org       Usage on arz.wikipedia.org            Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Harsiese A Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org Horsiese I Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Horsiese I.a Usage on fr.wikipedia.org ProjetEgyptopediaPhotos Harsiesi Ier Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans XXIII dinasta exipcia Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Harszisze fra Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Horsaset Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Harsiese I Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Harsierse A Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on ta.wikipedia.org       Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  I Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Harsiese A Usage on www.wikidata.org Q879138 TalkQ37110 Usage on zh.wikipedia.org   Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Image title MINOLTA DIGITAL CAMERA Camera manufacturer Minolta Co. Ltd. Camera model DiMAGE Xt Exposure time 1180 sec 
0.0 055555555555556 Fnumber f
6.7  ISO speed rating 50 Date and time of data generation 1248 15 August 2005 Lens focal length 
5.7  mm Horizontal resolution 72 dpi Vertical resolution 72 dpi Software used Ver. 
1.0 0 File change date and time 1248 15 August 2005 Y and C positioning Cosited Custom image processing Custom process Exposure mode Auto exposure White balance Auto white balance Digital zoom ratio 0 Focal length in 35 mm film 37 mm Scene capture type Standard Contrast Normal Saturation Normal Sharpness Normal Subject distance range Distant view Exposure Program Normal program Exif version 
2.2  Date and time of digitizing 1248 15 August 2005 Image compression mode 4 APEX brightness 
7.8  Exposure bias 0 Maximum land aperture 3 APEX f
2.8 3 Metering mode Pattern Light source Unknown Flash Flash did not fire auto mode Color space sRGB Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileSarcophageHarsiesis.JPG Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width