File:Stele of Year 2 of Pami, Louvre.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStele of Year 2 of Pami Louvre.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 450  600 pixels. Other resolutions 180  240 pixels  633  844 pixels. Original file 633  844 pixels file size 72 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStele of Year 2 of Pami Louvre.jpg Stle de lApis enterr en lan 2 du rgne de Pimay trouve  Saqqarah  XXIIe dynastie gyptienne  Muse du Louvre Date 14 December 2006 original upload date Source No machinereadable source provided. Own work assumed based on copyright claims. Author No machinereadable author provided. Neithsabes assumed based on copyright claims. Source Franais  Auteur  Sebi. Franais  Appareil  Casio EXS500 Franais  Date  dcembre 2006 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse I the copyright holder of this work release this work into the public domain. This applies worldwide. In some countries this may not be legally possible if so I grant anyone the right to use this work for any purpose without any conditions unless such conditions are required by law. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic     Items portrayed in this file depicts Room 318 copyright status copyrighted dedicated to the public domain by copyright holder copyright license released into the public domain by the copyright holder inception 14 December 2006 exposure time 
0.0 6666666666666666666 second fnumber 
2.7  focal length 
6.2  millimetre media type imagejpeg File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1652 14 December 2006 633  844 72 KB Neithsabes Stle de lApis enterr en lan 2 du rgne de Pimay trouve  Saqqarah  XXIIe dynastie gyptienne  Muse du Louvre File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Pami Pediese chief of the Ma Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org          Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirmi ikinci slal Misir Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Serapeu de Saqqara Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on el.wikipedia.org  Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Serapeum de Saqqara Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Saqqarako Serapeuma Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique XXIIe dynastie gyptienne ProjetEgyptopediaPhotos Pamy Ier Srapum de Saqqarah Padiiset grand prtre de Ptah Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Pedisze fpap Pami Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Pami Usage on it.wikipedia.org Lista dei faraoni Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Pami Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Pami Ikadalawamput dalawang dinastiya ng Ehipto Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Pami Padiese Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Camera manufacturer CASIO COMPUTER CO.LTD. Camera model EXS500 Exposure time 115 sec 
0.0 66666666666667 Fnumber f
2.7  Date and time of data generation 1445 13 December 2006 Lens focal length 
6.2  mm Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 72 dpi Vertical resolution 72 dpi Software used 
1.0 0 File change date and time 1445 13 December 2006 Y and C positioning Centered Exposure Program Normal program Exif version 
2.2 1 Date and time of digitizing 1445 13 December 2006 Meaning of each component Y Cb Cr does not exist Image compression mode 5 Exposure bias 0 Maximum land aperture 
2.8  APEX f
2.6 4 Metering mode Pattern Light source Unknown Flash Flash did not fire compulsory flash suppression Supported Flashpix version 1 Color space sRGB File source Digital still camera Custom image processing Normal process Exposure mode Auto exposure White balance Auto white balance Focal length in 35 mm film 38 mm Scene capture type Standard Scene control High gain up Contrast Normal Saturation Normal Sharpness Normal Image width 190 px Image height 190 px Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileSteleofYear
2 ofPamiLouvre.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width