Takelot II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 The Crown Prince Osorkon 
2 Theban Uprising and Conflict 
3 Marriages and children 
4 References 
5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Takelot II 25 languages   Bosanski Catal  Deutsch  Espaol Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski   Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedias quality standards. The specific problem is Article does not manage to clearly and consistently present the different scholarly opinions on this figure. Please help improve this article if you can. August 2021 Learn how and when to remove this message Egyptian Pharaoh Takelot II Takelot II left and AmunRa at Karnak Pharaoh Reign 84534  835824 BC Predecessor Harsiese A Successor Pedubast I Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Khaiemwaset1 Prenomen Praenomen Hedjkheperre Setepenre prR stp.nR Radiant is the manifestation of Ra the chosen one of Ra Nomen Takelotsiesemeramun TkltsstmrjJmn Takelot son of Isis beloved of Amun2 Consort Karomama Merytmut II Karomama D Tashep Tabeketenasket A Children Osorkon III Bakenptah Nimlot Isetweret DjedPtahefankh  Shebensopdet II  Karomama  Tentsepeh  Irbastudjatjau  Deersenesyt  Father Nimlot C Dynasty 
23 rd Dynasty Hedjkheperre Setepenre Takelot II SiEse was a pharaoh of the Twentythird Dynasty of Ancient Egypt in Middle and Upper Egypt. He has been identified as the High Priest of Amun Takelot F son of the High Priest of Amun Nimlot C at Thebes and thus the son of Nimlot C and grandson of king Osorkon II according to the latest academic research.3 Based on two lunar dates belonging to Takelot II this Upper Egyptian pharaoh is today believed to have ascended to the throne of a divided Egypt in either 845 BC or 834 BC.4 Most Egyptologists today including Aidan Dodson5 Gerard Broekman6 Jrgen von Beckerath7 M.A. Leahy and Karl JansenWinkeln also accept David Astons 1989 hypothesis8 that Shoshenq III was Osorkon IIs actual successor at Tanis rather than Takelot II. As Aidan Dodson and Dyan Hilton write in their comprehensive book on the royal families of Ancient Egypt Takelot II is likely to have been identical with the High Priest Takelot F who is stated in the Karnak inscriptions to have been a son of Nimlot C and whose likely period of office falls neatly just before Takelot IIs appearance.9 Takelot II rather ruled a separate kingdom that embraced Middle and Upper Egypt distinct from the Tanite Twentysecond Dynasty which only controlled Lower Egypt. Takelot F the son and successor of the High Priest of Amun Nimlot C served for a period of time under Osorkon II as a High Priest of Amun before he proclaimed himself as king Takelot II in the final three regnal years of Osorkon II.citation needed This situation is attested by the relief scenes on the walls of Temple J at Karnak which was dedicated by Takelot F  in his position as High Priest  to Osorkon II who is depicted as the celebrant and king.10 All the documents which mention Takelot II SiEse and his son Osorkon B originate from either Middle or Upper Egypt none from Lower Egypt and a royal tomb at Tanis which named a king Hedjkheperre Setepenre Takelot along with a Year 9 stela from Bubastis are now recognised as belonging exclusively to Takelot I. While both Takelot I and II used the same prenomen Takelot II added the epithet SiEse Son of Isis to his royal titulary both to affiliate himself with Thebes and to distinguish his name from Takelot I. The Crown Prince Osorkonedit Titulary of Takelot II on a doorway in the temple of Ptah at Karnak.1 Takelot II controlled Middle and Upper Egypt during the final 3 Years of Osorkon II and the first 2 decades of Shoshenq III. The majority of Egyptologists today concede that king Osorkon III was the illustrious Crown Prince and High Priest Osorkon B son of Takelot II. A misunderstanding arose over his identity because in the Crown Princes Chronicle which was carved on the Bubastite Portal at Karnak Osorkon dates his actions by both the regnal years of Takelot II years 11 through 24  with a short year 25 left unmentioned  and then by those of the Tanite king Shoshenq III from regnal years 22 through 
29.1 1 While Kenneth Kitchen has interpreted this to mean that Shoshenq III succeeded Takelot II at Tanis in fact Takelot II and Shoshenq III were likely close contemporaries because immediately after the death of his father in year 25 of Takelot II Osorkon B started dating his activities to year 22 and not year 1 of Shoshenq III onwards. Consequently there was never a two decade long break in Osorkon Bs struggle to regain control of Thebes from Year 1 to Year 22 of Sheshonq III as Kitchens chronology implies because year 25 of Takelot II is equivalent to year 22 of Sheshonq III.12 Osorkon B did not immediately ascend to his fathers throne presumably because he was involved in a prolonged civil war with his rival Pedubast I and later Shoshenq VI for control of Thebes. Instead he merely dated his activities to the serving Dynasty 22 Pharaoh at Tanis Shoshenq III. The Crown Prince Osorkon B was not outmaneuvered to the throne of Tanis by Shoshenq III because both men ruled over separate kingdoms with the 
22 nd Dynasty controlling Lower Egypt and Takelot IIOsorkon B ruling over most of Upper Egypt from Herakleopolis Magna to Thebes where they are monumentally attested. In 1983 a donation stela was discovered by Japanese excavators Heian Museum 1983 at Tehna which reveals that Osorkon III was once a High Priest of Amun himself.13 This person can only be the wellknown High Priest Osorkon B since no other Theban High Priests named Osorkon are known until the reign of Takelot III half a century later when the latters son Osorkon F served in this office.14 Theban Uprising and Conflictedit In Year 11 of Takelot II an insurrection began under Pedubast I whose followers challenged this kings authority at Thebes. Takelot reacted by dispatching his son Osorkon B to sail southwards to Thebes and quell the uprising. Osorkon B succeeded in retaining control of the city and then proclaimed himself as the new High Priest of Amun. Some of the rebels bodies were deliberately burned by Osorkon to permanently deny their souls any hope of an afterlife. However just four years later in year 15 of Takelot II a second major revolt broke out and this time Osorkon Bs forces were expelled from Thebes by Pedubast I. This caused a prolonged period of turmoil and instability in Upper Egypt as a prolonged struggle broke out between the competing factions of Takelot IIOsorkon B and Pedubast IShoshenq VI for control of Thebes. This conflict would last for 27 long years  from Year 15 to Year 25 of Takelot II and then from Year 22 to Year 39 of Shoshenq III when Osorkon B finally defeated his enemies and conquered this great city. Osorkon B proclaimed himself as king Osorkon III sometime after his victory. On other matters the Chronicle of Prince Osorkon B which is carved on the Bubastis Portal at Karnak records Osorkons activities between regnal years 11 and 24 of his father and then from regnal years 22 through 29 of Shoshenq III. However Takelot IIs brief 
25 th year is attested by a donation stela made by his son in his position as High Priest at Thebes shortly before Takelot died it granted 35 aurourae of land to Takelot IIs daughter Karomama E.15 Papyrus Berlin 3048 has also now been conclusively dated to Takelot IIs and not Takelot IIIs reign due to the attestation of a certain Harsiesedesignated the fourth prophet of Amunin this document who is known to have served in office during king Takelot IIs reign.16 This papyrus contains several year dates including a year 13 year 14 year 16 year 23 and even a year 
26 although a Year 26 date for Takelot II is unknown for this ruler and could pertain to another pharaoh instead.16 As of 20
08 update no tomb or final resting place has been found for this king. Marriages and childrenedit Takelot II married his sister and Great Royal Wife Karomama Merymut II they were the parents of Osorkon B the High Priest of Amun at Thebes who later became king Osorkon III. Bakenptah general of Heracleopolis. Mentioned in a text dating to year 39 of Osorkon III and said to be a brother of the king.8 Takelot II also married a lady whose name was only partially preserved as Tashep.... They had a son Nimlot mentioned on a wooden stela Turin 14
68 Vatican 329 as the son of King Takelot and Tashep.... Thought to be a son of Takelot II.8 Takelot also had a wife named Tabektenasket I they had a daughter Isetweret II. Married the Theban Vizier Nakhtefmut C. Known from the coffins of her son Ankhpakhered and daughter Tabektenasket II Berlin 20132 and 201
36.8 17 Other children DjedPtahefankh a younger son of Takelot II. Shebensopdet II. Married the Fourth Prophet of Amun DjedKhonsefankh. She is known from a statue now in the Cairo Museum CG 42211 817 Karomama E. Chantress of Amun.8 Possible further children Tentsepeh D married Ptahudjankhef. Kitchen assumed she was a daughter of Takelot II. Bierbrier assumed she was a daughter of Osorkon II instead.817 IrBastudjatjau married Pakhuru the brother of Vizier Padiamonet. She was a daughter of either Takelot II or Takelot III.17 DiEsenesyt married Nespaqashuty B the nephew of Vizier Padiamonet. She was a daughter of either Takelot II or Takelot III.17 Referencesedit  a b Henri Gauthier Le Livre des rois dgypte recueil de titres et protocoles royaux 3 De la XIXe  la XXIVe dynastie MIFAO 19 Cairo 1914 p. 354.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen MS 49 Philip Von Zabern 1999 pp. 19495.  Karl JansenWinkeln Historische Probleme Der 3. Zwischenzeit JEA 811995 p.129 138  Rolf Krauss in Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss and David Warburton editors Handbook of Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 pp. 408411  Aidan Dodson A new King Shoshenq confirmed GM 1371993 p.58  Gerard Broekman The Reign of Takeloth II a Controversial Matter GM 2052005 pp.2133  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten MS 46 Philipp von Zabern Mainz 1997. p.94  a b c d e f g Aston D. A. 1989. Takeloth II A King of the Theban TwentyThird Dynasty. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 75 1 139153. S
2 CID 192273193.  Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 2004 p. 224  Aston 1989 p. 147  Aston 1989 p. 143  Aston 1989 pp. 143 and 148149     hshiro Michinori 1999. The Identity of Osorkon III The Revival of an Old Theory Prince Osorkon  Osorkon III.  Bulletin of the Ancient Orient Museum. 20 3349. article language is English  Kitchen Kenneth 1996. The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC 
3 rd edition Warminster Aris  Phillips pp. 565  581  Broekman 2005 p.30  a b Frdric Payraudeau Takeloth III Considerations on Old and New Documents in The Libyan Period in Egypt. Historical and Cultural Studies into the 
21 st
24 th Dynasties Proceedings of a Conference at Leiden University 2527 October 2007 G. Broekman RJ Demaree  O.E. Kaper eds Peeters Leuven 2009 p.294  a b c d e Kitchen Kenneth A. The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 B.C. Book  Supplement Aris  Phillips. 1986 ISBN 9780856682988 Further readingedit David Aston 1989. Takeloth II  a King of the Twentythird Dynasty PDF Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 75 139153 Winfried Barta 1980. Die Mondfinsternis im 15. Regierungsjahr Takelots II. und die Chronologie der 22. bis 25. Dynastie Revue dgyptologie 32 317 Gerard P.F. Broekman 2008. The Chronicle of Prince Osorkon and its Historical Context Journal of Egyptian History 
1.2  209234 Ricardo A. Caminos 1958. The Chronicle of Prince Osorkon. Analectica Orientalia AO 37. Rome Biblical Institute Press N. Dautzenberg 1995. Bemerkungen zu Schoschenq II. Takeloth II. und Pedubastis II Gttinger Miszellen 144 2129 Karl JansenWinkeln 2006. The Chronology of the Third Intermediate Period Dyns. 2224. In E. Hornung R. Krauss and D. A. Warburton eds Ancient Egyptian Chronology 234264. Handbook of Oriental Studies HdO I vol. 83. Leiden Brill Rolf Krauss 2007. Die BubastidenFinsternis im Licht von 150 Jahren Forschungsgeschichte Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts. Abteilung Kairo MDAIK 63 211223 Bengt Julius Peterson 1967. Djedptahefanch Sohn des Takeloth II Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde ZS 94 128129 Robert K. Ritner An Oblique Reference to the Expelled High Priest Osorkon in E. Teeter J.A. Larson Gold of Praise Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honor of Edward F. Wente SAOC 58 Chicago 1999 351360 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Takelot II. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTakelotIIoldid1200166182 Categories 
9 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt Theban High Priests of Amun Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles needing cleanup from August 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from August 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from August 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 28 January 2024 at 2311 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width