File:Louvre C100 stele Petrie.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileLouvre C100 stele Petrie.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. LouvreC1
00 stelePetrie.png 541  588 pixels file size 230 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionLouvre C100 stele Petrie.png English Drawing of the socalled poetic stele Louvre C100 depicting very likely the theban ruler Menkheperre Ini. Original work at Louvre Museum Third intermediate period. ref Jean Yoyotte Pharaon Iny un Roi mystrieux du VIIIe sicle avant J.C. CRIPEL 111989 pp.113131 Date 7 January 2014 201122 Source A History of Egypt  vol 3  From the XIXth to the XXXth Dynasties 1905 available copyrightfree here p. 293 f. 121 Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 7 January 2014 media type imagepng File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1923 7 January 2014 541  588 230 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Ini pharaoh List of pharaohs UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org       Usage on bg.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Menkhperr Iny Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Ini fra Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on uk.wikipedia.org   Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Menkheperre Ini Usage on www.wikidata.org Q325744 TalkQ37110 Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.7 9 dpc Vertical resolution 
37.7 9 dpc File change date and time 1915 28 December 2013 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileLouvreC1
00 stelePetrie.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width