Tefnakht - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 Kingship 
3 References 
4 Further reading 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents Tefnakht 27 languages   Brezhoneg Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Tefnakhte Egyptian pharaoh Tefnakht Tefnakht on his year 8 stela Pharaoh Reign 732725 BC Predecessor Interregnum as a pharaoh Osorkon C as a Great Chief of the Ma Ankhhor as a Great Chief of the West Successor Bakenranef Royal titulary Horus name Siakhethor Sj
3 t Son of Khet Nebty name Siakhetnebty Sj
3 t Son of the Two Ladies body Prenomen Praenomen Shepsesre pssR Noble like Ra1 Nomen Tefnakht2 T
3 y.fnt Children Bakenranef Father Gemnefsutkapu Dynasty 
24 th Dynasty Shepsesre Tefnakht in Ancient Greek  romanized Tnephachthos3 was a prince of Sais and founder of the relatively short Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt he rose to become a Chief of the Ma in his home city. He is thought to have reigned roughly 732 BCE to 725 BCE or seven years. Tefnakht I first began his career as the Great Chief of the West and Prince of Sais and was a late contemporary of the last ruler of the 
22 nd Dynasty Shoshenq V. Tefnakht I was actually the second ruler of Sais he was preceded by Osorkon C who is attested by several documents mentioning him as this citys Chief of the Ma and Army Leader according to Kenneth Kitchen4 while his predecessor as Great Chief of the West was a man named Ankhhor.5 A recently discovered statue dedicated by Tefnakht I to AmunRe reveals important details about his personal origins.6 The statues text states that Tefnakht was the son of a certain Gemnefsutkapu and the grandson of Basa a priest of Amun near Sais. Consequently Tefnakht was not actually descended from either lines of Chiefs of the Ma and of the Libu as traditionally believed but rather came from a family of priests and his ancestors being more likely Egyptians rather than Libyans.7 Tefnakht is absent from the Manethonian tradition perhaps because of the abbreviated form in which the Aegyptiaca is known perhaps because Tefnakht was considered a usurper.8 Biographyedit Tefnakht erected two donation stelas in Years 36 and 38 of Shoshenq V as a Prince at Sas. His Year 38 stela from Buto is significant not only because Tefnakht employs the rather boastful epithet of Great Chief of the entire land but due to its list of his religious titles as prophet of Neith Edjo and the Lady of Imay.9 This reflects his control over Sais Buto to the north and Kom elHish to the southwest even prior to the end of the 
22 nd Dynastywith the death of Shoshenq Vand reflects Tefnakhts political base in the Western Delta region of Egypt. The 
22 nd Dynasty was politically fragmenting even prior to the death of Shoshenq V. Tefnakht established his capital at Sais and formed an alliance with other minor kings of the Delta region in order to conquer Middle and Upper Egypt which was under the sway of the Nubian king Piye. He was able to capture and unify many of the cities of the Delta region thus making Tefnakht considerably more powerful than any of his predecessors in either the 
22 nd or 
23 rd dynasties. Tefnakht was not a member of the Tanitebased 
22 nd Dynasty of Egypt since Tanis is located in the Eastern Delta whereas his local city of Sais was situated in the Western Delta closer to Libya. His modest title Great chief of the West also hints at a nonroyal background. Prior to assuming the title of Great Chief of the West Tefnakht managed to extend his control southward capturing the city of Memphis and besieging the city of Herakleopolis which was an ally of the Kushite king Piye of Nubia. This caused him to face considerable opposition from Piye especially after Nimlot the local ruler of Hermopolis defected from Piyes sphere of influence to his side. A pair of naval engagements soon checked any further advances by Tefnakhts coalition into Piyes Middle Egyptian territories and Memphis was soon recaptured by Piye. After further campaigns Tefnakhts allies surrendered to Piye and Tefnakht soon found himself isolated. He finally dispatched a letter formally submitting his loyalty and swearing his loyalty to Piye. Tefnakht however was the only Lower Egyptian prince to avoid seeing Piye face to face. These details are recounted in the Great Victory stela of Piye which this Nubian ruler erected on the New Years Day of his 
21 st regnal year. Shortly afterwards Piye returned home to Nubia at Gebel Barkal and never returned to Lower Egypt again. Kingshipedit Complete stele of Tefnakht Despite this setback Tefnakht was left alone as the local prince of his local region of Sais. He managed over time to soon reestablish his kingdoms control in the Delta region from the political vacuum which resulted after Piyes departure from this region. It is generally believed that prince Tefnakht officially proclaimed himself as king Shepsesre Tefnakht I and adopted a royal title sometime after Piyes departure from Lower Egypt. His successor at Sais was Bakenranef. While most scholars such as Kenneth Kitchen have equated Manethos Tefnakht with the king Shepsesre Tefnakht of Sais who is attested by the Year 8 Athens donation stela a recent article by Olivier Perdu10 has suggested that this Tefnakht was rather Tefnakht II a much later king of Sais who ruled in the mid6
80 s BCE during the late Nubian 
25 th Dynasty. In his paper Perdu published a newly discovered stela dating from the second year of Necho Is reign which he contends is similar in style text and content to the Year 8 stela of Shepsesre Tefnakht. Perdu thus infers that these two kings of SaisNecho I and Tefnakht IIwere close contemporaries. However his arguments are not currently accepted by most Egyptian scholars such as Danel Kahn or Kenneth Kitchen who still believe that the Year 8 Athens stela of king Shepsesre Tefnakht likely belongs to Tefnakht I rather than a hypothetical Tefnakht II who would then have assumed power in 685 BC at Saisearly during the reign of Taharqa one of the most powerful Nubian rulers of Egypt. Kahn has also stressed at an Egyptological Conference at Leiden that Perdus epigraphic criteria here in the famed Athens stelasuch as the use of the tripartite wig the method through which the falconheaded god keeps his head upright in the same stela and on temple wall reliefs contemporary with Tefnakht Is time the decoration of the stela scene Heaven supported by wAs sceptersappear already in use in the 
24 th or early 
25 th Nubian dynasty during Piye Shabaka or Bakenranefs reign.11 The invisible back side of the tripartite wig can be found on the donation stela of Shebitku from Pharbaitos and on the BakenranefBocchoris vase dating to the last days of Piye and the beginning of Shabakaall appear close in time to the presumed reign of Tefnakht I. Moreover the head of the falconheaded god Horus is as Perdu himself noted similar in style to the stela of Tefnakht chief of the Meshwesh and Piyes chief rival.12 Unlike Necho I neither of this kings presumed Saite royal predecessors a certain Nekauba and Tefnakht II are monumentally attested in Lower Egypt. Hence the latter two kings who appear in the records of Manethos Epitome may well be fictitious. Moreover it is improbable that Taharqa perhaps one of the most powerful Kushite kings of the Nubian 
25 th dynasty for the first 18 years of his reign would have tolerated the existence of a rival line of native Egyptian kings at Sais during the first half of his reign when he exercised full control over Memphis and the Delta region. After all the 
24 th dynasty Saite rulers Tefnakht and Bakenranef had fought Taharqas father Piye and resisted Shabakas expansion of Kushite power into the Delta region. Referencesedit  Peter A. Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt Thames and Hudson London 1994. p.188  Tefnakht  Diodorus Siculus 
1.4 5  KA Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC 
3 rd ed. 1996 Aris  Phillips Limited pp.351  p.355  Kitchen op. cit.  316.  P.R. Del Francia Di una statuette dedicate ad AmonRa dal grande capo dei Ma Tefnakht nel Museo Egizio di Firenze S. Russo ed. Atti del V Convegno Nazionale di Egittologia e Papirologia Firenze 1012 dicembre 1999 Firenze 2000 63112 7682  Del Francia pp.63112  7682  Bonhme M.A. 1987. Les noms royaux dans lgypte de la troisime priode intermdiaire in French. IFAO. p. 228. ISBN 9782724700459.  Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt p.362  Olivier Perdu La Chefferie de Sbennytos de Piankhy  Psammtique Ier Revue dgyptology 55 2004 pp. 95111.  Danel Kahn The Transition from Libyan to Nubian Rule in Egypt Revisiting the Reign of Tefnakht THE LIBYAN PERIOD IN EGYPT Historical and Cultural Studies into the 
21 st  
24 th Dynasties Proceedings of a Conference at Leiden University 2527 October 2007 G.P.F. Broekman R.J. Demare  O.E. Kaper eds. pp.13948  Olivier Perdu De Stphinates  Ncho ou les dbuts de la XXVIe Dynastie acadmie des Inscriptios  belleslettres  Comptes rendus CRAIBL 2002. p.1229 n. 73 Further readingedit Danel Kahn Did Tefnakht I rule as king GM 173 1999 pp. 123125 Danel Kahn The Transition from Libyan to Nubian Rule in Egypt Revisiting the Reign of Tefnakht. In G. P. F. Broekman R. J. Demare and O. E. Kaper eds The Libyan Period in Egypt Egyptologische Uitgaven vol. 23 139148. Leiden 2009 Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten Leuven Peeters. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tefnakht. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTefnakhtoldid1172151124 Categories 
8 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt Chiefs of the Ma 
8 thcentury BC births 
8 thcentury BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 August 2023 at 0829 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width