File:Apis Bakenranef 6 Mariette.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileApis Bakenranef 6 Mariette.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. ApisBakenranef
6 Mariette.jpg 385  467 pixels file size 77 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionApis Bakenranef 6 Mariette.jpg English Stele commemorating the death of an Apis bull in year 6 of Bakenranef found in the Serapeum of Saqqara. Bakenranefs name is visible on the tip of the stele. Reign of Bakenranef 
24 th dynasty Third intermediate period. Date 10 January 2014 103419 Source Le srapum de Memphis dcouvert et dcrit par Auguste Mariette 1857 available here pl. 34. Author Auguste Mariette 18211881 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1881 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic         Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 10 January 2014 media type imagejpeg checksum 527
44 cda
8 c
1 aeec
85 a6
82 cce
3 e
3 e
94 cae
28 a
99 cf determination method SHA1 data size 78750 byte height 467 pixel width 385 pixel File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1017 10 January 2014 385  467 77 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Bakenranef List of pharaohs Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on arz.wikipedia.org              Usage on az.wikipedia.org yirmi drdnc slal Misir Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Bakenrenef Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on el.wikipedia.org      Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Bakenrenef Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Bakenrenef Usage on fa.wikipedia.org      Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Bakenranef Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Bakenranef Usage on it.wikipedia.org Boccori Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Bakenrenef Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Vng triu th Hai Mi Bn ca Ai Cp Bakenranef Usage on www.wikidata.org Q510515 TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Bakenranef Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileApisBakenranef
6 Mariette.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width