Piye - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Family 
3 Conquest of Egypt 
4 Length of reign 
5 Burial 
6 References 
7 Bibliography 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Piye 42 languages Afrikaans    Brezhoneg Catal  Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Kushite king and Egyptian pharaoh Paanchi redirects here. For other usages see Paanchi disambiguation. Piye Piankhi Piankhy Paankhi Paanchi Drawing of the upper part of the Stele of Piye. The lunette on the top depicts Piye being tributed by various Lower Egypt rulers and the text describes his successful invasion of Egypt. While the stele itself dates back to Piyes reign in the Twentyfifth Dynasty it also describes events from the Twentythird Dynasty. Pharaoh Reign 744714 BC Predecessor Kashta Successor Shebitku Royal titulary Horus name Zematawy Nebty name Meshemut Golden Horus Sashaqenu Prenomen Praenomen Usimare Nomen Piy1 Consort Tabiry Abar Khensa Peksater Children Pharaoh Taharqa Gods Wife Shepenupet II Queen Qalhata Queen Arty Queen Tabekenamun Queen Naparaye Queen Takahatenamun Har Khaliut Father King Kashta Mother Possibly Queen Pebatjma Burial elKurru Monuments Stelae at Jebel Barkal enlargement of Temple of Amun Jebel Barkal Pyramid at ElKurru Dynasty 
25 th Dynasty Piye once transliterated as Pankhy or Piankhi2 d. 714 BC was an ancient Kushite king and founder of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt who ruled Egypt from 744714 BC.3 He ruled from the city of Napata located deep in Nubia modernday Sudan. Nameedit Piye adopted two throne names Usimare and Sneferre.4 He was passionate about the worship of the god Amun like many kings of Nubia. He revitalized the moribund Great Temple of Amun at Jebel Barkal which was first built under Thutmose III of the New Kingdom employing numerous sculptors and stonemasons from Egypt. He was once thought to have also used the throne name Menkheperre the Manifestation of Ra abides but this prenomen has now been recognized as belonging to a local Theban king named Ini instead who was a contemporary of Piye.5 Part of a series on Kushite Monarchs and Rulers Main Topics Main article Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Qore Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Familyedit See also Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Piye was the son of Kashta and Pebatjma. He is known to have had three or four wives. Abar was the mother of his successor Taharqa. Further wives are Tabiry Peksater and probably Khensa.6 Piye is known to have had several children. He was the father of King Shebitku. Said to be a son of Piye7 or alternatively a brother of Piye.68 King Taharqa. Son of Queen Abar. He would take the throne after his uncle Shabaka and another male relative Shebitku.6 Gods Wife of Amun Shepenwepet II. Installed in Thebes during the reign of her brother Taharqa.6 Qalhata wife of King Shabaka she was the mother of king Tanutamun and probably of King Shabataka as well.6 Tabekenamun married her brother Taharqa.6 Naparaye married her brother Taharqa.6 Takahatenamun married her brother Taharqa.6 Arty married king Shebitku.6 Har. Known from an offering table of his daughter Wadjrenes from Thebes TT
34.6  Khaliut Governor of Kanad according to a stela found at Barkal.6 Princess Mutirdis Chief Prophet of Hathor and Mut in Thebes and daughter of Piye according to Morkot.8 Thought to be a daughter of a local ruler named Menkheperre Khmuny from Hermopolis by Kitchen.7 Conquest of Egyptedit Image of Shepenupet II Divine adoratrice of Amn and daughter of Piye. Ruins of the Temple of Gebel Barkal. As ruler of Nubia and Upper Egypt Piye took advantage of the squabbling of Egypts rulers by expanding Nubias power beyond Thebes into Lower Egypt. In reaction to this Tefnakht of Sais formed a coalition between the local kings of the Delta Region and enticed Piyes nominal allyking Nimlot of Hermopolisto defect to his side. Tefnakht then sent his coalition army south and besieged Herakleopolis where its king Peftjauawybast and the local Nubian commanders appealed to Piye for help. Piye reacted quickly to this crisis in his regnal year 20 by assembling an army to invade Middle and Lower Egypt and visited Thebes in time for the great Opet Festival which proves he effectively controlled Upper Egypt by this time. His military feats are chronicled in the Victory stela at Gebel Barkal Hear what I have done in exceeding the ancestors. I am the king the representation of god the living image of Atum who issued from the womb marked as ruler who is feared by those greater than he whose father knew and whose mother perceived even in the egg that he would be ruler the good god beloved of the gods the Son of Re who acts with his two arms Piye beloved of Amon .... Victory Stele of Piye.9 Piye viewed his campaign as a Holy War commanding his soldiers to cleanse themselves ritually before beginning battle. He himself offered sacrifices to the great god Amun.10 Piye then marched north and achieved complete victory at Herakleopolis conquering the cities of Hermopolis and Memphis among others and received the submission of the kings of the Nile Delta including Iuput II of Leontopolis Osorkon IV of Tanis and his former ally Nimlot at Hermopolis. Hermopolis fell to the Nubian king after a siege lasting five months. Tefnakht took refuge in an island in the Delta and formally conceded defeat in a letter to the Nubian king but refused to personally pay homage to the Kushite ruler. Satisfied with his triumph Piye proceeded to sail south to Thebes and returned to his homeland in Nubia never to return to Egypt. Despite Piyes successful campaign into the Delta his authority only extended northward from Thebes up to the western desert oases and Herakleopolis where Peftjauawybast ruled as a Nubian vassal king. The local kings of Lower Egyptespecially Tefnakhtwere essentially free to do what they wanted without Piyes oversight. It was Shebitku Piyes successor who later rectified this unsatisfactory situation by attacking Sais and defeating Tefnakhts successor Bakenranef there in his second regnal year. Length of reignedit Detail of a drawing of the Victory stele Piye left partially erased is tributed by four Nile Delta rulers Nimlot standing and kneeling from left to right Osorkon IV Iuput II and Peftjauawybast.11 Piyes highest known date was long thought to be the Year 24 III Akhet day 10 date mentioned in the Smaller Dakhla Stela Ashmolean Museum No.1894 from the Sutekh temple of Mut elKharab in the Dakhla Oasis.12 However reliefs from the Great Temple at Gebel Barkal depict Piye celebrating a Heb Sed Festival. Such festivals were traditionally celebrated in a kings 
30 th Year. It is debated whether the reliefs portrayed historical events or were prepared in advance for the festivalin which case Piye might have died before his 
30 th regnal year. Piye is also attested by two papyri dated to Year 21 and 22 of his reign where he is named Pharaoh Piye SiEse Meryamun which is undoubtedly this kings name.13 Kenneth Kitchen has suggested a reign of 31 years for Piye based on the Year 8 donation stela of a king Shepsesre Tefnakht who is commonly viewed as Piyes opponent.14 A dissenting opinion came from Olivier Perdu in 2002 who believes that this stela refers instead to the later king Tefnakht II because of stylistic similarities to another dated to Year 2 of Necho Is reign.1516 Secondly Kitchen observes that A fragmentary bandage from Western Thebes bears an obscure date of Sneferre Piankhy or Piye. The visible traces indicate Regnal Year 20 a patch and trace the latter compatible with a 10 and a shallow sign perhaps an otiose t. In other words we here have a date higher than Year 20 of Piankhy or Piye and very possibly Year 30  which would fit very well with the 31 years minimum reign which has been already inferred on independent grounds.17 Burialedit Piyes tomb was located next to the largest Pyramid in the cemetery designated Ku.1 seen in the image on the right at elKurru near Jebel Barkal in what is now Northern Sudan. Down a stairway of 19 steps opened to the east the burial chamber is cut into the bedrock as an open trench and covered with a corbelled masonry roof. His body had been placed on a bed which rested in the middle of the chamber on a stone bench with its four corners cut away to receive the legs of the bed so that the bed platform lay directly on the bench. Further out to the edge of the cemetery the first pharaoh to receive such an entombment in more than 500 years10 his four favorite horses had been buried. This site would be also occupied by the tombs of several later members of the dynasty. Referencesedit  King Piy. Archived from the original on 20070426. Retrieved 20070612. Piy Piankhi  ZibeliusChen Karola 2006. Zur Problematik der Lesung des Knigsnamens Pianchi. Der Antike Sudan. 17 127133.  F. Payraudeau Retour sur la succession ShabaqoShabataqo Nehet 1 2014 p. 115127 online here Archived 20180507 at the Wayback Machine  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Verlag Philipp von Zabern MS 49 1999. pp. 206207  Jean Yoyotte Pharaon Iny un Roi mystrieux du VIIIe sicle avant J.C. CRIPEL 111989 pp.113131  a b c d e f g h i j k Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2004. ISBN 0500051283  a b Kitchen Kenneth A. The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 B.C. Book  Supplement Aris  Phillips. 1986 ISBN 9780856682988  a b Morkot Robert G. The Black Pharaohs Egypts Nubian Rulers The Rubicon Press 2000 ISBN 0948695242  The Literature Of Ancient Egypt in Arabic. pp. 368 ff.  a b The Black Pharaohs Archived 20140506 at the Wayback Machine by Robert Draper National Geographic February 2008.  Leahy Anthony 1992. Royal Iconography and Dynastic Change 750525 BC The Blue and Cap Crowns. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 78 227 and Plate XXVI. doi
10.2 3073822074. ISSN 03075133. JSTOR 3822074.  Janssen Jac. J. 19680801. The Smaller Dkhla Stela Ashmolean Museum No. 1894. 107 b. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 54 165172. doi
10.2 3073855921. ISSN 03075133. JSTOR 3855921.  Kenneth Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC. 
3 rd ed. 1996 Warminster Aris  Phillips S123  Kenneth Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC. 
3 rd ed. 1996 Warminster Aris  Phillips  Olivier Perdu De Stphinats  Nchao ou les dbuts de la XXVIe dynastie Compterendus de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et BellesLettres CRAIBL 2002 pp. 12151244  Olivier Perdu La Chefferie de Sbennytos de Piankhy  Psammtique Ier RdE 55 2004 pp. 95111  Kenneth Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC. 
3 rd ed. 1996 Warminster Aris  Phillips S123 Bibliographyedit Roberto B. Gozzoli The Writing of History in Ancient Egypt during the First Millennium BC ca. 1070180 BC Trends and Perspectives London 2006 S. 5467 ISBN 0955025
63 X External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Piye. The Victory Stela of Piankhy The Stela of Piye  verbatim translation v t e Kushite monarchs and rulers Main topics Main article Qore Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Norway Germany Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePiyeoldid1217902974 Categories 7
10 s BC deaths 
8 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
8 thcentury BC monarchs of Kush Kingdom of Kush Pharaohs of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Egyptian people of Nubian descent Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Arabiclanguage sources ar Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Year of birth unknown Year of death uncertain This page was last edited on 8 April 2024 at 1508 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width