Nubia - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Linguistics 
2 Geography 
3 History Toggle History subsection 
3.1 Prehistory before 60003500 BC 
3.2 PreKerma AGroup 35003000 BC 

3.2.1 Upper Nubia 

3.2.2 Lower Nubia 

3.2.3 Egypt in Nubia 
3.3 Early Kerma 30002400 BC 
3.4 Early Kerma CGroup 24001550 BC 

3.4.1 Upper Nubia 

3.4.2 Lower Nubia 

3.4.3 Egypt in Nubia 
3.5 Kerma Egyptian Empire 15501100 BC 

3.5.1 Upper Nubia 

3.5.2 Lower Nubia 

3.5.3 Egypt in Nubia 
3.6 Napatan Empire 750542 BC 

3.6.1 Nubia in Egypt 
3.7 Meroitic 542 BC400 AD 

3.7.1 Achaemenid period 

3.7.2 Ptolemaic period 

3.7.3 Roman period 
3.8 Christian Nubia 
3.9 Islamic Nubia 4
21 stcentury archaeology 
5 Contemporary issues 
6 Ancient DNA 
7 Nubian Images 
8 See also 
9 Notes 
10 Further reading 
11 Notes 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Nubia 78 languages Afrikaans  Asturianu Azrbaycanca      Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa   Kiswahili  Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Nordfriisk Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke    Vneto Ting Vit Winaray    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Region in northern Sudan and southern Egypt This article is about the region in Africa. For other uses see Nubia disambiguation. Not to be confused with Numidia. Nubia Statues of several Nubian rulers of the late 
25 th Dynastyearly Napatan period 
7 th century BC. From left to right Tantamani Taharqa rear Senkamanisken again Tantamani rear Aspelta Anlamani again Senkamanisken. Kerma Museum.1 Outline of Nubia Nubia njubi Nobiin Nobn2 Arabic  romanized anNba is a region along the Nile river encompassing the area between the first cataract of the Nile south of Aswan in southern Egypt and the confluence of the Blue and White Niles in Khartoum in central Sudan or more strictly Al Dabbah.3456 It was the seat of one of the earliest civilizations of ancient Africa the Kerma culture which lasted from around 2500 BC until its conquest by the New Kingdom of Egypt under Pharaoh Thutmose I around 1500 BC whose heirs ruled most of Nubia for the next 400 years. Nubia was home to several empires most prominently the Kingdom of Kush which conquered Egypt in the eighth century BC during the reign of Piye and ruled the country as its 
25 th Dynasty to be replaced a century later by the native Egyptian 
26 th Dynasty. From the 
3 rd century BC to 
3 rd century AD northern Nubia would be invaded and annexed to Egypt ruled by the Greeks and Romans. This territory was known in the GrecoRoman world as Dodekaschoinos. Kushs collapse in the fourth century AD was preceded by an invasion from the Ethiopian Kingdom of Aksum and the rise of three Christian kingdoms Nobatia Makuria and Alodia. Makuria and Alodia lasted for roughly a millennium. Their eventual decline started not only the partition of Nubia which was split into the northern half conquered by the Ottomans and the southern half by the Sennar sultanate in the sixteenth century but also a rapid Islamization and partial Arabization of the Nubian people. Nubia was reunited with the Khedivate of Egypt in the nineteenth century. Today the region of Nubia is split between Egypt and Sudan. The primarily archaeological science dealing with ancient Nubia is called Nubiology. Part of a series on History of Nubia Topics Nubia Names of Nubia History of Sudan Military Lower Nubia Upper Nubia Kingdoms AGroup Alodia BGroup Blemmyes CGroup Kerma Kingdom of alAbwab Kingdom of Kush Kingdom of Sennar Makuria Medja Mero Napata Nobatia XGroup Monarchy Titles Kandake Pharaoh Qore Viceroy Rulers Monarchs of Kerma Monarchs of Kush Monarchs of Makuria Queens of Kush Viceroy of Kush Locations AlMeragh Amara Aniba Askut Ballana Bigeh Deir elBahari Debeira Dodekaschoinos Dongola Dotawo Elephantine ElHobagi ElKurru Fadrus Faras Hamadab Gala Abu Ahmed Jebel Adda Jebel Barkal Jebel Dosha Kadero Kageras Kawa Kulb Kulubnarti Kumma Lisht Meinarti Musawwarat esSufra Nubian Desert Sa Island Shalfak Singa Soba Soleb Umm Ruweim Wad ban Naqa Zuma Languages Blemmye Egyptian Meroitic Meroitic alphabet Old Nubian Religions Christianity Egyptian Kushite Sunni Islam Deities A Allah Aman Amanete Amesemi Anhur Anaka Apedemak Aqedise Arensnuphis Ariten Atari B Bastet Bes Breith D Dedun H Heka Hemen Horus K Khenmu J Jesus M Makedeke Mash Mehit Menhit Merul Miket N Nu R Ra S Satis Sabomakal Sobek T Thoth W Wusa Y Yahweh Temples Faras Cathedral Kulubnarti church Monastery in Ghazali Philae temple complex Qasr Ibrim Qustul Semna Temple of Amun Jebel Barkal Temple of Amun Tabo Temple of Apedemak Lion Temple Temple of Dendur Temple of Mut Throne Hall of Dongola Tombos Architecture Monumental depictions of Amanitore Nubian architecture Nubian pyramids Nubian vault Pyramids of Mero Sedeinga pyramids Technology Bow and arrow Gold mining Hafir Levallois technique Category v t e Linguisticsedit Main article Nubian languages Nubia in hieroglyphs 7 Taseti T
3 stj Curved land7 8 Setiu Stjw Curved land of the Nubians8 Nehset  Nehsyu  Nehsi Nst  Nsyw  Nsj Nubia  Nubians Nubia Historically the people of Nubia spoke at least two varieties of Nubian languages a subfamily that includes Nobiin the descendant of Old Nubian Dongolawi Midob and several related varieties in the northern part of the Nuba Mountains in South Kordofan. The Birgid language was spoken north of Nyala in Darfur but has been extinct as late as 1970. However the linguistic identity of the ancient Kerma culture of southern and central Nubia also known as Upper Nubia is uncertain some research suggests that it belonged to the Cushitic branch of the Afroasiatic languages910 while more recent studies indicate that the Kerma culture belonged to the Eastern Sudanic branch of NiloSaharan languages instead and that other peoples of northern or Lower Nubia north of Kerma such as the CGroup culture and the Blemmyes spoke Cushitic languages before the spread of Eastern Sudanic languages from southern or Upper Nubia.11121314 Geographyedit See also Aethiopia Archaeological expeditions to Nubia and Nile boat Nubia was divided into three major regions Upper Middle and Lower Nubia in reference to their locations along the Nile. Lower referred to regions downstream further north and upper to regions upstream further south. Lower Nubia lay between the First and the Second Cataracts within the current borders of Egypt Middle Nubia lay between the Second and the Third Cataracts and Upper Nubia lay south of the Third Cataract.15 Historyedit Prehistory before 60003500 BCedit Archaeological evidence attests to long histories of fishinghuntinggathering and later herding throughout the Nile Valley.16 Affad 23 is an archaeological site located in the Affad region of southern Dongola Reach in northern Sudan17 which hosts the wellpreserved remains of prehistoric camps relics of the oldest openair hut in the world and diverse hunting and gathering loci some 50000 years old.181920 In southern Nubia near modern Khartoum from the ninth to the sixth millennia cal BC Khartoum Mesolithic fisherhuntergatherers produced sophisticated pottery.21 By 5000 BC the people who inhabited what is now called Nubia participated in the Neolithic Revolution. The Sahara became drier and people began to domesticate sheep goats and cattle.22 Saharan rock reliefs depict scenes that have been thought to suggest the presence of a cattle cult typical of those seen throughout parts of Eastern Africa and the Nile Valley even to this day.23 Nubian rock art depicts hunters using bows and arrows in the neolithic period which is a precursor to Nubian archer culture in later times. Megaliths discovered at Nabta Playa are early examples of what seems to be one of the worlds first astronomical devices predating Stonehenge by almost 2000 years.24 This complexity as expressed by different levels of authority within the society there likely formed the basis for the structure of both the Neolithic society at Nabta and the Old Kingdom of Egypt.25 Joseph Vogel wrote that The period when subSaharan Africa was most influential in Egypt was a time when neither Egypt as we understand it culturally nor the Sahara as we understand it geographically existed. Populations and cultures now found south of the desert roamed far to the north. The culture of Upper Egypt which became dynastic Egyptian civilization could fairly be called a Sudanese transplant.26 British Africanist Basil Davidson outlined that The ancient Egyptians belonged that is not to any specific Egyptian region or Near Eastern heritage but to that wide community of peoples who lived between the Red Sea and the Atlantic Ocean shared a common SaharanSudanese culture and drew their reinforcements from the same great source even though as time went by they also absorbed a number of wanderers from the Near East.27 Biological anthropologists Shomarka Keita and A.J. Boyce have stated that the Studies of crania from southern predynastic Egypt from the formative period 40003100 B.C. show them usually to be more similar to the crania of ancient Nubians Kushites Saharans or modern groups from the Horn of Africa than to those of dynastic northern Egyptians or ancient or modern southern Europeans.28 Archaeological evidence has attested that population settlements occurred in Nubia as early as the Late Pleistocene era and from the 
5 th millennium BC onwards whereas there is no or scanty evidence of human presence in the Egyptian Nile Valley during these periods which may be due to problems in site preservation.29 Several scholars have argued that the African origins of the Egyptian civilisation derived from pastoral communities which emerged in both the Egyptian and Sudanese regions of the Nile Valley in the fifth millennium BCE.3031 Dietrich Wildung 2018 examined Eastern Saharan pottery styles and Sudanese stone sculptures and suggested these artefacts were transmitted across the Nile Valley and influenced the predynastic Egyptian culture in the Neolithic period.32 PreKerma AGroup 35003000 BCedit AGroup style Nubian pottery Musee du Louvre Upper Nubiaedit The poorly known preKerma culture existed in Upper Southern Nubia on a stretch of fertile farmland just south of the Third Cataract. Lower Nubiaedit Qustul incense burner 32003000 BC Nubia has one of the oldest civilizations in the world. This history is often intertwined with Egypt to the north.3316 Around 3500 BC the second Nubian culture termed the Early AGroup culture arose in Lower Nubia.34 They were sedentary agriculturalists226 traded with the Egyptians and exported gold.35 This trade is supported archaeologically by large amounts of Egyptian commodities deposited in the AGroup graves. The imports consisted of gold objects copper tools faience amulets and beads seals slate palettes stone vessels and a variety of pots.36 During this time the Nubians began creating distinctive black topped red pottery. The AGroup population have been described as ethnically very similar to the predynastic Egyptians in physical characteristics.37 Around 3100 BC the Agroup transitioned from the Early to Classical phases. Arguably royal burials are known only at Qustul and possibly Sayala.358 During this period the wealth of Agroup kings rivaled Egyptian kings. Royal Agroup graves contained gold and richly decorated pottery.3319 Some scholars believe Nubian AGroup rulers and early Egyptian pharaohs used related royal symbols similarities in AGroup Nubia and Upper Egypt rock art support this position. Scholars from the University of Chicago Oriental Institute excavated at Qustul near Abu Simbel in Sudan in 196064 and found artifacts which incorporated images associated with Egyptian pharaohs. Archeologist Bruce Williams studied the artifacts and concluded that Egypt and Nubia AGroup culture shared the same official culture participated in the most complex dynastic developments and Nubia and Egypt were both part of the great East African substratum.38 Williams also wrote that Qustul could well have been the seat of Egypts founding dynasty.3940 David OConnor wrote that the Qustul incense burner provides evidence that the Agroup Nubian culture in Qustul marked the pivotal change from predynastic to dynastic Egyptian monumental art.41 However most scholars do not agree with this hypothesis42 as more recent finds in Egypt indicate that this iconography originated in Egypt instead of Nubia and that the Qustul rulers adopted or emulated the symbols of Egyptian pharaohs.43444546 According to David Wengrow the AGroup polity of the late 
4 th millenninum BCE is poorly understood since most of the archaeological remains are submerged underneath Lake Nasser.47 Frank Yurco also remarked that depictions of pharonic iconography such as the royal crowns Horus falcons and victory scenes were concentrated in the Upper Egyptian Naqada culture and AGroup Nubia. He further elaborated that Egyptian writing arose in Naqadan Upper Egypt and AGroup Nubia and not in the Delta cultures where the direct Western Asian contact was made further vitiates the Mesopotamianinfluence argument.48 The archaeological cemeteries at Qustul are no longer available for excavations since the flooding of Lake Nasser.49 The earliest representations of pharaonic iconography have been excavated from Nag elHamdulab in Aswan the extreme southern region of Egypt which borders the Sudan with an estimated dating range between 3200 and 3100 BC.50 Egypt in Nubiaedit Writing developed in Egypt around 3300 BC. In their writings Egyptians referred to Nubia as TaSeti or The Land of the Bow as the Nubians were known to be expert archers.51 More recent and broader studies have determined that the distinct pottery styles differing burial practices different grave goods and site distribution all indicate that the Naqada people and the Nubian AGroup people were from different cultures. Kathryn Bard states that Naqada cultural burials contain very few Nubian craft goods which suggests that while Egyptian goods were exported to Nubia and were buried in AGroup graves AGroup goods were of little interest further north.52 According to anthropologist Jane Hill there is no evidence that the pharaohs of the First Dynasty of Egypt buried at Abydos were of Nubian origin.53 However several biological anthropological studies have shown the Badarian and Naqada people to be closely related to the Nubian and other tropical African populations.545556575859 Also the protodynastic kings emerged from the Naqada region.6061 Early Kerma 30002400 BCedit A uniform culture of nomadic herders called the Gash group existed from 3000 to 1500 BC to the east and west of Nubia.228 In Lower Nubia the Agroup moved from the Classical to Terminal phase. At this time kings at Qustul likely ruled all of Lower Nubia and demonstrated the political centralization of Nubian society.2221 The AGroup culture came to an end sometime between 3100 and 2900 BC when it was apparently destroyed by the First Dynasty rulers of Egypt.62 There are no records of settlement in Lower Nubia for the next 600 years. Old Kingdom Egyptian dynasties 
4 th to 
6 th controlled uninhabited Lower Nubia and raided Upper Nubia. Early Kerma CGroup 24001550 BCedit Upper Nubiaedit Kerma style pottery 25001500 BC The preKerma developed into the Middle phase Kerma group. Some Agroup people transitioning to Cgroup settled the area and coexisted with the preKerma group.2225 Like other Nubian groups the two groups made an abundance of red pottery with black tops though each group made different shapes.2229 Traces of the Cgroup in Upper Nubia vanish by 2000 BC and Kerma culture began to dominate Upper Nubia.2225 The power of an independent Upper Nubia increased around 1700 BC and Upper Nubia dominated Lower Nubia.2225 An Egyptian official Harkhuf mentions that Irtjet Setjet and Wawat all combined under a single ruler. By 1650 BC Egyptian texts started to refer to only two kingdoms in Nubia Kush and Shaat.223238 Kush was centered at Kerma and Shaat was centered on Sai island.2238 Bonnet posits that Kush actually ruled all of Upper Nubia since royal graves were much larger in Kush than Shaat and Egyptian texts other than the Execration lists only refer to Kush and not Shaat.223839 Lower Nubiaedit Cgroup Nubians resettled Lower Nubia by 2400 BC.2225 As trade between Egypt and Nubia increased so did wealth and stability. Nubia was divided into a series of small kingdoms. There is debate over whether the Cgroup people63 who flourished from 2500 BC to 1500 BC were another internal evolution or invaders. OConnor states a transition from A group into a later culture the Cgroup can be traced and the Cgroup culture was typical of Lower Nubia from 2400 to 1650 BC.2225 Although they lived in close proximity to each other Nubians did not acculturate much to Egyptian culture. Notable exceptions include Cgroup Nubians during the 
15 th Dynasty isolated Nubian communities in Egypt and some bowmen communities.2256 CGroup pottery is characterized by allover incised geometric lines with white infill and impressed imitations of basketry. Lower Nubia was controlled by Egypt from 2000 to 1700 BC and Upper Nubia from 1700 to 1525 BC. From 2200 to 1700 BC the Pan Grave culture appeared in Lower Nubia.3320 Some of the people were likely the Medjay m64 arriving from the desert east of the Nile river. One feature of Pan Grave culture was shallow grave burial. The Pan Grave and CGroup definitely interacted Pan Grave pottery is characterized by more limited incised lines than the CGroups and generally have interspersed undecorated spaces within the geometric schemes.65 Egypt in Nubiaedit 
11 th Dynasty model of Nubian archers in the Egyptian army from a tomb in Asyut c. 21301991 BC. In 2300 BC Nubia was first mentioned in Old Kingdom Egyptian accounts of trade missions. The Egyptians referred to Lower Nubia as Wawat Irtjet and Setju while they referred to Upper Nubia as Yam. Some authors believe that Irtjet and Setju could also have been in Upper Nubia.2232 They referred to Nubians dwelling near the river as Nehasyu.2226 From Aswan the southern limit of Egyptian control at the time Egyptians imported gold incense ebony copper ivory and exotic animals from tropical Africa through Nubia. Relations between the Egyptians and Nubians showed peaceful cultural interchange cooperation and mixed marriages. Nubian bowmen that settled at Gebelein during the First Intermediate Period married Egyptian women were buried in Egyptian style and eventually could not be distinguished from Egyptians.2256 Older scholarship noted that some Egyptian pharaohs may have had Nubian ancestry.6667 Richard Loban expressed the view that Mentuhotep II of the 
11 th Dynasty was quite possibly of Nubian origin and cited historical evidence which mentioned that Amenemhet I founder of the 
12 th Dynasty had a Ta Seti or Nubian mother.686970 Dietrich Wildung has argued that Nubian features were common in Egyptian iconography since the predynastic era and that several pharaohs such as Khufu and Mentuhotep II were represented with these Nubian features.71 Frank Yurco wrote that Egyptian rulers of Nubian ancestry had become Egyptians culturally as pharaohs they exhibited typical Egyptian attitudes and adopted typical Egyptian policies. Yurco noted that some Middle Kingdom rulers particularly some pharaohs of the Twelfth Dynasty had strong Nubian features due to the origin of the dynasty in the Aswan region of southern Egypt. He also identified the pharaoh Sequenre Tao of the Seventeenth Dynasty as having Nubian features.72 Many scholars in recent years have argued that the mother of Amenemhat I founder of the Twelfth Dynasty was of Nubian origin.73746975767778 After a period of withdrawal the Middle Kingdom of Egypt conquered Lower Nubia from 2000 to 1700 BC.22825 By 1900 BC King Sesostris I began building a series of towns below the Second Cataract with heavy fortresses that had enclosures and drawbridges.3319 Sesotris III relentlessly expanded his kingdom into Nubia from 1866 to 1863 BC and erected massive river forts including Buhen Semna Shalfak and Toshka at Uronarti to gain more control over the trade routes in Lower Nubia. They also provided direct access to trade with Upper Nubia which was independent and increasingly powerful during this time. These Egyptian garrisons seemed to peacefully coexist with the local Nubian people though they did not interact much with them.79 Medjay was the name given by ancient Egypt to nomadic desert dwellers from east of the Nile river. The term was used variously to describe a location the Medjay people or their rolejob in the kingdom. They became part of the Egyptian military as scouts and minor workers before being incorporated into the Egyptian army.citation needed In the army the Medjay served as garrison troops in Egyptian fortifications in Nubia and patrolled the deserts as a kind of gendarmerie80 or elite paramilitary police force81 to prevent their fellow Medjay tribespeople from further attacking Egyptian assets in the region.81 The Medjay were often used to protect valuable areas especially royal and religious complexes. Although they are most notable for their protection of the royal palaces and tombs in Thebes and the surrounding areas the Medjay were deployed throughout Upper and Lower Egypt they were even used during Kamoses campaign against the Hyksos and became instrumental in turning the Egyptian state into a military power.8283 After the First Intermediate Period of Egypt the Medjay district was no longer mentioned in written records.84 Kerma Egyptian Empire 15501100 BCedit Upper Nubiaedit Main article Kerma culture Western Deffufa Daggers of bone and copper 17501450 BC Kerma British Museum EA55442 From the Middle Kerma phase the first Nubian kingdom to unify much of the region arose. The Classic Kerma culture named for its royal capital at Kerma was one of the earliest urban centers in the Nile region and oldest city in Africa outside of Egypt.85225051 The Kerma group spoke either languages of the Cushitic branch910 or according to more recent research NiloSaharan languages of the Eastern Sudanic branch.11121314 By 1650 BC Classic Kerma phase the kings of Kerma were powerful enough to organize the labor for monumental town walls and large mud brick structures such as the Eastern and Western Deffufas 50 by 25 by 18 meters. They also had rich tombs with possessions for the afterlife and large human sacrifices. George Andrew Reisner excavated sites at the royal city of Kerma and found distinctive Nubian architecture such as large pebble covered tombs 90 meters in diameter a large circular dwelling and a palacelike structure.2241 Classic Kerma rulers employed a good many Egyptians according to the Egyptian Execration texts.2257 Mirror. Kerma Period 17001550 BC. Kerma culture was militaristic as attested by many archers burials and bronze daggersswords found in their graves.2231 Other signs of Nubias military prowess are the frequent use of Nubians in Egypts military and Egypts need to construct numerous fortresses to defend their southern border from the Nubians.2231 Despite assimilation the Nubian elite remained rebellious during Egyptian occupation. There were numerous rebellions and military conflict occurred almost under every reign until the 
20 th dynasty.86102103 At one point Kerma came very close to conquering Egypt Egypt suffered a serious defeat at the hands of the Kingdom of Kush.8788 According to Davies head of the joint British Museum and Egyptian archaeological team the attack was so devastating that if the Kerma forces had chosen to stay and occupy Egypt they might have permanently eliminated the Egyptians and brought the nation to extinction. During Egypts Second Intermediate period the Kushites reached the height of their Bronze Age power and completely controlled southern trade with Egypt.2241 They maintained diplomatic ties with the Thebans and Hyksos until the New Kingdom pharaohs brought all of Nubia under Egyptian rule from 1500 to 1070 BC.2241 After 1070 BC there were continued hostilities with Egypt which led Nubians to concentrate in Upper Nubia.2258 Within 200 years a fully formed Kushite state based at Napata began to exert its influence on Upper Southern Egypt.225859 Lower Nubiaedit When the Middle Kingdom Egyptians pulled out of the Napata region around 1700 BC they left a lasting legacy that was merged with indigenous Cgroup customs. Egyptians remaining at the garrison towns started to merge with the Cgroup Nubians in Lower Nubia. The Cgroup quickly adopted Egyptian customs and culture as attested by their graves and lived together with the remaining Egyptians in garrison towns.2241 After Upper Nubia annexed Lower Nubia around 1700 BC the Kingdom of Kush began to control the area. At this point Cgroup Nubians and Egyptians began to proclaim their allegiance to the Kushite King in their inscriptions.2241 Egypt conquered Lower and Upper Nubia from 1500 to 1070 BC. However the Kingdom of Kush survived longer than Egypt. Egypt in Nubiaedit Nubian Prince Heqanefer bringing tribute for King Tutankhamun 
18 th dynasty Tomb of Huy. Circa 1342  c. 1325 BC The Turin Papyrus Map dating to about 1160 BC After the Theban 
17 th Dynasty New Kingdom of Egypt c. 15321070 BC expelled the Canaanite Hyksos from Egypt they turned their imperial ambitions to Nubia. By the end of Thutmose Is reign 1520 BC all of Lower Nubia had been annexed. After a long campaign Egypt also conquered the Kingdom of Kerma in Upper Nubia and held both areas until 1070 BC.861011022225 The Egyptian empire expanded into the Fourth Cataract and a new administrative center was built at Napata which became a gold and incense production area.8990 Egypt became a prime source of gold in the Middle East. The primitive working conditions for the slaves are recorded by Diodorus Siculus.91 One of the oldest maps known is of a gold mine in Nubia the Turin Papyrus Map dating to about 1160 BC it is also one of the earliest characterized road maps in existence.92 Nubians were an integral part of New Kingdom Egyptian society. Some scholars state that Nubians were included in the 
18 th Dynasty of Egypts royal family.93 AhmoseNefertari arguably the most venerated woman in Egyptian history94 was thought by some scholars such as Flinders Petrie to be of Nubian origin because she is most often depicted with black skin.66951796 The mummy of AhmoseNefertaris father Seqenenre Tao has been described as presenting tightly curled woolly hair with a slight build and strongly Nubian features.97 Some modern scholars also believe that in some depictions her skin color is indicative of her role as a goddess of resurrection since black is both the color of the fertile land of Egypt and that of the underworld.98999010094101125 However there is no known depiction of her painted during her lifetime she is represented with the same light skin as other represented individuals in tomb TT15 before her deification the earliest black skin depiction appears in tomb TT161 c. 150 years after her death.111223745101125 Egyptologist Barbara Lesko wrote in 1996 that AhmoseNefertari was sometimes portrayed by later generations as having been black although her coffin portrait gives her the typical light yellow skin of women.102 In 2009 Egyptologist Elena Vassilika noting that in a wooden statuette of the queen now at the Museo Egizio the face is painted black but the arms and feet are light in color argued that the reason for the black coloring in that case was religious and not genetic.103789 In 10981088 BC Thebes was the scene of a civil warlike conflict between the High Priest of Amun of Thebes Amenhotep and the Viceroy of Kush Panehesy  the Nubian. It was chaotic and many tombs were plundered. Instead of sending soldiers to restore order Ramesses XI put Panehesy in control of that areas military and appointed him Director of Granaries. Panehesy stationed his troops in Thebes to protect the city from thieves but it resembled a military occupation of Thebes to the High Priest which later led to the Civil war in Thebes.86104105 By 1082 BC Ramesses XI finally sent help to the High Priest. Panehesy continued his revolt and the city of Thebes suffered from war famine and plunderings.86106 Panehesy initially succeeded and the High Priest fled Thebes. Panehesy pursued the High Priest as far as Middle Egypt before Egyptian forces pushed Panehesy and his troops out of Egypt and into Lower Nubia.86106 Ramesses sent new leadership to Thebes Herihor was named the new High Priest of Thebes and effectively King of Southern Egypt and Paiankh was named the new Viceroy of Kush. Paiankh recaptured former Egyptian holdings in Lower Nubia as far as the second Nile cataract but could not defeat Panehesy in Lower Nubia who ruled the area until his death.86106 Herihors descendants became rulers of Egypts 
21 st and 
22 nd Dynasties. Napatan Empire 750542 BCedit Main article Kingdom of Kush Pyramids of Kushite rulers at Nuri Pyramid of Taharqa at Nuri  
51.7 
5 m in side length and possibly as much as 
50 m high was the largest built in Sudan.1 Pharaoh Taharqa of Ancient Egypts 
25 th Dynasty. Ashmolean Museum Oxford UK There are competing theories on the origins of the Kushite kings of the 
25 th Dynasty104 some scholars believe they were Nubian officials that learned state level organization by administering Egyptianheld Nubia from 1500 to 1070 BC2259 such as the rebel Viceroy of Kush Panehesy who ruled Upper Nubia and some of Lower Nubia after Egyptian forces withdrew.86110 Other scholars believe they are descended from families of the Egyptianized Nubian elite supported by Egyptian priests or settlers.105106107104 Children of elite Nubian families were sent to be educated in Egypt then returned to Kush to be appointed in bureaucratic positions to ensure their loyalty. During the Egyptian occupation of Nubia there were temple towns with Egyptian cults but production and redistribution was based mostly on indigenous social structures.86111 The El Kurru chiefdom likely played a major role in the development of the Kingdom of Kush due to its access to gold producing areas control of caravan routes86112 more arable land and participation in international trade.86121 There can be no doubt that elKurru was the burial place of the ancestors of the TwentyFifth Dynasty.86112 The early elKurru burials resemble Nubian KermaCgroup traditions contracted body circular stone structures burial on a bed.86121 However by 880815 BC Nubian burials at elKurru became more Egyptian in style with mastabas or pyramid on mastabas chapels and rectangular enclosures.86117121122 Alara the first elKurru prince and his successor Kashta were buried at elKurru.86123 Later documents mention Alara as the 
25 th Dynastys founder and central to a myth of the origins of the kingdom.86124126 Alaras sister was the priestess of Amun which created a system of royal secession and an ideology of royal power in which Kushite concepts and practice were united with contemporary Egyptian concepts of kingship.86144 Later Kashtas daughter the Kushite princess Amenirdis was installed as Gods Wife of Amun Elect and later Divine Adoratrice effectively governor of Upper Egypt which signaled the Kushite conquest of Egyptian territories.86148 The Napatan Empire ushered in the age of Egyptian archaism or a return to a historical past which was embodied by a concentrated effort at religious renewal and restoration of Egypts holy places.86169 Piye expanded the Temple of Amun at Jebel Barkal35 by adding an immense colonnaded forecourt.86163164 Shabaka restored the great Egyptian monuments and temples unlike his Libyan predecessors.86167169 Taharqa enriched Thebes on a monumental scale.86 At Karnak the Sacred Lake structures the kiosk in the first court and the colonnades at the temple entrance are all built by Taharqa and Mentuemhet. In addition to architecture the Kingdom of Kush was deeply influenced by Egyptian culture.108109110 By 780 BC Amun was the main god of Kush and intense contacts with Thebes were maintained.86144 Kush used the methods of Egyptian art and writing.111 The Nubian elite adopted many Egyptian customs and gave their children Egyptian names. Although some Nubian customs and beliefs e.g. burial practices continued to be practiced86111 Egyptianization dominated in ideas practices and iconography.112 The cultural Egyptianization of Nubia was at its highest levels at the times of both Kashta and Piye.113 Nubia in Egyptedit Main article Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Kushite heartland and Kushite Empire of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt circa 700 BC.114115 Taharqas kiosk and column Karnak temple Kashta peacefully became King of Upper and Lower Egypt with his daughter Amendiris as Divine Adoratrice of Amun in Thebes.86144146 Rulers of the 
23 rd Dynasty withdrew from Thebes to Heracleopolis which avoided conflict with the new Kushite rulers of Thebes. Under Kashtas reign the Kushite elite and professional classes became significantly Egyptianized. The citystate of Napata was the spiritual capital of Kush and it was from there that Piye spelled Piankhi or Piankhy in older works invaded and took control of Egypt.116 Piye personally led the attack on Egypt and recorded his victory in a lengthy hieroglyphic filled stele called the Stele of Victory.86166 Piyes success in achieving the double kingship after generations of Kushite planning resulted from Kushite ambition political skill and the Theban decision to reunify Egypt in this particular way and not Egypts utter exhaustion as frequently suggested in Egyptological studies.35 Due to archaism Piye mostly used the royal titulary of Tuthmosis III but changed the Horus name from Strong bull appearing crowned in Thebes to Strong bull appearing in Napata to announce that the Kushites had reversed history and conquered their former Thebaid Egyptian conquerors.86154 He also revived one of the greatest features of the Old and Middle Kingdoms pyramid construction. As an energetic builder he constructed the oldest known pyramid at the royal burial site of ElKurru. According to the revised chronology Shebitku brought the entire Nile Valley as far as the Delta under the empire of Kush and is reputed to have had Bocchoris dynast of Sais burnt to death.11786166167 Shabaka transferred the capital to Memphis.86166 Shebitkus successor Taharqa was crowned in Memphis in 690 BC8633 and ruled Upper and Lower Egypt as Pharaoh from Tanis in the Delta.118117 Excavations at elKurru and studies of horse skeletons indicate the finest horses used in Kushite and Assyrian warfare were bred in and exported from Nubia. Horses and chariots were key to the Kushite war machine.86157158 Taharqas reign was a prosperous time in the empire with a particularly large Nile river flood and abundant crops and wine.11986 Taharqas inscriptions indicate that he gave large amounts of gold to the temple of Amun at Kawa.120 His army undertook successful military campaigns as attested by the list of conquered Asiatic principalities from the Mut temple at Karnak and conquered peoples and countries Libyans Shasu nomads Phoenicians Khor in Palestine from Sanam temple inscriptions.86 Lszl Trk mentions the military success was due to Taharqas efforts to strengthen the army through daily training in longdistance running and Assyrias preoccupation with Babylon and Elam.86 Taharqa also built military settlements at the Semna and Buhen forts and the fortified site of Qasr Ibrim.86 Imperial ambitions of the Mesopotamianbased Assyrian Empire made war with the 
25 th Dynasty inevitable. Taharqa conspired with Levantine kingdoms against Assyria121 in 701 BC Taharqa and his army aided Judah and King Hezekiah in withstanding a siege by King Sennacherib of the Assyrians 2 Kings 199 Isaiah 3
79.1 22 There are various theories Taharqas army123 disease divine intervention Hezekiahs surrender Herodotus mice theory as to why the Assyrians failed to take Jerusalem and withdrew to Assyria.124 Sennacheribs annals record Judah was forced into tribute after the siege and Sennacherib became the ruler of the region125 However this is contradicted by Khors frequent utilization of an Egyptian system of weights for trade and the twentyyear cessation in Assyrias pattern of repeatedly invading Khor as Assyrians had before 701 and after Sennacheribs death.126127 In 681 BC Sennacherib was murdered by his own sons in Babylon. In 679 BC Sennacheribs successor King Esarhaddon campaigned in Khor destroyed Sidon and forced Tyre into tribute in 677676 BC. Esarhaddon invaded Egypt proper in 674 BC but according to Babylonian records Taharqa and his army outright defeated the Assyrians.128 In 672 BC Taharqa brought reserve troops from Kush as mentioned in rock inscriptions.86 Taharqas Egypt still had influence in Khor during this period as Tyres King Balu put his trust upon his friend Taharqa. Further evidence was Ashkelons alliance with Egypt and Esarhaddons inscription asking if the KushiteEgyptian forces plan and strive to wage war in any way and if the Egyptian forces will defeat Esarhaddon at Ashkelon.129 However Taharqa was defeated in Egypt in 671 BC when Esarhaddon conquered Northern Egypt captured Memphis and imposed tribute before withdrawing.118 Pharaoh Taharqa escaped to the south but Esarhaddon captured the Pharaohs family including Prince NesAnhuret and the royal wives86 and sent them to Assyria. In 669 BC Taharqa reoccupied Memphis and the Delta and recommenced intrigues with the king of Tyre.118 Esarhaddon led his army to Egypt again and after his death in 668 BC command passed to Ashurbanipal. Ashurbanipal and the Assyrians defeated Taharqa again and advanced as far south as Thebes but direct Assyrian control was not established.118 The rebellion was stopped and Ashurbanipal appointed Necho I who had been king of the city Sais as his vassal ruler in Egypt. Nechos son Psamtik I was educated at the Assyrian capital of Nineveh during Esarhaddons reign.citation needed As late as 665 BC the vassal rulers of Sais Mendes and Pelusium were still making overturesa to Taharqa in Kush.86 The vassals plot was uncovered by Ashurbanipal and all rebels but Necho of Sais were executed.86 Taharqas successor Tantamani sailed north from Napata with a large army to Thebes where he was ritually installed as the king of Egypt.86185 From Thebes Tantamani began his reconquest and regained control of Egypt as far north as Memphis.86185118 Tantamanis dream stele states that he restored order from the chaos where royal temples and cults were not being maintained.86185 After conquering Sais and killing Assyrias vassal Necho I in Memphis some local dynasts formally surrendered while others withdrew to their fortresses.86185 The Kushites had influence over their northern neighbors for nearly 100 years until they were repelled by the invading Assyrians. The Assyrians installed the native 
26 th Dynasty of Egypt under Psamtik I and they permanently forced the Kushites out of Egypt around 590 BC.130121122 The heirs of the Kushite empire established their new capital at Napata which was also sacked by the Egyptians in 592 BC. The Kushite kingdom survived for another 900 years after being pushed south to Mero. The Egyptianized culture of Nubia grew increasingly Africanized after the fall of the 
25 th Dynasty until Queen Amanishakhete acceded in 45 BC.citation needed She temporarily arrested the loss of Egyptian culture but then it continued unchecked.113 Meroitic 542 BC400 ADedit Main article Mero Aerial view at Nubian pyramids Meroe Apedemak Temple at Naqa Due to pressure from Assyrians and Egyptians Mero 800 BC  c.350 AD became the southern capital of the Kingdom of Kush.86 According to partially deciphered Meroitic texts the name of the city was Medewi or Bedewi. Mero was in southern Nubia by the east bank of the Nile about 6 km northeast of the Kabushiya station near Shendi Sudan and about 200 km northeast of Khartoum. Mero is mentioned in firstcentury AD Periplus of the Erythraean Sea farther inland in the country towards the west there lies a city called Meroe. In fifthcentury BC Greek historian Herodotus described it as a great city...said to be the mother city of the other Ethiopians.131132 Together Musawwarat esSufra Naqa and Mero formed the Island of Meroe. The towns importance gradually increased from the beginning of the Meroitic Period especially from the reign of Arakamani c. 280 BC when the royal burial ground was transferred to Mero from Napata Jebel Barkal. Excavations revealed evidence of important high ranking Kushite burials from the Napatan Period c. 800  c. 280 BC in the vicinity of the settlement called the Western cemetery. They buried their kings in small pyramids with steeply sloped sides that were based on New Kingdom Viceroy designs.105 At its peak the rulers of Mero controlled the Nile Valley over a northsouth straightline distance of more than 1000 km 620 mi.133 People of the Meroitic period preserved many ancient Egyptian customs but were unique in many respects. The Meroitic language was spoken in Mero and Sudan during the Meroitic period attested from 300 BC before becoming extinct around 400 AD. They developed their own form of writing by using Egyptian hieroglyphs before switching to a cursive alphabetic script with 23 signs.134 It was split into two types Meroitic Cursive which was written with a stylus and used for general recordkeeping and Meroitic Hieroglyphic which was carved in stone or used for royal or religious documents. It is not well understood due to the scarcity of bilingual texts.clarification needed The earliest inscription in Meroitic writing dates from between 180 and 170 BC. These hieroglyphics were found engraved on the temple of Queen Shanakdakhete. Meroitic Cursive is written horizontally and is read from right to left like all Semitic orthographies.135 The Meroitic people worshiped the Egyptian gods as well as their own such as Apedemak and the lionson of Sekhmet or Bast. Mero was the base of a flourishing kingdom whose wealth was centered around a strong iron industry and international trade with India and China.136 Metalworking is believed to have happened in Mero possibly through bloomeries and blast furnaces.137 The centralized control of production within the Meroitic empire and distribution of certain crafts and manufactures may have been politically important. Other important sites were Musawwarat esSufra and Naqa. Musawwarat esSufra which is now a UNESCO World Heritage Site was constructed in sandstone. Its main features were the Great Enclosure the Lion Temple of Apedemak 1495 meters and the Great Reservoir. The Great Enclosure is the main structure of the site. Much of the large labyrinthlike building complex which covers approximately 45000 m2 was erected in thirdcentury BC.138 The scheme of the site is so far without parallel in Nubia and ancient Egypt. According to Hintze the complicated ground plan of this extensive complex of buildings is without parallel in the entire Nile valley.139 The maze of courtyards includes three possible temples passages low walls that prevent any contact with the outside world about 20 columns ramps and two reservoirs.140141 There is some debate about the purpose of the buildings with earlier suggestions including a college a hospital and an elephanttraining camp.142 The Lion Temple was constructed by Arnekhamani and bears inscriptions in Egyptian hieroglyphs representations of elephants and lions on the rear inside wall and reliefs of Apedemak depicted as a threeheaded god on the outside walls.143 The Great Reservoir is a hafir to retain as much as possible of the rainfall of the short wet season. It is 250 m in diameter and 
6.3  m deep.144 Kandake often Latinised as Candace was the Meroitic term for the sister of the king of Kush who due to matrilineal succession would bear the next heir making her a queen mother. According to scholar Basil Davidson at least four Kushite queens  Amanirenas Amanishakheto Nawidemak and Amanitore  probably spent part of their lives in Musawwarat esSufra.145 Pliny writes that the Queen of the Ethiopians bore the title Candace and indicates that the Ethiopians had conquered ancient Syria and the Mediterranean.146 In 25 BC the Kush kandake Amanirenas as reported by Strabo attacked the city of Syene known as Aswan today within the territory of the Roman Empire Emperor Augustus destroyed the city of Napata in retaliation.147148 In the New Testament biblical account a treasury official of Candace queen of the Ethiopians returning from a trip to Jerusalem met with Philip the Evangelist and was baptized.149150 Achaemenid periodedit Kuiya soldier of the Achaemenid army circa 480 BC. Xerxes I tomb relief. Marble portrait of a Nubian ca. 120100 BC The Achaemenids occupied the Kushan kingdom possibly from the time of Cambyses c.530 BC and more probably from the time of Darius I 550486 BC who mentions the conquest of Kush Kuiya in his inscriptions.151152 Herodotus mentioned an invasion of Kush by the Achaemenid ruler Cambyses II however he mentions that his expedition failed miserably in the desert.1186566 Derek Welsby states scholars have doubted that this Persian expedition ever took place but... archaeological evidence suggests that the fortress of Dorginarti near the second cataract served as Persias southern boundary.1186566 Ptolemaic periodedit The Greek Ptolemaic Kingdom under Ptolemy II Philadelphus invaded Nubia in 275 BC and annexed the northern twelve miles of this territory subsequently known as the Dodekaschoinos twelvemile land.153 Throughout the 1
60 s and 1
50 s BC Ptolemy VI has also reasserted Ptolemaic control over the northern part of Nubia.154155 There is no record of conflict between the Kushites and Ptolemies. However there was a serious revolt at the end of Ptolemy IVs reign and the Kushites likely tried to interfere in Ptolemaic affairs.11867 It is suggested that this led to Ptolemy V defacing the name of Arqamani on inscriptions at Philae.11867 Arqamani constructed a small entrance hall to the temple built by Ptolemy IV at Pselchis and constructed a temple at Philae to which Ptolemy contributed an entrance hall.11866 There is evidence of Ptolemaic occupation as far south as the Second Cataract but recent finds at Qasr Ibrim such as the total absence of Ptolemaic pottery have cast doubts on the effectiveness of the occupation.11867 Dynastic struggles led to the Ptolemies abandoning the area so the Kushites reasserted their control...with Qasr Ibrim occupied by the Kushites and other locations perhaps garrisoned.11867 Roman periodedit According to Welsby after the Romans assumed control of Egypt they negotiated with the Kushites at Philae and drew the southern border of Roman Egypt at Aswan.11867 Theodore Mommsen and Welsby state the Kingdom of Kush became a client Kingdom which was similar to the situation under Ptolemaic rule of Egypt. Kushite ambition and excessive Roman taxation are two theories for a revolt supported by Kushite armies.1186768 The ancient historians Strabo and Pliny give accounts of the conflict with Roman Egypt. Meroitic prince smiting his enemies early first century AD Strabo describes a war with the Romans in firstcentury BC. He stated that the Kushites sacked Aswan with an army of 30000 men and destroyed imperial statues...at Philae.11868 A fine overlifesize bronze head of the emperor Augustus was found buried in Meroe in front of a temple.11868 After the initial victories of Kandake or Candace Amanirenas against Roman Egypt the Kushites were defeated and Napata was sacked.156 Napatas fall was not a crippling blow to the Kushites and did not frighten Candace enough to prevent her from again engaging in combat with the Roman military. In 22 BC a large Kushite force moved northward with the intention of attacking Qasr Ibrim.157 Alerted to the advance Petronius again marched south and managed to reach Qasr Ibrim and bolster its defences before the invading Kushites arrived. Welsby states after a Kushite attack on Primis Qasr Ibrim1186970 the Kushites sent ambassadors to negotiate a peace settlement with Petronius which succeeded on favourable terms.156 Trade between the two nations increased and the Roman Egyptian border being extended to Hiera Sykaminos Maharraqa.15714911870 This arrangement guaranteed peace for most of the next 300 years and there is no definite evidence of further clashes.11870 During this time different parts of the region divided into smaller groups with individual leaders or generals each commanding small armies of mercenaries. They fought for control of what is now Nubia and its surrounding territories leaving the entire region weak and vulnerable to attack. Mero would eventually be defeated by the new rising Kingdom of Aksum to their south ruled by King Ezana. A stele of Geez of an unnamed ruler of Aksum thought to be Ezana was found at the site of Mero. From his description in Greek he was King of the Aksumites and the Omerites i.e. of Aksum and Himyar. It is likely this king ruled sometime around 330 AD. While some authorities interpret these inscriptions as proof that the Axumites destroyed the kingdom of Meroe others note that archeological evidence points to an economic and political decline in Meroe around 3
00.1 58 Moreover some view the stele as military aid from Aksum to Meroe to quell the revolt and rebellion. From then on the Romans referred to the area as Nobatia. Christian Nubiaedit Main articles Makuria Nobadia and Alodia Wall painting from Faras first half of 
11 th c CE National Museum in Warsaw Around 350 AD the area was invaded by the Kingdom of Aksum and the Meroitic kingdom collapsed. Three smaller Christian kingdoms replaced it the northernmost was Nobatia capital Pachoras now modernday Faras Egypt between the first and second cataract of the Nile River in the middle was Makuria capital Old Dongola and southernmost was Alodia capital Soba. King Silky of Nobatia defeated the Blemmyes and recorded his victory in a Greek language inscription carved in the wall of the temple of Talmis modern Kalabsha around 500 AD. Christianity had been introduced to the region by the fourth century Bishop Athanasius of Alexandria consecrated Marcus as bishop of Philae before his death in 373 AD. John of Ephesus records that a Miaphysite priest named Julian converted the king and his nobles of Nobatia around 545 AD. He also writes that the kingdom of Alodia was converted around 569. However John of Biclarum wrote that the kingdom of Makuria converted to Catholicism the same year suggesting that John of Ephesus might be mistaken. Further doubt is cast on Johnsclarification needed testimony by an entry in the chronicle of the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria Eutychius of Alexandria which states that in 719 AD the church of Nubia transferred its allegiance from the Greek to the Coptic Orthodox Church. After the official Christianization of Nubia the Isis cult of Philae remained for the sake of the Nubians. The edict of Theodosius I 390 AD was not enforced at Philae. Later attempts to suppress the cult of Isis led to armed clashes between the Nubians and Romans. Finally in 453 AD a treaty recognizing the traditional religious rights of Nubians at Philae was signed. By the seventh century Makuria expanded and became the dominant power in the region. It was strong enough to halt the southern expansion of Islam after the Arabs had taken Egypt. After several failed invasions the new Muslim rulers agreed to a treaty with Dongola called Baqt to allow peaceful coexistence and trade contingent on the Nubians making an annual payment consisting of slaves and other tributes to the Islamic Governor at Aswan it guaranteed that any runaway slaves were returned to Nubia.159 The treaty was kept for six hundred years.159 Throughout this period Nubias main exports were dates and slaves though ivory and gold were also exchanged for Egyptian ceramics textiles and glass.160 Over time the influx of Arab traders introduced Islam to Nubia and it gradually supplanted Christianity. After an interruption in the annual tribute of slaves the Egyptian Mamluk ruler invaded in 1272 and declared himself sovereign over half of Nubia.159 While there are records of a bishop Timothy at Qasr Ibrim in 1372 his see included Faras. It is also clear that the cathedral of Dongola had been converted to a mosque in 13
17.1 61 The influx of Arabs and Nubians to Egypt and Sudan had contributed to the suppression of the Nubian identity following the collapse of the last Nubian kingdom around 1504. A vast majority of the Nubian population is currently Muslim and the Arabic language is their main medium of communication in addition to their indigenous Nubian language. The unique characteristic of Nubian is shown in their culture dress dances traditions and music. Islamic Nubiaedit Main article Islamization of Sudan Further information TurcoEgyptian conquest of Sudan 18201824  Invasion of Nubia In the fourteenth century the Dongolan government collapsed and the region was divided and dominated by Arabs. Several Arab invasions into the region and the establishment of smaller kingdoms occurred over the next few centuries. Northern Nubia was brought under Egyptian control while the south was controlled by the Kingdom of Sennar in the sixteenth century. The entire region came under Egyptian control during Muhammad Alis rule in the early nineteenth century and later became a joint AngloEgyptian condominium. 
21 stcentury archaeologyedit In 2003 archaeologist Charles Bonnet led a team of Swiss archaeologists to excavate near Kerma and discovered a cache of monumental black granite statues of the Pharaohs of the 
25 th Dynasty of Egypt now displayed at the Kerma Museum. Among the sculptures are ones belonging to the dynastys last two pharaohs Taharqa and Tanoutamon whose statues are described as masterpieces that rank among the greatest in art history.162 Craniometric analysis of Kerma fossils that compared them to various other early populations inhabiting the Nile Valley and Maghreb found that they were morphologically close to Predynastic Egyptians from Naqada 40003200 BC.163 Dental trait analysis of Kerma fossils found affinities with various populations inhabiting the Nile Valley Horn of Africa and Northeast Africa especially to other ancient populations from the central and northern Sudan. Among the sampled populations the Kerma people were overall nearest to the Kush populations in Upper Nubia the AGroup culture bearers of Lower Nubia and Ethiopians.164 Contemporary issuesedit Further information Nubian people Nubia was divided between Egypt and Sudan after colonialism ended and the Republic of Egypt was established in 1953 and the Republic of Sudan seceded from Egypt in 1956. In the early19
70 s many Egyptian and Sudanese Nubians were forcibly relocated to make room for Lake Nasser after dams were constructed at Aswan.165 Nubian villages can be found north of Aswan on the west bank of the Nile and on Elephantine Island. Many Nubians now live in large cities like Cairo and Khartoum.165 Ancient DNAedit In 2014 a male infant skeleton was recovered during an excavation in what is presentday Wadi Halfa from the Christian Period 5001400 C.E. located near the Second Cataract of the Nile in the Republic of the Sudan. The results from the Principle component analysis PCA had the individual placed between African and European clusters. Furthermore the individual was assigned to L
5 a
1 a a branch of the ancient L5 haplogroup with origins in East Africa.166 Sirak et al. 2021 obtained and analyzed the whole genomes of 66 individuals from the site of Kulubnarti situated in northern Nubia between the 
2 nd and 
3 rd cataract near the modern Egyptian border and dated to the Christian period between 650 and 1000 CE. The samples were obtained from two cemeteries. The samples genetic profile was found to be a mixture between West Eurasian and Sub Saharan Dinkarelated ancestries with 60 West Eurasian related ancestry that likely came from ancient Egyptians but ultimately resembles that found in Bronze or Iron Age Levantines and 40 Dinkarelated ancestry. The two cemeteries showed minimal differences in their West EurasianDinka ancestry proportions. These findings in addition to multiple cross cemetery relatives that the analyses have revealed indicate that people of both the R and S cemeteries were part of the same population despite the archaeological and anthropological differences between the two burials showing social stratification. Modern Nubians despite their superficial resemblance to the Kulubnarti Nubians on the PCA were not found to be descended from Kulubnarti Nubians without additional later admixtures. Modern Nubians were found to have an increase in SubSaharan ancestry along with a change in their west Eurasian ancestry from that which was found in the ancient samples.167 A sample from historic Lower Nubia in the Nubian site of Sayala during the 
3 rd
6 th Century AD belonged to mtDNA haplogroup J
1 c.168 In 2022 DNA was sequenced from the hair of a Kerma period individual 4000 BP and the results revealed close genetic affinity to early pastoralists from the Rift Valley in eastern Africa during the Pastoral Neolithic.169 Nubian Imagesedit Nubian terracotta female figurine from the Neolithic period ca. 35003100 BC Brooklyn Museum Nubian king with bow Buhen Fortress 1650 BC Univ. of Chicago Museum Nubian Tribute Presented to the King Tomb of Huy MET DT221112 Nubians bringing tribute for King Tut Tomb of Huy Temple of Amun Jebel Barkal Entrance to Great Enclosure Musawwarat esSufra Column and elephant  part of temple complex in Musawwarat esSufra Pyramid of Amanishakheto Jewelry of Kandake Amanishakheto Copy of relief from Naqa depicting Amanitore second from left Natakamani second from right and two princes approaching a threeheaded Apedemak. The Archer King an unknown king of Meroe 
3 rd century BC. National Museum of Sudan. Bishop Petros Christian Nubia The Relief of Gebel Sheikh Suleiman probably shows the victory of an early Pharaoh possibly Djer over AGroup Nubians circa 3000 BC. Now gone Christian Nubian wall painting in the Temple of Kalabsha See alsoedit Kerma culture List of monarchs of Kerma Kingdom of Kush List of monarchs of Kush Napata Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Mero Kandake Queens of Meroe Military of ancient Nubia Nubian pyramids Nubiology Merowe Dam Aethiopia Notesedit  Elshazly Hesham. Kerma and the royal cache.  Reinisch Leo 1879. Die NubaSprache. Wien. p. 271.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Appiah Anthony Gates Henry Louis 2005. Africana The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195170559.  Janice Kamrin Adela Oppenheim. The Land of Nubia. www.metmuseum.org. Retrieved 20200731.  SudanHistory.org.  Raue Dietrich 20190604. Handbook of Ancient Nubia. Walter de Gruyter GmbH  Co KG. ISBN 9783110420388.  a b Elmar Edel Zu den Inschriften auf den Jahreszeitenreliefs der Weltkammer aus dem Sonnenheiligtum des Niuserre Teil 2. In Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gttingen Nr. 5. Vandenhoeck  Ruprecht Gttingen 1964 pp. 118119.  a b Christian Leitz et al. Lexikon der gyptischen Gtter und Gtterbezeichnungen Bd. 6 Hs. Peeters Leuven 2002 ISBN 9042911514 p. 697.  a b BechausGerst Marianne Blench Roger 2014. Kevin MacDonald ed.. The Origins and Development of African Livestock Archaeology Genetics Linguistics and Ethnography  Linguistic evidence for the prehistory of livestock in Sudan 2000. Routledge. p. 453. ISBN 9781135434168. Retrieved 15 September 2014.  a b Behrens Peter 1986. Libya Antiqua Report and Papers of the Symposium Organized by Unesco in Paris 16 to 18 January 1984  Language and migrations of the early Saharan cattle herders the formation of the Berber branch. Unesco. p. 30. ISBN 9231023764. Retrieved 14 September 2014.  a b Rilly C 2010. Recent Research on Meroitic the Ancient Language of Sudan PDF.  a b Rilly C January 2016. The Wadi Howar Diaspora and its role in the spread of East Sudanic languages from the fourth to the first millennia BCE. Faits de Langues. 47 151163. doi
10.1 1631958951404701900000010. S
2 CID 134352296.  a b Rilly C 2008. Enemy brothers. Kinship and relationship between Meroites and Nubians Noba. Polish Centre for Mediterranean Archaeology. doi
10.3 13
38 uw.9788323533269.pp.211226. ISBN 9788323533269.  a b Cooper J 2017. Toponymic Strata in Ancient Nubian placenames in the Third and Second Millennium BCE a view from Egyptian Records. Dotawo A Journal of Nubian Studies. 4. Archived from the original on 20200523.  Edwards David 2004. The Nubian Past. Oxon Routledge. pp. 2 90 106. ISBN 9780415369886.  Garcea Elena A.A. 2020. The Prehistory of the Sudan. SpringerBriefs in Archaeology. doi
10.1 0079783030471859. ISBN 9783030471873. ISSN 18616623. S
2 CID 226447119.  Osypiski Piotr Osypiska Marta Gautier Achilles 2011. Affad 23 a Late Middle Palaeolithic Site With Refitted Lithics and Animal Remains in the Southern Dongola Reach Sudan. Journal of African Archaeology. 9 2 177188. doi
10.3 2132191578410186. ISSN 16121651. JSTOR 43135549. OCLC 7787802958. S
2 CID 161078189.  Osypiski Piotr 2020. Unearthing PanAfrican crossroad Significance of the middle Nile valley in prehistory PDF. National Science Centre.  Osypiska Marta 2021. Animals in the history of the Middle Nile PDF. From Faras to Soba 60 years of SudanesePolish cooperation in saving the heritage of Sudan. Polish Centre of Mediterranean ArchaeologyUniversity of Warsaw. p. 460. ISBN 9788395336256. OCLC 1374884636.  Osypiska Marta Osypiski Piotr 2021. Exploring the oldest huts and the first cattle keepers in Africa PDF. From Faras to Soba 60 years of SudanesePolish cooperation in saving the heritage of Sudan. Polish Centre of Mediterranean ArchaeologyUniversity of Warsaw. pp. 187188. ISBN 9788395336256. OCLC 1374884636.  Salvatori Sandro 20121201. Disclosing Archaeological Complexity of the Khartoum Mesolithic New Data at the Site and Regional Level. African Archaeological Review. 29 4 399472. doi
10.1 0
07 s1043701291197. ISSN 15729842. S
2 CID 254195716.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae OConnor David 1993. Ancient Nubia Egypts Rival in Africa. University of Pennsylvania USA University Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. pp. 1112. ISBN 0924171286.  Dr. Stuart Tyson Smith. ucsb.edu.  PlanetQuest The History of Astronomy  Retrieved on 20070829  Late Neolithic megalithic structures at Nabta Playa  by Fred Wendorf 1998  Vogel Joseph 1997. Encyclopedia of precolonial Africa  archaeology history languages cultures and environments. Walnut Creek Calif. AltaMira Press. pp. 465472. ISBN 0761989021.  Davidson Basil 1991. Africa in history  themes and outlines Rev. and expanded ed.. New York Collier Books. p. 15. ISBN 0684826674.  Keita Shomarka and Boyce A.J. December 1996. The Geographical Origins and Population Relationships of Early Ancient Egyptians In Egypt in Africa Theodore Celenko ed. Indiana University Press. pp. 2033. ISBN 9780253332691.cite book CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  Gatto Maria C. The Nubian Pastoral Culture as Link between Egypt and Africa A View from the Archaeological Record.  Wengrow David Dee Michael Foster Sarah Stevenson Alice Ramsey Christopher Bronk March 2014. Cultural convergence in the Neolithic of the Nile Valley a prehistoric perspective on Egypts place in Africa. Antiquity. 88 339 95111. doi
10.1 0
17 S00035
98 X00050249. ISSN 00035
98 X. S
2 CID 49229774.  Smith Stuart Tyson 1 January 2018. Gift of the Nile Climate Change the Origins of Egyptian Civilization and Its Interactions within Northeast Africa. Across the Mediterranean  Along the Nile Studies in Egyptology Nubiology and Late Antiquity Dedicated to Lszl Trk. Budapest 325345.  E. Pischikova J. P. Budka  K. Grifn Eds. 2018. Wildung D African in Egyptian Art In Thebes in the first millennium BC  art and archaeology of the Kushite period and beyond. London. pp. 300380. ISBN 9781906137595.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  a b c d e Haynes Joyce 1992. Nubia Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. Boston Massachusetts USA Museum of Fine Arts. pp. 859. ISBN 0878463623.  Shaw Ian Jameson Robert eds. 2002. A Dictionary of Archaeology. Wiley. p. 433. ISBN 9780631235835.  a b c d Emberling Geoff 2011. Kim Julienne ed.. Nubia Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. New York University The Institute for the Study of the Ancient World. pp. 557. ISBN 9780615481029.  Hafsaas Henriette January 2009. Hierarchy and heterarchy  the earliest crosscultural trade along the Nile. Connecting South and North. Sudan Studies from Bergen in Honour of Mahmoud Salih. Retrieved 20160608.  Mohktar Gamal 1981. General History of Africa volume 2 Ancient Civilizations of Africa Unesco General History of Africa. London Heinemann Educational Books. p. 148. ISBN 9780435948054.  Williams Bruce 2011. Before the Pyramids. Chicago Illinois Oriental Institute Museum Publications. pp. 8990. ISBN 9781885923820.  The Nubia Salvage Project  The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. oi.uchicago.edu.  OConnor David Bourke Silverman David P 1995. Ancient Egyptian Kingship. BRILL. ISBN 9789004100411. Retrieved 20160528.  OConnor David 2011. Before the Pyramids. Chicago Illinois Oriental Institute Museum Publications. pp. 162163. ISBN 9781885923820.  Shaw Ian 20031023. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. OUP Oxford. p. 63. ISBN 9780191604621. Retrieved 20160528.  D. Wengrow 20060525. The Archaeology of Early Egypt Social Transformations in NorthEast Africa . Cambridge University Press. p. 167. ISBN 9780521835862. Retrieved 20160528.  Peter Mitchell 2005. African Connections An Archaeological Perspective on Africa and the Wider World. Rowman Altamira. p. 69. ISBN 9780759102590. Retrieved 20160528.  Lszl Trk 2009. Between Two Worlds The Frontier Region Between Ancient Nubia and Egypt . BRILL. p. 577. ISBN 9789004171978. Retrieved 20160528.  Bianchi Robert Steven 2004. Daily Life of the Nubians. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 9780313325014. Retrieved 20160528.  Wengrow David 2023. Ancient Egypt and Nubian Kings of Flood and Kings of Rain in Great Kingdoms of Africa John Parker eds. S.l. THAMES  HUDSON. pp. 140. ISBN 9780500252529.  Frank J.Yurco 1996. The Origin and Development of Ancient Nile Valley Writing in Egypt in Africa Theodore Celenko ed. Indianapolis Ind. Indianapolis Museum of Art. pp. 3435. ISBN 0936260645.  Lobban Richard A. Jr. 20 October 2020. Historical Dictionary of Medieval Christian Nubia. Rowman  Littlefield. p. 163. ISBN 9781538133415.  Hendrickx Stan Darnell John Coleman Gatto Maria Carmela December 2012. The earliest representations of royal power in Egypt the rock drawings of Nag elHamdulab Aswan. Antiquity. 86 334 10681083. doi
10.1 0
17 S00035
98 X00048250. ISSN 00035
98 X. S
2 CID 53631029.  Emberling Geoff 2011. Nubia Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. New York Institute for the study of the ancient world. p. 8. ISBN 9780615481029.  An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt by Kathryn A. Bard 2015 p. 110  Hill Jane A. 2004. Cylinder Seal Glyptic in Predynastic Egypt and Neighboring Regions. Archaeopress. ISBN 9781841715889.  Zakrzewski Sonia R. April 2007. Population continuity or population change Formation of the ancient Egyptian state. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 132 4 501509. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.20569. PMID 17295300.  Keita S. O. Y. September 1990. Studies of ancient crania from northern Africa. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 83 1 3548. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.1330830105. ISSN 00029483. PMID 2221029.  Tracy L. Prowse Nancy C. Lovell. Concordance of cranial and dental morphological traits and evidence for endogamy in ancient Egypt American Journal of Physical Anthropology Vol. 101 Issue 2 October 1996 Pages 237246  Godde Kane. A biological perspective of the relationship between Egypt Nubia and the Near East during the Predynastic period 2020. Retrieved 16 March 2022.  Keita S. O. Y. November 2005. Early Nile Valley Farmers From ElBadari Aboriginals or EuropeanAgroNostratic Immigrants Craniometric Affinities Considered With Other Data. Journal of Black Studies. 36 2 191208. doi
10.1 1770021934704265912. ISSN 00219347. S
2 CID 144482802.  Ehret Christopher 20 June 2023. Ancient Africa A Global History to 300 CE. Princeton Princeton University Press. pp. 8385. ISBN 9780691244099.  The Cambridge history of Africa. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. 19751986. pp. 500509. ISBN 9780521222150.  The Oxford history of ancient Egypt New ed.. Oxford Oxford University Press. 2003. p. 479. ISBN 0192804588.  Ancient Nubia AGroup 38003100 BC. The Oriental Institute. Retrieved 1 July 2016.  Hafsaas Henriette January 2006. The CGroup people in Lower Nubia 2500  1500 BC. Cattle pastoralists in a multicultural setting. Retrieved 20160608. cite book website ignored help  Erman  Grapow Wrterbuch der gyptischen Sprache 2 1
86.1 2  de Souza A.M. 2019. New Horizons The PanGrave Ceramic Tradition in Context. London Golden House  a b Petrie Flinders 1939. The making of Egypt. London.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link p.155  Bromiley Geoffrey William 1979. The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 9780802837820.  Lobban Richard A. 20031209. Historical Dictionary of Ancient and Medieval Nubia. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810865785.  a b Lobban Richard A. Jr. 10 April 2021. Historical Dictionary of Ancient Nubia. Rowman  Littlefield. ISBN 9781538133392.  Morris Ellen 20180806. Ancient Egyptian Imperialism. John Wiley  Sons. ISBN 9781405136778.  Wildung Dietrich. About the autonomy of the arts of ancient Sudan. In M. Honegger Ed. Nubian archaeology in the XXIst Century. pp. 105112.  F. J. Yurco The ancient Egyptians.. Biblical Archaeology Review Vol 15 no. 5 1989  General History of Africa Volume II  Ancient civilizations of Africa ed. G Moktar. UNESCO. p. 152.  Crawford Keith W. 1 December 2021. Critique of the Black Pharaohs Theme Racist Perspectives of Egyptian and KushiteNubian Interactions in Popular Media. African Archaeological Review. 38 4 695712. doi
10.1 0
07 s10437021094537. ISSN 15729842. S
2 CID 238718279.  Morris Ellen 6 August 2018. Ancient Egyptian Imperialism. John Wiley  Sons. p. 72. ISBN 9781405136778.  Van de Mieroop Marc 2021. A history of ancient Egypt Second ed.. Chichester West Sussex. p. 99. ISBN 9781119620877.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Fletcher Joann 2017. The story of Egypt  the civilization that shaped the world First Pegasus books paperback ed.. New York. pp. Chapter 12. ISBN 9781681774565.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Smith Stuart Tyson 8 October 2018. Ethnicity Constructions of Self and Other in Ancient Egypt. Journal of Egyptian History. 11 12 113146. doi
10.1 1631874166512340045. ISSN 18741665. S
2 CID 203315839.  Hafsaas Henriette January 2010. Between Kush and Egypt The CGroup people of Lower Nubia during the Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period. Between the Cataracts. Retrieved 20160608.  Bard op.cit. p. 486  a b Wilkinson op.cit. p. 147  Shaw op.cit. p. 201  Steindorff  Seele op.cit. p. 28  Gardiner op.cit. p. 76  HafsaasTsakos Henriette 2009. The Kingdom of Kush An African Centre on the Periphery of the Bronze Age World System. Norwegian Archaeological Review. 42 1 5070. doi
10.1 08000293650902978590. S
2 CID 154430884. Retrieved 20160608.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq Trk Lszl 1998. The Kingdom of Kush Handbook of the NapatanMeroitic Civilization. Leiden BRILL. pp. 132133 153184. ISBN 9004104488.  Tomb Reveals Ancient Egypts Humiliating Secret The Times London 2003  Elkabs hidden treasure. AlAhram. Archived from the original on 20090215.  James G. Cusick 5 March 2015. Studies in Culture Contact Interaction Culture Change and Archaeology. SIU Press. pp. 269. ISBN 9780809334094.  Richard Bulliet Pamela Crossley Daniel Headrick 1 January 2010. The Earth and Its Peoples. Cengage Learning. pp. 66. ISBN 0538744383.  Anne Burton 1973. Diodorus Siculus Book 1 A Commentary. BRILL. pp. 129. ISBN 9004035141.  James R. Akerman Robert W. Karrow 2007. Maps Finding Our Place in the World. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226010755.  Rawlinson George 1881. History of Ancient Egypt Vol. II. London Longmans Green and Co. p. 209.  a b Gestoso Singer Graciela. Ahmose Nefertari the Woman in Black. Terrae Antiqvae.  Mokhtar G. 1990. General History of Africa II Ancient Civilizations of Africa. Berkeley CA University of California Press. pp. 1118. ISBN 9780520066977.  Martin Bernal 1987 Black Athena Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization. The Fabrication of Ancient Greece 17851985 vol. I. New Jersey Rutgers University Press  Yurco Frank J. 1989. Were the ancient Egyptians black or white. Biblical Archaeology Review. 15 2429.  Gitton Michel 1973. Ahmose Nefertari sa vie et son culte posthume. cole Pratique des Hautes tudes 
5 e Section Sciences Religieuses. 85 82 84. doi
10.3 4
06 ephe.19
73.2 0828. ISSN 01837451.  Tyldesley Joyce. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2006. ISBN 0500051453  HodelHoenes S  Warburton D trans Life and Death in Ancient Egypt Scenes from Private Tombs in New Kingdom Thebes Cornell University Press 2000 p. 268.  a b Dodson Aidan Hilton Dyan 2004. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500051283.  The Remarkable Women of Ancient Egypt by Barbara S. Lesko page 14 B.C. Scribe Publications 1996 ISBN 9780930548131  Vassilika Elena 2009. I capolavori del Museo Egizio di Torino in Italian. Florence Fondazione Museo delle antichit egizie di Torino. ISBN 9788881179503.  a b Fage John Tordoff with William 20131023. A History of Africa. Routledge. ISBN 9781317797272.  a b Sudan  History Map Flag Government Religion  Facts. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 20200723.  Piye  king of Cush. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 20200723.  Middleton John 20150601. World Monarchies and Dynasties. Routledge. ISBN 9781317451587.  Drury Allen 1980. Egypt The Eternal Smile  Reflections on a Journey. Doubleday. ISBN 9780385001939.  Museums for Intercultural Dialogue  Statue of Iriketakana. www.unesco.org. Retrieved 20200723.  Cush Kush. www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 20200723.  statue  British Museum. The British Museum. Retrieved 20200723.  Shillington Kevin 20130704. Encyclopedia of African History 
3 Volume Set. Routledge. ISBN 9781135456696.  a b Nubia  Definition History Map  Facts. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 20200723.  Dive beneath the pyramids of Sudans black pharaohs. National Geographic. 2 July 2019. Archived from the original on July 2 2019.  The Kushite Conquest of Egypt. SudanHistory.org. 2 July 2022.  Herodotus 2003. The Histories. Penguin Books. pp. 106107 133134. ISBN 9780140449082.  a b Mokhtar G. 1990. General History of Africa. California USA University of California Press. pp. 161163. ISBN 0520066979.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Welsby Derek A. 1996. The Kingdom of Kush. London UK British Museum Press. pp. 6465. ISBN 0714109
86 X.  Welsby Derek A. 1996. The Kingdom of Kush. London UK British Museum Press. p. 158. ISBN 0714109
86 X.  Welsby Derek A. 1996. The Kingdom of Kush. London UK British Museum Press. p. 169. ISBN 0714109
86 X.  Coogan Michael David Coogan Michael D. 2001. The Oxford History of the Biblical World. Oxford Oxford University Press. p. 53. ISBN 0195139372.  Aubin Henry T. 2002. The Rescue of Jerusalem. New York NY Soho Press Inc. pp. x 141144. ISBN 1569472750.  Aubin Henry T. 2002. The Rescue of Jerusalem. New York NY Soho Press Inc. pp. x 127 129130 139152. ISBN 1569472750.  Aubin Henry T. 2002. The Rescue of Jerusalem. New York NY Soho Press Inc. pp. x 119. ISBN 1569472750.  Roux Georges 1992. Ancient Iraq Third ed.. London Penguin. ISBN 0140125
23 X.  Aubin Henry T. 2002. The Rescue of Jerusalem. New York NY Soho Press Inc. pp. x 155156. ISBN 1569472750.  Aubin Henry T. 2002. The Rescue of Jerusalem. New York NY Soho Press Inc. pp. x 152153. ISBN 1569472750.  Aubin Henry T. 2002. The Rescue of Jerusalem. New York NY Soho Press Inc. pp. x 158161. ISBN 1569472750.  Aubin Henry T. 2002. The Rescue of Jerusalem. New York NY Soho Press Inc. pp. x 159161. ISBN 1569472750.  Edwards David 2004. The Nubian Past. Oxon Routledge. pp. 2 75 7778. ISBN 9780415369886.  Herodotus 1949. Herodotus. Translated by J. Enoch Powell. Translated by Enoch Powell. Oxford Clarendon Press. pp. 121122.  Connah Graham 1987. African Civilizations Precolonial Cities and States in Tropical Africa An Archaeological Perspective. Cambridge University Press. p. 24. ISBN 9780521266666.  Adams William Yewdale 1977. Nubia Corridor to Africa. Princeton University Press. p. 302. ISBN 9780691093703.  Mero writing  digitalegypt  Fischer Steven Roger 2004. History of Writing. Reaktion Books. pp. 133134. ISBN 1861895887.  Stofferahn Steven Wood Sarah 2016 2003 Rauh Nicholas K. ed. Lecture 30 Ancient Africa CLCS 181 Classical World Civilizations student lecture notes West Lafayette IN Purdue University School of Languages and Cultures retrieved February 28 2017  Humphris Jane Charlton Michael F. Keen Jake Sauder Lee Alshishani Fareed 2018. Iron Smelting in Sudan Experimental Archaeology at The Royal City of Meroe. Journal of Field Archaeology. 43 5 399. doi
10.1 080009346
90.2 0
18.1 479085. ISSN 00934690.  The Great Enclosure  Hintze Fritz 1978. The Kingdom of Kush The Meroitic Period. The Brooklyn Museum. pp. 8993.  Zamani Project  Google Books Sudan The Bradt Travel Guide p.1312.  UNESCO Nomination document p.43.  Gilda Ferrandino and Matteo Lorenzini 
3 D Reconstruction of the Lion Temple at Musawwarat es Sufra 
3 D model and domain ontologies in The Kushite World 2015. Proceedings of the 
11 th International Conference for Meroitic StudiesVienna 14 September 2008.  Claudia Nser The Great Hafir at Musawwarat asSufra. Fieldwork of the Archaeological Mission of Humboldt University Berlin in 2005 and 2006. On Between the Cataracts. Proceedings of the 
11 th Conference of Nubian Studies. Warsaw University 27 August  2 September 2006 In Polish Centre of Mediterranean Aerchaeology University of Warsaw. PAM Supplement Series 

2.2.1 2.  Basil Davidson Old Africa Rediscovered PrenticeHall 1970.  Turner Sharon 1834. The Sacred History of the World as Displayed in the Creation and Subsequent Events to the Deluge Attempted to be Philosophically Considered in a Series of Letters to a Son. Vol. 2. Longman. pp. 480482.  FluehrLobban Carolyn August 20 1998. Nubian Queens in the Nile Valley and AfroAsiatic Cultural History PDF. Ninth International Conference for Nubian Studies. Museum of Fine Arts Boston U.S.A. Retrieved 20180607.  Budge Sir Ernest Alfred Wallis 1911. Cooks handbook for Egypt and the Egyptian Sdn. T. Cook  Son. p. 737.  Isaiah 5378  Acts 839  Dandamaev M. A. 1989. A Political History of the Achaemenid Empire. BRILL. pp. 8081. ISBN 9004091726.  Curtis John Simpson St John 2010. The World of Achaemenid Persia History Art and Society in Iran and the Ancient Near East. I.B.Tauris. p. 222. ISBN 9780857718013.  Agatharchides FGrH 86 F20 Diodorus Siculus Bibliotheca 
1.3 
7.5   Trk Lszl 2009. Between Two Worlds The Frontier Region Between Ancient Nubia and Egypt 3700 BCAD 500. Leiden New York Kln Brill. pp. 400404. ISBN 9789004171978.  Grainger 2010 p. 325 harvnb error no target CITEREFGrainger2010 help  a b Arthur E. Robinson The Arab Dynasty of Dar For Darfur Part II Journal of the Royal African Society Lond. XXVIII 5567 October 1928  a b Jackson Robert B. 2002. At Empires Edge Exploring Romes Egyptian Frontier. Yale University Press. ISBN 0300088566.  MunroHay Stuart C. 1991. Aksum An African Civilisation of Late Antiquity. Edinburgh University Press. pp. 79 224. ISBN 9780748601066.  a b c Adams William Y 1993. Expedition Magazine  Penn Museum. 35 2. cite journal Cite journal requires journal help  Medieval Nubia  the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.  Hassan Arabs 125.  Digging into Africas past. Archived from the original on 20080411. Retrieved 20080426.  Marta Mirazn Lahr et al. 2010 Human Skeletal Remains Fazzan Libya The Society for Libyan Studies  Haddow Scott Donald. Dental Morphological Analysis of Roman Era Burials from the Dakhleh Oasis Egypt PDF. Institute of Archaeology University College London. Retrieved 2 June 2017.  a b About Nubia. Nubian Foundation. 2018. Retrieved 31 July 2019.  Sirak K. Armelagos G. Bradley D. Gamba C. Jones E. Pinhasi R. 2014. Ancient DNA analysis of an infant from Sudanese Nubia ca 5001400 C.E.. S
2 CID 173527929. cite journal Cite journal requires journal help  Sirak Kendra A. Fernandes Daniel M. Lipson Mark Mallick Swapan Mah Matthew Olalde Iigo Ringbauer Harald Rohland Nadin Hadden Carla S. Harney adaoin Adamski Nicole Bernardos Rebecca Broomandkhoshbacht Nasreen Callan Kimberly Ferry Matthew Lawson Ann Marie Michel Megan Oppenheimer Jonas Stewardson Kristin Zalzala Fatma Patterson Nick Pinhasi Ron Thompson Jessica C. Van Gerven Dennis Reich David 14 December 2021. Social stratification without genetic differentiation at the site of Kulubnarti in Christian Period Nubia. Nature Communications. 12 1 7283. Bibcode20
21 NatCo..
12.7 2
83 S. doi
10.1 0
38 s41467021273568. PMC 8671435. PMID 34907168.  Loufouma Mbouaka Alvie Gamble Michelle Wurst Christina Jger Heidi Yoko Maixner Frank Zink Albert Noedl Harald Binder Michaela 2021. The elusive parasite comparing macroscopic immunological and genomic approaches to identifying malaria in human skeletal remains from Sayala Egypt third to sixth centuries AD. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences. 13 7 115. Bibcode20
21 ArAnS..13..1
15 L. doi
10.1 0
07 s12520021013
50 z. ISSN 18669557. PMC 8202054. PMID 34149953.  Wang Ke Bleasdale Madeleine Le Moyne Charles Freund Cacilia Krause Johannes Boivin Nicole Schiffels Stephan 20221203. 40
00 yearold hair from the Middle Nile highlights unusual ancient DNA degradation pattern and a potential source of early eastern Africa pastoralists. Scientific Reports. 12 1 20939. Bibcode20
22 NatSR..12209
39 W. doi
10.1 0
38 s41598022253
84 y. ISSN 20452322. PMC 9719486. PMID 36463384. Further readingedit Adams William Y. 1977 Nubia Corridor to Africa London. Adams William Y. FebruaryMarch 1980. Nubias corridor of time From the kingdom of Kush to the triumph of Islam PDF. UNESCO Courrier. Victory in Nubia The greatest archaeological rescue operation of all time 2529. Bell Herman 2009 Paradise Lost Nubia before the 1964 Hijra DAL Group. Black Pharaohs National Geographic Feb 2008 Bulliet et al. 2001 Nubia The Earth and Its Peoples pp. 7071 Houghton Mifflin Company Boston. Drower M. 1970 Nubia A Drowning Land London Longmans. Emberling Geoff 2011 Nubia Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. New York Institute for the Study of the Ancient World. Fisher Marjorie et al. 2012 Ancient Nubia African Kingdoms on the Nile. The American University in Cairo Press. Hassan Yusuf Fadl 1973 The Arabs and the Sudan Khartoum. Jennings Anne 1995 The Nubians of West Aswan Village Women in the Midst of Change Lynne Reinner Publishers. OConnor David 1993 Ancient Nubia Egypts Rival in Africa Philadelphia The University Museum University of Pennsylvania. Raue Dietrich 2019. Elephantine und Nubien vom 
4.2 . Jahrtausend v. Chr. BerlinBoston Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 9783110501056. Thelwall Robin 1982 Linguistic Aspects of Greater Nubian History in Ehret C.  Posnansky M. eds. The Archeological and Linguistic Reconstruction of African History. BerkeleyLos Angeles 3956. Trk Lszl 1997 The Kingdom of Kush Handbook of the NapatanMeroitic Civilization. Brill Academic Publishers. Valbelle Dominique and Bonnet Charles 2006 The Nubian Pharaohs. New York The American University in Cairo Press. Notesedit  Definition 3 External linksedit Media related to Nubia at Wikimedia Commons Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Nubia. African Kingdoms Ancient Sudan Websiteusurped Racism and the Rediscovery of Ancient Nubia Medieval Sai Project Journey to Ethiopia Eastern Sudan and Nigritia was written by Pierre Trmaux in 186263. It features extensive descriptions and drawings of Nubia. 19
60 s Nubia Scrapbook Nubian Foundation for Preserving a Cultural Heritage v t e History of Nubia Topics Nubia Names of Nubia History of Sudan Military Lower Nubia Upper Nubia Kingdoms AGroup Alodia BGroup Blemmyes CGroup Kerma Kingdom of alAbwab Kingdom of Kush Kingdom of Sennar Makuria Medja Mero Napata Nobatia XGroup Monarchy Titles Kandake Pharaoh Qore Viceroy Rulers Monarchs of Kerma Monarchs of Kush Monarchs of Makuria Queens of Kush Viceroy of Kush Locations AlMeragh Amara Aniba Askut Ballana Bigeh Deir elBahari Debeira Dodekaschoinos Dongola Dotawo Elephantine ElHobagi ElKurru Fadrus Faras Hamadab Gala Abu Ahmed Jebel Adda Island of Mero Jebel Barkal Jebel Dosha Kadero Kageras Kawa Kulb Kulubnarti Kumma Lisht Meinarti Musawwarat esSufra Nubian Desert Sa Island Shalfak Singa Soba Soleb Umm Ruweim Wad ban Naqa Zuma Languages Blemmye Egyptian Meroitic Meroitic alphabet Old Nubian Religion Religions Christianity Egyptian Kushite Sunni Islam Deities A Allah Aman Amanete Amesemi Anhur Anaka Apedemak Aqedise Arensnuphis Ariten Atari B Bastet Bes Breith D Dedun H Heka Hemen Horus K Khenmu J Jesus M Makedeke Mash Mehit Menhit Merul Miket N Nu R Ra S Satis Sabomakal Sobek T Thoth W Wusa Y Yahweh Temples Faras Cathedral Kulubnarti church Monastery in Ghazali Philae temple complex Qasr Ibrim Qustul Semna Temple of Amun Jebel Barkal Temple of Apedemak Lion Temple Temple of Amun Tabo Temple of Dendur Temple of Mut Throne Hall of Dongola Tombos Architecture Monumental depictions of Amanitore Nubian architecture Nubian pyramids Nubian vault Pyramids of Mero Sedeinga pyramids Technology Bow and arrow Gold mining Hafir Levallois technique Category v t e Kushite monarchs and rulers Main topics Main article Qore Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Kushite religion Beliefs Afterlife Christianity Creation myths Egyptian religion Eye of Ra Flooding of the Nile Maat Mythology Philosophy Prophecy of Neferti Soul Practices Burials Execration texts Funerals Mortuary temple Pilgrimage Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Triads Elephantine Naqa A Aman Amanete Amesemi Anaka Apedemak Aqedise Arensnuphis Ariten B Bes Breith D Dedun H Heka Hemen K M Makedeke Mash Mehit Menhit Merul Miket N R S Sabomakal T W Wusa Cultures AGroup Alodia BGroup Blemmyes CGroup Kerma Kingdom of alAbwab Makuria Medja Mero Napata Nobatia XGroup Locations Aniba Ballana Bigeh Deir elBahari Dodekaschoinos Dotawo Elephantine Jebel Barkal Kawa Lisht Musawwarat esSufra Philae temple complex Qasr Ibrim Qustul Semna Temple of Amun Temple of Dendur Temple of Mut Throne Hall of Dongola Tombos Sacred animals Abtu Barbary lion Cattle Falcon Hieracosphinx Medjed Nile crocodile North African elephant Ram Serpopard Sphinx Taweret Uraeus Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Christian cross Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Gold Hafir Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Languages Blemmyes language Egyptian language Meroitic language Meroitic alphabet Nubian language Category Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany Israel United States Sweden Other IdRef v t e Earths primary regions and subregions Africa Mediterranean Saharan Northern Maghreb Middle East Middle East and North Africa Mashriq SubSaharan Western East Horn Great Lakes Central Southern Islands North America Northern Pacific Northwest Northeastern United States New England Midwest MidAtlantic Western United States Southwest Mountain states South Central United States Southern United States East Coast West Coast Bible Belt Appalachia Great Lakes Eastern Canada Western Canada Canadian Prairies Northern Canada Atlantic Canada Northern Mexico Aridoamerica Caribbean West Indies Central Middle Mesoamerica Anglo French Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Latin America and the Caribbean LAC South America Southern Northern Guianan states West Indies Patagonia Amazon LAC Asia Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea Far East Pacific Asia Russian Far East Eastern Northeastern Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Southeastern Mainland Maritime Northern Siberia Ural Southern Subregions Himalayan states Indian subcontinent Western Levant Dead Sea Mediterranean Greater Iran Iranian Plateau Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Middle East Middle East and North Africa Near East Mashriq AsiaPacific Europe Central Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Eastern Southeastern Balkans Caucasus South Caucasus North Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southern Iberia Italy Italian Peninsula Balkans Southeastern Mediterranean Middle East Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Germanic Romance Celtic Slavic Oceania Australasia Australia New Guinea Zealandia Pacific Islands Micronesia Melanesia Polynesia Polar Antarctic Arctic Oceans World Sea AntarcticSouthern Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Ring of Fire List of seas Noncontinentbased world regions Global North and Global South Global Northwest Global Southwest Global East Global Southeast Land and water hemispheres Continents of Earth  List of seas  Physical Earth Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNubiaoldid1222300839 Categories Nubia History of Nubia Ancient peoples Historical regions Ancient Greek geography of East Africa Regions of Africa Regions of Egypt 
5 thmillennium BC establishments Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint location missing publisher CS1 maint multiple names authors list CS1 errors periodical ignored CS1 Italianlanguage sources it Pages with numeric Bible version references Harv and Sfn notarget errors CS1 errors missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Nobiinlanguage text Articles containing Arabiclanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2020 CS1 long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 5 May 2024 at 0531 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width