Shebitku - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign before Shabaka 
2 Alleged coregency with Shabaka 
3 Timeline 
4 Identification with Herodotus Sethos 
5 References 
6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Shebitku 26 languages   Catal Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Italiano  Lietuvi  Nederlands Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Second pharaoh of the 
25 th Dynasty of Egypt Shebitku Shebitkus statue in the Nubian Museum Pharaoh Reign 714705 BC1 Predecessor Piye Successor Shabaka Royal titulary Horus name Djedkhaw Nebty name Aashefitemtawnebu Golden Horus Aakhepeshhupedjetpesdjet Prenomen Praenomen Djedkare Enduring is the Soul of Re2 Nomen Shebitku Consort Arty Died 705 BC Dynasty 
25 th Dynasty nomen or birth name  b t k Shabataka in hieroglyphs Part of a series on Kushite Monarchs and Rulers Main Topics Main article Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Qore Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Shebitku Ancient Egyptian btk NeoAssyrian  apataku Ancient Greek  Sethn3 also known as Shabataka or Shebitqo and anglicized as Sethos was the second pharaoh of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt who ruled from 714 BC  705 BC according to the most recent academic research. He was a son of Piye the founder of this dynasty. Shebitkus prenomen or throne name Djedkare means Enduring is the Soul of Re.2 Shebitkus queen was Arty who was a daughter of king Piye according to a fragment of statue JE 49157 of the High Priest of Amun Haremakhet son of Shabaka found in the temple of the Goddess Mut in Karnak.4 Reign before Shabakaedit Until recent times Shebitku was placed within the 
25 th Dynasty between Shabaka and Taharqa. Although the possibility of a switch between the reigns of Shabaka and Shebitku had already been suggested before by Brunet5 and Baker had outlined nine reasons for the reversal6 it was Michael Bnyai in 20137 who first published in a mainstream journal many arguments in favor of such a relocation. After him Frdric Payraudeau1 and Gerard P. F. Broekman8 independently expanded the hypothesis. The archaeological evidence discovered in 20162017 by Claus Jurman confirms a ShebitkuShabaka succession. Gerard Broekmans GM 251 2017 paper shows that Shebitku reigned before Shabaka since the upper edge of Shabakas NLR 30 Year 2 Karnak quay inscription was carved over the lefthand side of the lower edge of Shebitkus NLR33 Year 3 inscription.9 The Egyptologist Claus Jurmans personal reexamination of the Karnak quay inscriptions of Shebitku or Shabataka and Shabaka in 2016 and 2017 conclusively demonstrate that Shebitku ruled before Shabaka and confirmed Broekmans arguments that Shebitkus Nile Text inscription was carved before Shabakas inscription hence Shebitku ruled before Shabaka.10 Critically it was first pointed out by Baker6 and then later by Frederic Payraudeau who wrote in French that the Divine Adoratrix ie. Gods Wife of Amun Shepenupet I the last Libyan Adoratrix was still alive during the reign of ShebitkuShabataqo because she is represented performing rites and is described as living in those parts of the OsirisHqadjet chapel built during his reign wall and exterior of the gate111 In the rest of the room it is Amenirdis I Shabakas sister who is represented with the Adoratrix title and provided with a coronation name. The succession Shepenupet I  Amenirdis I as Gods Wife of Amun or Divine Adoratrice of Amun thus took place during the reign of Shebitku. This detail in itself is sufficient to show that the reign of Shabaka cannot precede that of Shebitku.1 King Shebitku making offerings to Egyptian gods The construction of the tomb of Shebitku Ku. 18 resembles that of Piye Ku. 17 while that of Shabaka Ku. 15 is similar to that of Taharqa Nu. 1 and Tantamani Ku. 
16.1 21 One of the strongest evidence that Shabaka ruled after Shebitku was demonstrated by the architectural features of the Kushite royal pyramids in El Kurru. Only in the pyramids of Piye Ku 17 and Shebitku Ku 18 are the burialchambers opencut structures with a corbelled roof whereas fully tunneled burial chamber substructures are found in the pyramids of Shabaka Ku 15 Taharqa Nu 1 and Tantamani Ku 16 as well as with all subsequent royal pyramids in El Kurru and Nuri.13 The fully tunneled and oncedecorated burial chamber of Shabakas pyramid was clearly an architectural improvement since it was followed by Taharqa and all his successors.14 The pyramid design evidence also shows that Shabaka must have ruled afterand not beforeShebitku. This also favours a ShebitkuShabaka succession in the 
25 th dynasty. In the Cairo CG 42204 of the High Priest of Amun Haremakhetson of Shabakacalls himself as kings son of Shabaka justified who loves him Sole Confidant of king Taharqa justified Director of the palace of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt TanutamunTantamani may he live for ever.15 However as first noted by Baker6 no mention of Haremakhets service under Shebitku is made even if Haremakhet was only a youth under Shebitku this kings absence is strange since the intent of the statues text was to render a chronological sequence of kings who reigned during Haremakhets life each of their names being accompanied by a reference to the relationship that existed between the king mentioned and Haremakhet.16 A possible explanation for Shebitkus omission from the statue of Haremakhet was that Shebitku was already dead when Haremaket was born under Shabaka. Payraudeau notes that Shebitkus shabtis are small about 10 cm and have a very brief inscription with only the kings birth name in a cartouche preceded by the Osiris king of Upper and Lower Egypt and followed by mrw.171 They are thus very close to those of PiyePiankhy 42  D. Dunham see footnote 39 plate 44.. However Shabakas shabtis are larger about 1520 cm with more developed inscriptions including the quotation from the Book of the Dead which is also present on those Taharqo Tanouetamani and Senkamanisken.1 All this evidence also suggests that Shebitku ruled before Shabaka. Finally as first pointed out by Baker6 and then later by Payraudeau who observed that in the traditional ShebitkuShabaka chronology the time span between the reign of Taharqa and Shabaka seems to be excessively long. They both noted that Papyrus Louvre E 33
28 c from Year 2 or Year 6 of Taharqa mentions the sale of a slave by his owner who had bought him in Year 7 of Shabaka that is 27 years earlier in the traditional chronology but if the reign of Shabaka is placed just before that of Taharqa with no intervening reign of Shebitku there is a gap of about 10 years which is much more credible.18 The respected German scholar Karl Jansen Winkeln also endorsed a ShebitkuShabaka succession in a JEH 10 2017 N.1 paper titled Beitrge zur Geschichte der Dritten Zwischenzeit Journal of Egyptian History 10 2017 pp. 2342 when he wrote a postscript stating Im Gegensatz zu meinen Ausfhrungen auf dem 2014 Kolloquium in Mnster bin ich jetzt der Meinung dass die neue Reihenfolge SchebitkuSchabako in der Tat richtig ist... or In contrast to my exposition at the 2014 Munster colloquium I am now of the opinion that the new succession ShebitkuShabako is in fact correct...19 Alleged coregency with Shabakaedit Donation Stela of Shebitku with the cartouche identifying him bottom left. Metropolitan Museum of Art The Turin Stela 1467 which depicts Shabaka and Shebitku seated together with Shebitku behind Shabaka facing two other individuals across an offering table was once considered to be clear evidence for a royal coregency between these two Nubian kings in William J. Murnanes 1977 book Ancient Egyptian Coregencies.20 However the Turin Museum has subsequently acknowledged the statue to be a forgery. Robert Morkot and Stephen Quirke who analysed the stela in a 2001 article also confirmed that the object is a forgery which cannot be used to postulate a possible coregency between Shabaka and Shebitku.21 Secondly Shebitkus Year 3 
1 st month of Shemu day 5 inscription in Nile Level Text Number 33 has been assumed to record a coregency between Shabaka and Shebitku among some scholars. This Nile text records Shebitku mentioning his appearing j in Thebes as king in the temple of Amun at Karnak where Amun gave him the crown with two uraei like Horus on the throne of Re thereby legitimising his kingship.22 Jrgen von Beckerath argued in a GM 136 1993 article that the inscription recorded both the official coronation of Shebitku and the very first appearance of the king himself in Egypt after comparing this inscription with Nile Level Text No.30 from Year 2 of Shebitku when Shabaka conquered all of Egypt.23 If correct this would demonstrate that Shebitku had truly served as a coregent to Shabaka for 2 years. Kenneth Kitchen however observes that the verb j or appearance applies to any official epiphany or official manifestation of the king to his public appearances.24 Kitchen also stresses that the period around the first month of Shemu days 15 marked the date of a Festival of AmunRe at Karnak which is well attested during the New Kingdom Period the 
22 nd Dynasty and through to the Ptolemaic period.24 Hence in the third Year of Shebitku this Feast to Amun evidently coincided with both the Inundation of the Nile and a personal visit by Shebitku to the Temple of Amun but we have no warrant whatever for assuming that Shebitku...remained uncrowned for 2 whole years after his accession.25 William Murnane also endorsed this interpretation by noting that Shebitkus Year 3 Nile Text need not refer to an accession or coronation at all. Rather it seems simply to record an appearance of Shebitku in the temple of Amun during his third year and to acknowledge the gods influence in securing his initial appearance as king.26 In other words Shebitku was already king of Egypt and the purpose of his visit to Karnak was to receive and record for posterity the god Amuns official legitimization of his reign. Therefore the evidence for a possible coregency between Shabaka and Shebitku is illusory at present. Danel Kahn also carefully considered but rejected arguments against a division of the 
25 th dynasty kingdom under Shabakas reign with Shabaka ruling in Lower and Upper Egypt and Shebitku acting as Shabakas junior coregent or viceroy in Nubia in an important 2006 article.27 Kahn notes that there was always only one Nubian king ruling over all of the 
25 th dynastys domain including both Egypt and Nubia and that problems of communication and control did not hinder the kushite king to be the supreme ruler of this vast territory.28 Kahn stresses that the Great Triumphal stela of Piye indicates it took only 39 days to travel by boat from Napata to Thebes while the Nitocris Adoption Stela shows that the time to travel the distance between Memphis or possibly Tanis and Thebes by boat c. 700 km or more for Tanis is only 16 days.29 Timelineedit This section needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. May 2017 In 1999 an EgyptAssyrian synchronism from the Great Inscription of Tangi Var in Iran was rediscovered and reanalysed. Carved by Sargon II of Assyria 722705 BC the inscription dates to the period around 707706 BC and reveals that it was Shebitku king of Egypt who extradited the rebel king Iamani of Ashdod into Sargons hands rather than Shabaka as previously thought.30 The pertinent section of the inscription by Sargon II reads 19 I scil. Sargon plundered the city of Ashdod Iamani31 its king feared my weapons and...He fled to the region of the land of Meluhha and lived there stealthfully literallylike a thief. 20 Shapataku Shebitku king of the land of Meluhha heard of the might of the gods Ashur Nabu and Marduk which I had demonstrated over all lands...21 He put Iamani in manacles and handcuffs...he had him brought captive into my presence.32 It was noted by Kenneth Kitchen that the Assyrian term used sharru was not exclusively used to mean king but rather various levels of officials. He also contended that Meluha referred to Nubia Kush. This supported Kitchens contention that Shebitku was a deputy ruler for Shabaka in Nubia at that time. The net result was to move the 12 year reign of Shebitku to 702 BC and following.33 The Tangi Var inscription dates to Sargons 
15 th year between Nisan 707 BC to Adar 706 BC.34 This shows that Shebitku was ruling in Egypt by April 706 BC at the very latest and perhaps as early as November 707 BC to allow some time for Iamannis extradition and the recording of this deed in Sargons inscription.35 A suggestion that Shebitku served as Shabakas viceroy in Nubia and that Shebitku extradited Iamanni to Sargon II during the reign of king Shabaka has been rejected by the Egyptologist Karl JansenWinkeln in Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies which is the most updated publication on Egyptian chronology.36 As JansenWinkeln writes there has never been the slightest hint at any form of coregency of the Nubian kings of Dynasty 25. Had Shabaka been ruler of Egypt in the year 707706 and Shebitku was his viceroy in Nubia one would definitely expect that the opening of diplomatic relations with Assur as well as the capture and extradation of Yamanni would have been part of Shabakas responsibility. Sargon can also be expected to have named the regent of Egypt and senior king rather than the distant viceroy Shebitku in Nubia. If on the other hand Shebitku was already Shabakas successor in 707706 BC the reports of the Yamani affair become clearer and make more sense. It had hitherto been assumed that the Nubian king Shabaka handed over Yamani more or less immediately after his flight to Egypt. Now it appears...certain that Yamani was only turned over to the Assyrians a couple of years later under Shebitku instead.36 Identification with Herodotus Sethosedit The Greek historian Herodotus in his Histories book II chapter 141 writes of a High Priest of Ptah named Sethos Greek  Sethon who became pharaoh and defeated the Assyrians with divine intervention. This name is probably a corruption of Shebitku.3738 Herodotus account was the inspiration for the 
18 thcentury fantasy novel Life of Sethos which has been influential among Afrocentrists. Referencesedit  a b c d e f g F. Payraudeau Retour sur la succession ShabaqoShabataqo Nehet 1 2014 p. 115127 online here  a b Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p.190. 2006. ISBN 0500286280  apataku KING OF MELUHHA RN. Oracc The Open Richly Annotated Cuneiform Corpus.  Karl JansenWinkeln Inschriften der Sptzeit Teil III Die 25. Dynastie 2009. pp.3478 
52.5   JeanFrdric Brunet The 
21 st and 
25 th Dynasties Apis Burial Conundrum Journal of the Ancient Chronology Forum 10 2005 p. 29.  a b c d Joe Baker 2005 on egyptologyforum.org  Michael Bnyai Ein Vorschlag zur Chronologie der 25. Dynastie in gypten JEgH 6 2013 46129 and forthcoming Die Reihenfolge der kuschitischen Knige JEgH 8 2015 81147  Gerard P. F. Broekman The order of succession between Shabaka and Shabataka A different view on the chronology of the Twentyfifth Dynasty GM 245 2015 1731.  G.P.F. Broekman Genealogical considerations regarding the kings of the Twentyfifth Dynasty in Egypt GM 251 2017 p.13  Claus Jurman The Order of the Kushite Kings According to Sources from the Eastern Desert and Thebes. Or Shabataka was here first Journal of Egyptian History 10 2017 pp. 124151. See PDF  45  G. Legrain Le temple et les chapelles dOsiris  Karnak. Le temple dOsirisHiqDjeto partie thiopienne RecTrav 22 1900 128 JWIS III 45.  39  D. Dunham ElKurru The Royal Cemeteries of Kush I 1950 55 60 64 67 also D. Dunham Nuri The Royal Cemeteries of Kush II 1955 67 J. Lull Las tumbas reales egipcias del Tercer Periodo Intermedio dinastas XXIXXV. Tradicin y cambios BARIS 1045 2002 208..  Dows D. Dunham El Kurru The Royal Cemeteries of Kush Cambridge Massachusetts 1950  G.P.F. Broekman The order of succession between Shabaka and Shabataka. A different view on the chronology of the Twentyfifth Dynasty GM 245 2015 pp.2122  G.P.F. Broekman The order of succession between Shabaka and Shabataka. A different view on the chronology of the Twentyfifth Dynasty GM 245 2015 p. 23  G.P.F. Broekman GM 245 2015 p.24  41  JWIS III 51 number 9 D. Dunham see footnote 39 69 plate 
45 AB..  Payraudeau Nehet I 2014 p.119  JansenWinkeln Journal of Egyptian History 10 2017 N1 p.40  William Murnane Ancient Egyptian Coregencies SAOC 40 Chicago 1977 p.190  R. Morkot and S. Quirke Inventing the 
25 th Dynasty Turin stela 1467 and the construction of history Begegnungen  Antike Kulturen im Niltal Festgabe fr Erika Endesfelder KarlHeinz Priese Walter Friedrich Reineke Steffen Wenig Leipzig 2001 pp.349363  L. Trk The Royal Crowns of Kush A Study in Middle Nile Valley Regalia and Iconography in the 
1 st Millennia B. C. and A.D. Cambridge Monographs in African Archaeology 18 Oxford 1987 p. 4  J. von Beckerath Die Nilstandsinschrift vom 3. Jahr Schebitkus am kai von Karnak GM 136 1993 pp. 79  a b Kenneth A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC TIPE 
3 rd edition 1986 Warminster Aris  Phillips Ltd p.170  Kitchen TIPE p.171  Murnane Coregencies p.189  Kahn Danel. Divided Kingdom Coregency or Sole Rule in the Kingdoms of EgyptandKush Egypt and Levant 16 2006 pp.275291 online PDF  Kahn Egypt and Levant 16 p.290  Kahn Egypt and Levant 16 p. 290. Kahn cites RA Caminos The Nitocris Stela JEA 50 1964 pp. 8184 for the Nitocris stela evidence  Grant Frame The Inscription of Sargon II at Tangi Var Orientalia Vol.68 1999 pp.3157 and pls. IXVIII  Robin Lane Fox Travelling Heroes in the Epic Age of Homer 200830 makes a case for Iamani to be simply the Ionian Greek Ionian Greeks were sometimes written in cuneiform script as iaamnaa could this usurping Iamani be a Greek ...would Assyrian scribes be exact about the name of a lowly rebel  Frame p.40  Kitchen Kenneth A. THE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF EGYPTIAN CHRONOLOGY  A RECONSIDERATION gypten Und Levante  Egypt and the Levant vol. 16 pp. 293308 2006  A. Fuchs Die Inschriften Sargons II. aus Khorsabad Gottingen 1994 pp.76  308  Kahn p.3  a b Karl JansenWinkeln The Third Intermediate Period in Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006. pp.258259  Robert B. Strassler ed. The Landmark Herodotus The Histories Anchor 2007 p. 182  Alan B. Lloyd Commentary on Book II in A Commentary on Herodotus Books IIV Oxford University Press 2007 p. 237. Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shebitku. Robert Morkot The Black Pharaohs Egypts Nubian Rulers The Rubicon Press 2000. ISBN 0948695234 Preceded by Piye Pharaoh of Egypt 714 BC  705 BC Twentyfifth Dynasty Succeeded by Shabaka v t e Kushite monarchs and rulers Main topics Main article Qore Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleShebitkuoldid1222295540 Categories 705 BC deaths 
8 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
8 thcentury BC monarchs of Kush Kingdom of Kush Pharaohs of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 5 May 2024 at 0420 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width