Wikipedia:Verifiability - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Responsibility for providing citations 
2 Reliable sources Toggle Reliable sources subsection 
2.1 What counts as a reliable source 

2.1.1 Best sources 
2.2 Newspaper and magazine blogs 
2.3 Reliable sources noticeboard and guideline 
3 Sources that are usually not reliable Toggle Sources that are usually not reliable subsection 
3.1 Questionable sources 
3.2 Selfpublished sources 
3.3 Selfpublished or questionable sources as sources on themselves 
3.4 Wikipedia and sources that mirror or use it 
4 Accessibility Toggle Accessibility subsection 
4.1 Access to sources 
4.2 NonEnglish sources 

4.2.1 Citing 

4.2.2 Quoting 
5 Other issues Toggle Other issues subsection 
5.1 Verifiability does not guarantee inclusion 
5.2 Tagging a sentence section or article 
5.3 Exceptional claims require exceptional sources 
6 Verifiability and other principles Toggle Verifiability and other principles subsection 
6.1 Copyright and plagiarism 
6.2 Neutrality 
6.3 Notability 
6.4 Original research 
7 See also Toggle See also subsection 
7.1 Guidelines 
7.2 Information pages 
7.3 Resources 
7.4 Essays 
8 Notes 
9 References 
10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents WikipediaVerifiability 97 languages Afrikaans   Asturianu Azrbaycanca        Bosanski Catal  etina Cymraeg Dansk  Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego    Hausa   Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano       Kreyl ayisyen Kurd Latina Lietuvi Magyar    Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau  Nederlands   Napulitano Norsk bokml  Ozbekcha     Polski Portugus Qaraqalpaqsha Romn   Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara     Trke Trkmene   Ting Vit    Edit links Project page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata Wikiversity From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Wikipedia policy on verifiability of information WPV redirects here. For discussing particular sources see WikipediaReliable sourcesNoticeboard. For vandalism see WikipediaVandalism. This page documents an English Wikipedia policy. It describes a widely accepted standard that all editors should normally follow. Changes made to it should reflect consensus. Shortcuts WPV WPVER WPVERIFY This page in a nutshell Readers must be able to check that any of the information within Wikipedia articles is not just made up. This means all material must be attributable to reliable published sources. Additionally quotations and any material challenged or likely to be challenged must be supported by inline citations. Content policies Neutral point of view No original research Verifiability Article titles Biographies of living persons Image use policy What Wikipedia is not v t e Short URL w.wikiFVY In the English Wikipedia verifiability means other people using the encyclopedia can check that the information comes from a reliable source. Its content is determined by previously published information rather than editors beliefs opinions experiences or previously unpublished ideas or information. Even if you are sure something is true it must have been previously published in a reliable source before you can add it.a If reliable sources disagree with each other then maintain a neutral point of view and present what the various sources say giving each side its due weight. All material in Wikipedia mainspace including everything in articles lists and captions must be verifiable. All quotations and any material whose verifiability has been challenged or is likely to be challenged must include an inline citation to a reliable source that directly supportsb the material. Any material that needs an inline citation but does not have one may be removed. Please immediately remove contentious material about living people that is unsourced or poorly sourced. For how to write citations see citing sources. Verifiability no original research and neutral point of view are Wikipedias core content policies. They work together to determine content so editors should understand the key points of all three. Articles must also comply with the copyright policy. Responsibility for providing citations Shortcuts WPBURDEN WPPROVEIT WPCHALLENGE WPFULLCITE WPPROVEIT redirects here. For the editing tool see WikipediaProveIt. WPCHALLENGE redirects here. For challenging closes see WikipediaClosing discussions  Challenging a closing. See also WikipediaEditing policy  Try to fix problems All content must be verifiable. The burden to demonstrate verifiability lies with the editor who adds or restores material and it is satisfied by providing an inline citation to a reliable source that directly supportsb the contribution.c Using inline citations provide reliable published sources for all quotations all material whose verifiability has been challenged all material that is likely to be challenged all contentious matter about living and recently deceased persons. The cited source must clearly support the material as presented in the article. Cite the source clearly ideally giving page numbersthough sometimes a section chapter or other division may be appropriate instead see WikipediaCiting sources for details of how to do this. Any material lacking an inline citation to a reliable source that directly supportsb the material may be removed and should not be restored without an inline citation to a reliable source. Whether and how quickly material should be initially removed for not having an inline citation to a reliable source depends on the material and the overall state of the article. In some cases editors may object if you remove material without giving them time to provide references. Consider adding a citation needed tag as an interim step.d When tagging or removing material for lacking an inline citation please state your concern that it may not be possible to find a published reliable source and the material therefore may not be verifiable.e If you think the material is verifiable you are encouraged to provide an inline citation yourself before considering whether to remove or tag it. Do not leave unsourced or poorly sourced material in an article if it might damage the reputation of living people1 or existing groups and do not move it to the talk page. You should also be aware of how WikipediaBiographies of living persons also applies to groups. Reliable sources Shortcuts WPSOURCE WPSOURCES WPSOURCE redirects here. For how to reference sources see HelpReferencing for beginners. For the wikitext tag previously labeled source see HelpWikitext  syntaxhighlight. What counts as a reliable source Further information WikipediaReliable sources A cited source on Wikipedia is often a specific portion of text such as a short article or a page in a book. But when editors discuss sources for example to debate their appropriateness or reliability the word source has four related meanings The work itself the article book That book looks like a useful source for this article. and works like it An obituary can be a useful biographical source A recent source is better than an old one The creator of the work the writer journalist What do we know about that sources reputation and people like them A medical researcher is a better source than a journalist for medical claims. The publication for example the newspaper journal magazine That source covers the arts. and publications like them A newspaper is not a reliable source for medical claims. The publisher of the work for example Cambridge University Press That source publishes reference works. and publishers like them An academic publisher is a good source of reference works. All four can affect reliability. Base articles on reliable independent published sources with a reputation for factchecking and accuracy. Source material must have been published the definition of which for the purposes of Wikipedia is made available to the public in some form.f Unpublished materials are not considered reliable. Use sources that directly support the material presented in an article and are appropriate to the claims made. The appropriateness of any source depends on the context. Be especially careful when sourcing content related to living people or medicine. If available academic and peerreviewed publications are usually the most reliable sources on topics such as history medicine and science. Editors may also use material from reliable nonacademic sources particularly if it appears in respected mainstream publications. Other reliable sources include Universitylevel textbooks Books published by respected publishing houses Mainstream nonfringe magazines including specialty ones Reputable newspapers Editors may also use electronic media subject to the same criteria see details in WikipediaIdentifying reliable sources and WikipediaSearch engine test. Best sources The best sources have a professional structure for checking or analyzing facts legal issues evidence and arguments. The greater the degree of scrutiny given to these issues the more reliable the source. Newspaper and magazine blogs Shortcut WPNEWSBLOG Some newspapers magazines and other news organizations host online columns they call blogs. These may be acceptable sources if the writers are professionals but use them with caution because blogs may not be subject to the news organizations normal factchecking process.g If a news organization publishes an opinion piece in a blog attribute the statement to the writer e.g. Jane Smith wrote ... Never use the blog comments that are left by the readers as sources. For personal or group blogs that are not reliable sources see  Selfpublished sources below. Reliable sources noticeboard and guideline Further information WikipediaReliable sources and WikipediaReliable sourcesNoticeboard To discuss the reliability of a specific source for a particular statement consult WikipediaReliable sourcesNoticeboard which seeks to apply this policy to particular cases. For a guideline discussing the reliability of particular types of sources see WikipediaReliable sources. In the case of inconsistency between this policy and the WikipediaReliable sources guideline or any other guideline related to sourcing this policy has priority. Sources that are usually not reliable WPNOTRELIABLE redirects here. For Wikipedias own reliability see WikipediaWikipedia is not a reliable source. See also WikipediaReliable sources  Questionable and selfpublished sources and WikipediaReliable sourcesPerennial sources Shortcuts WPNOTRELIABLE WPNONRS WPNOTRS WPQS Questionable sources Questionable sources are those that have a poor reputation for checking the facts lack meaningful editorial oversight or have an apparent conflict of interest. Such sources include websites and publications expressing views widely considered by other sources to be promotional extremist or relying heavily on unsubstantiated gossip rumor or personal opinion. Questionable sources should be used only as sources for material on themselves such as in articles about themselves see below. They are not suitable sources for contentious claims about others. Predatory open access journals are considered questionable due to the absence of quality control in the peerreview process. Selfpublished sources Shortcuts WPSPS WPSELFPUB WPSELFPUBLISH WPBLOGS WPEXPERTSPS Further information WikipediaBiographies of living persons  Avoid selfpublished sources WikipediaList of companies engaged in the selfpublishing business and WikipediaIdentifying and using selfpublished works Anyone can create a personal web page selfpublish a book or claim to be an expert. That is why selfpublished material such as books patents newsletters personal websites open wikis personal or group blogs as distinguished from newsblogs above content farms Internet forum postings and social media postings are largely not acceptable as sources. Selfpublished expert sources may be considered reliable when produced by an established subjectmatter expert whose work in the relevant field has previously been published by reliable independent publications.g Exercise caution when using such sources if the information in question is suitable for inclusion someone else will probably have published it in independent reliable sources.2 Never use selfpublished sources as thirdparty sources about living people even if the author is an expert wellknown professional researcher or writer. Selfpublished or questionable sources as sources on themselves WPSOCIALMEDIA redirects here. For the policy on what Wikipedia is not see WPNOTSOCIALMEDIA. WPTWITTER redirects here. For the external links essay see WPTwitterEL. For a template used for citing tweets see TemplateCite tweet. For community evaluation of Twitter as a source see WikipediaReliable sourcesPerennial sources  Twitter. See also WikipediaReliable sources  Statements of opinion Shortcuts WPABOUTSELF WPTWITTER WPSOCIALMEDIA It has been suggested that WikipediaReliable sourcesSelfpublished and questionable sources as sources on themselves and WikipediaBiographies of living personsUsing the subject as a selfpublished source be merged into this section. Discuss Proposed since December 2023. Selfpublished and questionable sources may be used as sources of information about themselves usually in articles about themselves or their activities without the selfpublished source requirement that they are established experts in the field so long as The material is neither unduly selfserving nor an exceptional claim It does not involve claims about third parties It does not involve claims about events not directly related to the source There is no reasonable doubt as to its authenticity and The article is not based primarily on such sources. This policy also applies to material made public by the source on social networking websites such as Twitter Tumblr LinkedIn Reddit and Facebook. Wikipedia and sources that mirror or use it Shortcuts WPCIRC WPCIRCULAR WPREFLOOP WPCIRCULAR redirects here. For links on a page that redirect back to the same page see WPSELFRED. See also WPCOPYWITHIN WikipediaList of citogenesis incidents WikipediaCiting Wikipedia WikipediaWikipedia is not a reliable source and WikipediaABOUTSELF Do not use articles from Wikipedia whether English Wikipedia or Wikipedias in other languages as sources since Wikipedia is a usergenerated source. Also do not use websites mirroring Wikipedia content or publications relying on material from Wikipedia as sources. Content from a Wikipedia article is not considered reliable unless it is backed up by citing reliable sources. Confirm that these sources support the content then use them directly.3 An exception is allowed when Wikipedia itself is being discussed in the article. These may cite an article guideline discussion statistic or other content from Wikipedia or a sister project to support a statement about Wikipedia. Wikipedia or the sister project is a primary source in this case and may be used following the policy for primary sources. Any such use should avoid original research undue emphasis on Wikipedias role or views and inappropriate selfreference. The article text should clarify how the material is sourced from Wikipedia to inform the reader about the potential bias. Accessibility Access to sources Shortcuts WPPAYWALL WPSOURCEACCESS See also WikipediaOffline sources WikipediaWikiProject Resource ExchangeResource Request and WikipediaReliable sourcesCost Do not reject reliable sources just because they are difficult or costly to access. Some reliable sources are not easily accessible. For example an online source may require payment and a printonly source may be available only through libraries. Rare historical sources may even be available only in special museum collections and archives. If you have trouble accessing a source others may be able to do so on your behalf see WikiProject Resource Exchange. NonEnglish sources Shortcuts WPRSUE WPNOENG WPNONENG See also WikipediaTranslators available and WikipediaNo original research  Translations and transcriptions Citing Shortcut WPRSUEC Citations to nonEnglish reliable sources are allowed on the English Wikipedia. However because this project is in English Englishlanguage sources are preferred over nonEnglish ones when they are available and of equal quality and relevance. As with sources in English if a dispute arises involving a citation to a nonEnglish source editors may request a quotation of relevant portions of the original source be provided either in text in a footnote or on the article talk page.h See TemplateRequest quotation. Quoting Shortcut WPRSUEQ If you quote a nonEnglish reliable source whether in the main text or in a footnote a translation into English should accompany the quote. Translations published by reliable sources are preferred over translations by Wikipedians but translations by Wikipedians are preferred over machine translations. When using a machine translation of source material editors should be reasonably certain that the translation is accurate and the source is appropriate. Editors should not rely upon machine translations of nonEnglish sources in contentious articles or biographies of living people. If needed ask an editor who can translate it for you. The original text is usually included with the translated text in articles when translated by Wikipedians and the translating editor is usually not cited. When quoting any material whether in English or in some other language be careful not to violate copyright see the fairuse guideline. Other issues Verifiability does not guarantee inclusion Shortcuts WPVNOT WPCDNI WPONUS WPONUS redirects here. For the responsibility to demonstrate verifiability see WPBURDEN. Main page WikipediaWhat Wikipedia is not  Encyclopedic content See also WPUNDUE WPPAGEDECIDE WPPRESERVE WPSUMMARY and WPIINFO While information must be verifiable for inclusion in an article not all verifiable information must be included. Consensus may determine that certain information does not improve an article. Such information should be omitted or presented instead in a different article. The responsibility for achieving consensus for inclusion is on those seeking to include disputed content. Tagging a sentence section or article Further information WikipediaCitation needed and WikipediaTemplate indexSources of articles Shortcuts WPFAIL WPFAILV WPFAILEDVERIFICATION If you want to request an inline citation for an unsourced statement you can tag a sentence with the citation needed template by writing cn or fact. Other templates exist for tagging sections or entire articles here. You can also leave a note on the talk page asking for a source or move the material to the talk page and ask for a source there. To request verification that a reference supports the text tag it with verification needed. Material that fails verification may be tagged with failed verification or removed. It helps other editors to explain your rationale for using templates to tag material in the template edit summary or on the talk page. Take special care with contentious material about living and recently deceased people. Unsourced or poorly sourced material that is contentious especially text that is negative derogatory or potentially damaging should be removed immediately rather than tagged or moved to the talk page. Exceptional claims require exceptional sources Shortcuts WPREDFLAG WPEXCEPTIONAL WPEXTRAORDINARY WPECREE See also Sagan standard and WikipediaFringe theories Any exceptional claim requires multiple highquality sources.4 Warnings red flags that should prompt extra caution include Surprising or apparently important claims not covered by multiple mainstream sources Challenged claims that are supported purely by primary or selfpublished sources or those with an apparent conflict of interest Reports of a statement by someone that seems out of character or against an interest they had previously defended Claims contradicted by the prevailing view within the relevant community or that would significantly alter mainstream assumptionsespecially in science medicine history politics and biographies of living and recently dead people. This is especially true when proponents say there is a conspiracy to silence them. Verifiability and other principles Copyright and plagiarism Further information WikipediaCopyright WikipediaPlagiarism WikipediaCopying within Wikipedia WikipediaMOS  Attribution and WikipediaCITE  Intext attribution Shortcuts WPOWNWORDS WPYTCOPYRIGHT Do not plagiarize or breach copyright when using sources. Summarize source material in your own words as much as possible when quoting or closely paraphrasing a source use an inline citation and intext attribution where appropriate. Do not link to any source that violates the copyrights of others per contributors rights and obligations. You can link to websites that display copyrighted works as long as the website has licensed the work or uses the work in a way compliant with fair use. Knowingly directing others to material that violates copyright may be considered contributory copyright infringement. If there is reason to think a source violates copyright do not cite it. This is particularly relevant when linking to sites such as Scribd or YouTube where due care should be taken to avoid linking to material violating copyright. Neutrality Further information WikipediaNeutral point of view Shortcuts WPSOURCESDISAGREE WPSOURCESDIFFER Even when information is cited to reliable sources you must present it with a neutral point of view NPOV. Articles should be based on thorough research of sources. All articles must adhere to NPOV fairly representing all majority and significantminority viewpoints published by reliable sources in rough proportion to the prominence of each view. Tinyminority views need not be included except in articles devoted to them. If there is a disagreement between sources use intext attribution John Smith argues X while Paul Jones maintains Y followed by an inline citation. Sources themselves do not need to maintain a neutral point of view. Indeed many reliable sources are not neutral. Our job as editors is simply to summarize what reliable sources say. Notability Further information WikipediaNotability If no reliable independent sources can be found on a topic Wikipedia should not have an article on it i.e. the topic is not notable. However notability is based on the existence of suitable sources not on the state of sourcing in an article WPNEXIST. Original research Further information WikipediaNo original research The no original research policy NOR is closely related to the Verifiability policy. Among its requirements are All material in Wikipedia articles must be attributable to a reliable published source. This means a reliable published source must exist for it whether or not it is cited in the article. Sources must support the material clearly and directly drawing inferences from multiple sources to advance a novel position is prohibited by the NOR policy.h Base articles largely on reliable secondary sources. While primary sources are appropriate in some cases relying on them can be problematic. For more information see the Primary secondary and tertiary sources section of the NOR policy and the Misuse of primary sources section of the BLP policy. See also Guidelines Reliable sources Identifying reliable sources medicine Citing sources Information pages Wikipedia is not a reliable source Core content policies How to mine a source Independent sources Identifying and using primary sources Identifying and using selfpublished works Video links When to cite Resources Backlog  links to articles that need citations added Template indexSources of articles  maintenance templates for articles with sourcing problems The Wikipedia Library  free access to newspapers journals and magazines for experienced editors WikiProject Resource Exchange  where you can ask for help with checking an individual source Essays Citation overkill Identifying and using tertiary sources Verifiability not truth WikipediaYou are not a reliable source Notes  This principle was previously expressed on this policy page as the threshold for inclusion is verifiability not truth. See the essay WikipediaVerifiability not truth.  a b c A source directly supports a given piece of material if the information is present explicitly in the source so that using this source to support the material is not a violation of WikipediaNo original research. The location of any citationincluding whether one is present in the article at allis unrelated to whether a source directly supports the material. For questions about where and how to place citations see WikipediaCiting sources WikipediaManual of StyleLead section  Citations etc.  Once an editor has provided any source they believe in good faith to be sufficient then any editor who later removes the material must articulate specific problems that would justify its exclusion from Wikipedia e.g. why the source is unreliable the source does not support the claim undue emphasis unencyclopedic content etc.. If necessary all editors are then expected to help achieve consensus and any problems with the text or sourcing should be fixed before the material is added back.  It may be that the article contains so few citations it is impractical to add specific citation needed tags. Consider then tagging a section with unreferenced section or the article with the applicable of either unreferenced or more citations needed. For a disputed category you may use unreferenced category. For a disambiguation page consider asking for a citation on the talk page.  When tagging or removing such material please keep in mind such edits can easily be misunderstood. Some editors object to others making chronic frequent and largescale deletions of unsourced information especially if unaccompanied by other efforts to improve the material. Do not concentrate only on material of a particular point of view as that may appear to be a contravention of WikipediaNeutral point of view. Also check to see whether the material is sourced to a citation elsewhere on the page. For all these reasons it is advisable to clearly communicate that you have a considered reason to believe the material in question cannot be verified.  This includes material such as documents in publicly accessible archives as well as inscriptions in plain sight e.g. tombstones.  a b Please do note that any exceptional claim would require exceptional sources.  a b When there is a dispute as to whether a piece of text is fully supported by a given source direct quotes and other relevant details from the source should be provided to other editors as a courtesy. Do not violate the sources copyright when doing so. References  Wales Jimmy. Zero information is preferred to misleading or false information WikiENl May 16 2006 I can NOT emphasize this enough. There seems to be a terrible bias among some editors that some sort of random speculative I heard it somewhere pseudo information is to be tagged with a needs a cite tag. Wrong. It should be removed aggressively unless it can be sourced. This is true of all information but it is particularly true of negative information about living persons.  Selfpublished material is characterized by the lack of independent reviewers those without a conflict of interest validating the reliability of the content. Further examples of selfpublished sources include press releases the material contained within company websites advertising campaigns material published in media by the ownerspublishers of the media group selfreleased music albums and electoral manifestos The University of California Berkeley library states Most pages found in general search engines for the web are selfpublished or published by businesses small and large with motives to get you to buy something or believe a point of view. Even within university and library web sites there can be many pages that the institution does not try to oversee. Princeton University offers this understanding in its publication Academic Integrity at Princeton 2011 Unlike most books and journal articles which undergo strict editorial review before publication much of the information on the Web is selfpublished. To be sure there are many websites in which you can have confidence mainstream newspapers refereed electronic journals and university library and government collections of data. But for vast amounts of Webbased information no impartial reviewers have evaluated the accuracy or fairness of such material before its made instantly available across the globe. The Chicago Manual of Style 
16 th Edition states Any site that does not have a specific publisher or sponsoring body should be treated as unpublished or selfpublished work.  Rekdal Ole Bjrn 1 August 2014. Academic urban legends. Social Studies of Science. 44 4 638654. doi
10.1 1770306312714535679. ISSN 03063127. PMC 4232290. PMID 25272616.  Hume David. An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding Forgotten Books 1984 pp. 82 86 first published in 1748 as Philosophical enquiries concerning human Understanding or the Oxford 1894 edition OL 70673
96 M at para. 91 A wise man ... proportions his belief to the evidence ... That no testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle unless the testimony is of such a kind that its falsehood would be more miraculous than the fact which it endeavors to establish and even in that case there is a mutual destruction of arguments and the superior only gives us an assurance suitable to that degree of force which remains after deducting the inferior. In the 
18 th century PierreSimon Laplace reformulated the idea as The weight of evidence for an extraordinary claim must be proportioned to its strangeness. Marcello Truzzi recast it again in 1978 as An extraordinary claim requires extraordinary proof. Carl Sagan finally popularized the concept broadly as Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence in 1980 on Cosmos A Personal Voyage this was the formulation originally used on Wikipedia. Further reading Wales Jimmy. Insist on sources WikiENl July 19 2006 I really want to encourage a much stronger culture which says it is better to have no information than to have information like this with no sources.referring to a rather unlikely statement about the founders of Google throwing pies at each other. v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Referencetags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and donts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation Edit refs Refref Refref2 Refstart Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines  Five pillars Ignore all rules Content  P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright Copyright violations Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Medicine Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Dont create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct  P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paidcontribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion  P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement  P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing  P Editing policy G Article size Summary style Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broadconcept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories lists and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content  G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF  P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P List of policies G List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaVerifiabilityoldid1222991697 Categories Wikipedia policies Wikipedia verifiability Hidden categories Wikipedia semiprotected project pages Miscellany to be merged This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 0557 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width