File:Stela Shabaqo Met.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStela Shabaqo Met.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 480  600 pixels. Other resolutions 192  240 pixels  384  480 pixels  614  768 pixels  819  1024 pixels  1639  2048 pixels  2978  3722 pixels. Original file 2978  3722 pixels file size 
2.7 5 MB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStela Shabaqo Met.jpg English Ancient Egyptian donation stela of pharaoh Shabaqo written in hieratic. The king is depicted while making offerings to the goddess Wadjet and to Horus of Pe a local form of Horus both deities worshipped in the city of Buto in the Nile Delta. Regnal Year 6 of Shabaqo 
25 th Dynasty Third Intermediate Period. Acc. No. 
55.1 
44.6 . Date Unknown date Unknown date Source Donation Stela of Shabaqo Author Metropolitan Museum of Art New York Licensing This file is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 
1.0  Universal Public Domain Dedication. The person who associated a work with this deed has dedicated the work to the public domain by waiving all of their rights to the work worldwide under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights to the extent allowed by law. You can copy modify distribute and perform the work even for commercial purposes all without asking permission. httpcreativecommons.orgpublicdomainzero
1.0 deed.enCC
0 Creative Commons Zero Public Domain Dedicationfalsefalse This file which was originally posted to Donation Stela of Shabaqo was reviewed on 27 August 2017 by reviewer Leoboudv who confirmed that it was available there under the stated license on that date. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts Donation Stela of Shabaqo copyright status copyrighted dedicated to the public domain by copyright holder copyright license Creative Commons CC0 License File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1654 26 May 2017 2978  3722 
2.7 5 MB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Synov Horovi Usage on el.wikipedia.org     Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Buto kaupunki Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Petindvajseta egipanska dinastija abaka Usage on ta.wikipedia.org       Usage on th.wikipedia.org  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Shabaka Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Image title httpwww.metmuseum.orgartcollectionsearch544880 Copyright holder httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainzero
1.0  Short title 
55.1 
44.6  Copyright status Copyright status not set Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileStelaShabaqoMet.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width