File:SphinxOfTaharqa.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileSphinxOfTaharqa.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 440  599 pixels. Other resolutions 176  240 pixels  469  639 pixels. Original file 469  639 pixels file size 83 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help.     Summary Author Jon Bodsworth Description Granite sphinx of Taharqo 
25 th Dynasty from a temple at Kawa. Now residing in the British Museum London. Date 12 November 2006 Collection British Museum Native name British Museum Location London Coordinates 51 31 10 N 0 07 37 W Established 1753 Website www.britishmuseum.org Authority file  Q6373 VIAF134857252 ISNI0000000123428817 ULAN500125180 LCCNn79107735 NLA35022119 WorldCat institution QSP1
95 Q6373 SourcePhotographer httpwww.egyptarchive.co.ukhtmlbritishmuseum52.html Permission Reusing this file This file was transferred from Egypt Archive website under the license Copyrighted free use see permission here. In short you are free to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. This is Mr. Jon Bodsworths statement about his pictures from Egypt Archive All the photographs on this site are from my own originals and are copyright free. They can be reproduced in any medium. If you use any on the web I would appreciate an email. This site was designed to put as many photographs on the web as possible in an easy to use format. I have deliberately kept captions to a minimum but if you would like more information on any of the photographs let me know. The photographs on this website are only a small proportion of over 3500 that I have covering many areas of Egypt. If there is a specific photograph that you are looking for please let me know. If you use any of the pictures on the web the author Jon Bodsworth would appreciate an email jonegyptarchive.co.uk As of March 2011 Egypt Archive website was closed so if a file is uploaded after that time we need further proof of permission. Licensing The copyright holder of this work allows anyone to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. Please check the source to verify that this is correct. In particular note that publication on the Internet like publication by any other means does not in itself imply permission to redistribute. Files without valid permission should be tagged with substnpd. Usage notes If the work requires attribution use Attribution instead. If this is your own work please use Cczero instead. Copyrighted free useCopyrighted free usefalsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic    Items portrayed in this file depicts Sphinx of Taharqa in the British Museum copyright status copyrighted copyright license copyrighted free use File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1002 10 September 2017 469  639 83 KB Soerfm Crop white balance brightness 2139 12 November 2006 500  667 65 KB Captmondo Information DescriptionGranite sphinx of Taharqo 
25 th Dynasty from a temple at Kawa. Now residing in the British Museum London. Sourcehttpwww.egyptarchive.co.ukhtmlbritishmuseum52.html DateNovember 12 2006 AuthorJon Bodsworth Permissi File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed A History of the World in 100 Objects List of pharaohs Sphinx of Taharqo SubSaharan Africa Taharqa UserChasubleList of objects in the British Museums Department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Taharqa Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org                       100   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on da.wikipedia.org Afrikansk kunst Usage on el.wikipedia.org      Usage on eml.wikipedia.org La storia del mondo in 100 oggetti Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Esfinge de granito de Taharqo Una historia del mundo en cien objetos Usage on fa.wikipedia.org  Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Une histoire du monde en cent objets Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org  Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Taharqa Usage on it.wikipedia.org A History of the World in 100 Objects Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 100 Usage on ko.wikipedia.org 100      Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Taharka Usage on mr.wikipedia.org   Usage on no.wikipedia.org Oldtidens Egypt Nubiere Kongedmmet Kusj 25. egyptiske dynasti Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Taraca Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  XXV  Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Taharka Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Petindvajseta egipanska dinastija Taharka View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 72 dpi Vertical resolution 72 dpi Color space sRGB Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileSphinxOfTaharqa.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width