Napata - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early history 
2 Napatan period Toggle Napatan period subsection 
2.1 Assyrian invasion and end of the Twentyfifth dynasty 
3 Late Napatan kingdom 
4 Archaeology of the site 
5 Cultural references 
6 References 
7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Napata 44 languages Afrikaans  Asturianu  Brezhoneg Catal Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog      Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 18
32 N 31
50 E  
18.5 
3 N 
31.8 
4 E  
18.5 3 
31.8 4 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Kushite city in presentday Karima Sudan 18
32 N 31
50 E  
18.5 
3 N 
31.8 
4 E  
18.5 3 
31.8 4 Napata classnotpageimage Location of Napata npy Napata1 in hieroglyphs Napata npt2 Old Egyptian Npt Npy Meroitic Napa Ancient Greek 3 and 4 was a city of ancient Kush at the fourth cataract of the Nile founded by the Egyptian Amun cult for Egyptian pilgrims given by its as suggested Egyptian name. It is located approximately 
1.5  kilometers from the east side of the river at the site of modern Karima Sudan. Napata was the southernmost permanent settlement in the New Kingdom of Egypt 
16 th
11 th centuries BC and home to Jebel Barkal the main Kushite cult centre of Amun. It was the sometime capital of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt and after its fall in 663 BC of the Kingdom of Kush. In 593 BC it was sacked by the Egyptians and the Kushite capital was relocated to Mero. Even after this move Napata continued to be the kingdoms primary religious centre.5 The city was sacked a second time by the Romans in 23 BC but was rebuilt and continued as an important centre of the Amun cult.6 The terms Napata or Napatan period can also refer to the Kushite polity from its rise around 750 BC until 270 BC when Napata finally lost its symbolic significance as the location of royal burials to Mero. The subsequent period of Kushite history is called Meroitic down to the collapse of the kingdom.7 Early historyedit npt Napata1 in hieroglyphs The last standing pillars of the temple of Amun at the foot of Jebel Barkal Napata was founded by Thutmose III in the 
15 th century BC after his conquest of Kush. Because Egyptians believed that the inundation of the Nile equated Creation Napatas location as the southernmost point in the empire led it to become an important religious centre and settlement.5 In the Early 
18 th Dynasty Jebel Barkal a lone sandstone butte became a focus of Egyptian cultic religion as the residence of their state god Amun of Karnak. In the shadow of Jebel Barkal a religious centre called Karnak was erected and the settlement that followed in the area became known as Napata. In 1075 BC the High Priest of Amun at Thebes capital of Egypt became powerful enough to limit the power of Pharaoh Smendes of the postRamesside Twentyfirst Dynasty over Upper Egypt. This was the beginning of the Third Intermediate Period 1075664 BC. The fragmentation of power in Egypt allowed the Kushites to regain autonomy as they became increasingly estranged from Theban clergy. They founded the Kingdom of Kush which was centered at Napata. A stela erected in Napata in the eighth century presents a Kushite king whose title has been hammered out as the only ruler legitimated by the god Amun appointing the kinglets and Libyan chiefs who shared Egypt at that time and derived their legitimacy from the generals discretion.8 Napatan periodedit Statue of Kushite ruler and pharaoh of the 
25 th Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa ruled 690664 BC who led the fight against the Assyrians during the Assyrian conquest of Egypt. Louvre Museum reconstruction. In 750 BC Napata was a developed city while Egypt was still suffering political instability. Kashta whose name is Egyptian for the Kushite profited from it and attacked Upper Egypt. His policy was pursued by his successors Piye and Shabaka 721707 BC who eventually brought the whole Nile Valley under Kushitic control in the second year of his reign. Overall the Kushite kings ruled Upper Egypt for approximately one century and the whole of Egypt for approximately 57 years from 721 to 664 BC. They constitute the Twentyfifth Dynasty in Manethos Aegyptiaca. Furthermore these Kushite kings were supported by Amun clergy at Thebes and believed their power was claimed through Amun of Jebel Barkal and Amun of Karnak.2 They are depicted in art as having worn a particular type of skullcap crown reminiscent of the shape of Jebel Barkal which was intended to show how they derived their power from that Pure Mountain.5 The reunited Egyptian empire under the 
25 th dynasty was as large as it had been since the New Kingdom and ushered in a renaissance.9 Religion arts and architecture were restored to their Old Middle and New Kingdom forms. Pharaohs such as Taharqa built or restored temples and monuments throughout the Nile including at Memphis Karnak Kawa Jebel Barkal and elsewhere.10 Assyrian invasion and end of the Twentyfifth dynastyedit Main article Assyrian conquest of Egypt Pharaoh Taharqas reign and that of his eventual successor his cousin Tantamani were filled with constant conflict with the NeoAssyrian Empire. Around 670 BC emperor Esarhaddon 681669 BC conquered Lower Egypt but allowed local kingdoms there to exist in order to enlist them as his allies against the Kushite rulers of Upper Egypt who had been accepted with reluctance. When King Ashurbanipal succeeded Esarhaddon the Kushite king Taharqa convinced some rulers of Lower Egypt to break with Assyrians. However Assurbanipal overpowered the coalition. He appointed Necho I ruler of Memphis and Sas. Necho was the first king of the Twentysixth Dynasty 664525 BC of Egypt which is also known as the Sate Dynasty. In 664 BC the Assyrians struck the final blow sacking Thebes and Memphis. The same year Taharqa died. The new Kushite king Tantamani 664653 BC killed Necho I that same year when he tried to invade Lower Egypt. However Tantamani was unable to defeat the Assyrians who backed Nechos son Psamtik I. Tantamani eventually abandoned his attempt to conquer Lower Egypt and retreated to Napata. However his authority over Upper Egypt was acknowledged until 656 BC when Psamtik I dispatched a naval fleet to Upper Egypt and succeeded in placing all of Egypt under his control. The 
25 th dynasty ended with its rulers retreating to Napata. It was there at ElKurru and Nuri that all 
25 th dynasty pharaohs are buried under the first pyramids that the Nile valley had seen since the Middle Kingdom.111213 The Napatan dynasty continued to rule the Kushite state which flourished in Napata and Mero until at least the second century AD. Late Napatan kingdomedit Kushite pyramids at Nuri Napatan necklace spacer made of gold 
6 th century BC. It is inscribed with Egyptian hieroglyphs in the name of Aramatleqo. Napata remained the centre of the Kingdom of Kush for another two generations from the 6
50 s to 590 BC. Its economy was essentially based on gold with 
26 th dynasty Egypt an important economic ally. Napatan architecture paintings writing script and other artistic and cultural forms were in Kush style. Egyptian burial customs were practised including the resurrection of pyramid building. Also several ancient Egyptian deities were worshipped. The most important god was Amun a Theban deity. The Temple of Amun and the Temple of Mut were the most important ones at Napata located at the foot of Jebel Barkal.14 After the Achaemenid conquest of Egypt Napata lost its economic influence. The Napatan region itself was desiccating leading to less cattle and agriculture. An Achaemenid raid had seriously affected Napata in 591 BC. Finally Napata was losing its role of economic capital to Mero. The island of Mero the peninsula formed by the Nile and the Atbarah River was an area rich in iron which was becoming an essential source of wealth. Meroe eventually became the capital of the Kingdom of Kush leading to the abandonment of Napata. In 23 BC the Governor of Roman Egypt Gaius Petronius invaded Kush with 10000 men after an initial attack by the queen of Mero razing Napata to the ground. In the Res Gestae Divi Augusti Deeds of the Divine Augustus Augustus claims that a penetration was made as far as the town of Napata which is next to Meroe.15 After the Roman sack Napata was restored by King Natakamani who renovated the temple of Amun and constructed a palace. Later the site was abandoned its buildings plundered and destroyed. There is circumstantial evidence that this may have been the result of religious changes.16 Archaeology of the siteedit The American archaeologists George A. Reisner discovered a total of ten complete or nearly complete statues in two caches. These statues depicted Taharqa and several of his successors including Tanwetamani Senkamanisken Anlamani and Aspelta. This discovery was partially accidental as Reisner had only happened upon the first cache while searching for a prospective dump site. Weeks later the second cache was found within the nearby Amun temple with several fragments matching the statues in the first cache. Along with the statue fragments ash was found in the second cache which suggested to Reisner that the sculptures had been purposefully destroyed. Due to the close proximity the statues from the caches are thought to have once been displayed in the Amun temple.17 The earliest known standing structure at Jebel Barkal is the Enthronement Pavilion which has been dated to the reign of Thutmose IV. This structure is adjacent to the Jebel Barkal cliff which has resulted in several rock falls damaging the construction at various points in the third century BC and first century AD. The 
18 th Dynasty use for this structure is uncertain though it is known to have functioned as a royal enthronement pavilion during the third century BC.18 Cultural referencesedit Napata was mentioned in Giuseppe Verdis opera Aida 1871 in Act III when Amonasro uses Aida to learn where Rhadames will lead his army. Referencesedit  a b Gauthier Henri 1926. Dictionnaire des Noms Gographiques Contenus dans les Textes Hiroglyphiques. Vol. 3. p. 8687.  a b Napata in the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language 2020.  Strabo Geography 

17.1.5 4  Stephanus of Byzantium Ethnica N4
69.1   a b c Kendall Timothy 2016. A Visitors Guide to The Jebel Barkal Temples. Khartoum. p. 7.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Timothy Kendall 2001 Napata in Donald B. Redford The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt Oxford University Press.  Richard A. Lobban Napata Historical Dictionary of Ancient and Medieval Nubia Scarecrow 2004 pp. 274276.  Le faiseur de rois et de chefs libyens sur la stle de Napata au Muse de Khartoum SNM 1851.  Diop Cheikh Anta 1974. The African Origin of Civilization. Chicago Illinois Lawrence Hill Books. pp. 219221. ISBN 1556520727.  Bonnet Charles 2006. The Nubian Pharaohs. New York The American University in Cairo Press. pp. 142154. ISBN 9789774160103.  Mokhtar G. 1990. General History of Africa. California USA University of California Press. pp. 161163. ISBN 0520066979.  Emberling Geoff 2011. Nubia Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. New York Institute for the Study of the Ancient World. pp. 911. ISBN 9780615481029.  Silverman David 1997. Ancient Egypt. New York Oxford University Press. pp. 3637. ISBN 0195212703.  World Studies The Ancient World Chapter 3 Section 5 Pages 100 101 and 102  Augustus The Deeds of the Divine Augustus Exploring the European Past Texts  Images Second Edition ed. Timothy E. Gregory Mason Thomson 2008 119.  Alessandro Roccati 2003 Napata the Destroyed City A Method for Plundering in M. Liverani ed. Arid Lands in Roman Times Papers from the International Conference Rome July 
9 th
10 th 2001 Florence Allinsegna del Giglio pp. 5964.  Kendall Timothy 2016. A Visitors Guide to The Jebel Barkal Temples. pp. 6775.  Kendall Timothy 2016. A Visitors Guide to The Jebel Barkal Temples. pp. 9093. Further readingedit Frdric Colin Le faiseur de rois et de chefs libyens sur la stle de Napata au Muse de Khartoum SNM 1851 Carnet de laboratoire en archologie gyptienne 6 mai 2020 httpsclae.hypotheses.org189 consult le 21 mai 2020. Hornung Erik. 1999. History of Ancient Egypt An Introduction. Translated from German by David Lorton. Grundzge der gyptischen Geschichte. New York USA Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801484758. Grimal Nicolas. 1992. A History of Ancient Egypt. Translated from French by Ian Shaw. Histoire de LEgypte Ancienne. Oxford UK Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0631174729. Bianchi Robert Steven. 1994. The Nubians People of the Ancient Nile. Connecticut USA Millbrook Press. ISBN 1562943561. Taylor John. 1991. Egypt and Nubia. London UK The British Museum Press. ISBN 0674241304. UNESCO. 2003. General History of Africa vol.2 Ancient Civilizations of Africa. Berkeley CA University of California Press. ISBN 0435948067. v t e Kushite religion Beliefs Afterlife Christianity Creation myths Egyptian religion Eye of Ra Flooding of the Nile Maat Mythology Philosophy Prophecy of Neferti Soul Practices Burials Execration texts Funerals Mortuary temple Pilgrimage Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Triads Elephantine Naqa A Aman Amanete Amesemi Anaka Apedemak Aqedise Arensnuphis Ariten B Bes Breith D Dedun H Heka Hemen K M Makedeke Mash Mehit Menhit Merul Miket N R S Sabomakal T W Wusa Cultures AGroup Alodia BGroup Blemmyes CGroup Kerma Kingdom of alAbwab Makuria Medja Mero Napata Nobatia XGroup Locations Aniba Ballana Bigeh Deir elBahari Dodekaschoinos Dotawo Elephantine Jebel Barkal Kawa Lisht Musawwarat esSufra Philae temple complex Qasr Ibrim Qustul Semna Temple of Amun Temple of Dendur Temple of Mut Throne Hall of Dongola Tombos Sacred animals Abtu Barbary lion Cattle Falcon Hieracosphinx Medjed Nile crocodile North African elephant Ram Serpopard Sphinx Taweret Uraeus Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Christian cross Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Gold Hafir Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Languages Blemmyes language Egyptian language Meroitic language Meroitic alphabet Nubian language Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Israel Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNapataoldid1219873070 Categories Populated places established in the 
2 nd millennium BC Populated places disestablished in the 
1 st century BC Cities in ancient Egypt Iron Age Former populated places in Sudan Former capitals of Egypt Ancient Greek geography of East Africa Kushite cities Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers This page was last edited on 20 April 2024 at 1049 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width