Help:Referencing for beginners - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Inline citations 
2 RefToolbar 
3 Using the 2017 wikitext editor 
4 Reliable sources 
5 See also Toggle the table of contents HelpReferencing for beginners 13 languages   Kurd Bahasa Melayu     Slovenina Srpskohrvatski      Edit links Help page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia This help page is a howto guide. It details processes or procedures of some aspects of Wikipedias norms and practices. It is not one of Wikipedias policies or guidelines and may reflect varying levels of consensus and vetting. Shortcuts WPREFB WPREFBEGIN WPREFSTART This page assumes you are using the source editor. Alternatively learn referencing in VisualEditor. The source editor shows underlying wiki markup like Earth. The VisualEditor works like a word processor. Wikipedian protester by Randall Munroe xkcd. Wikipedians famously demand citations for claims One of the key policies of Wikipedia is that all article content has to be verifiable. This means that reliable sources must be able to support the material. All quotations any material whose verifiability has been challenged or is likely to be challenged and contentious material whether negative positive or neutral about living persons must include an inline citation to a source that directly supports the material. This also means that Wikipedia is not the place for original work archival findings that have not been published or evidence from any source that has not been published. If you are adding new content it is your responsibility to add sourcing information along with it. Material provided without a source is significantly more likely to be removed from an article. Sometimes it will be tagged first with a citation needed template to give editors a chance to find and add sources but some editors will simply remove it because they question its veracity. This tutorial will show you how to add inline citations to articles and also briefly explain what Wikipedia considers to be a reliable source. Inline citations Shortcut WPINTREF2 Inline citations are usually small numbered footnotes like this.1 They are generally added either directly following the fact that they support or at the end of the sentence that they support following any punctuation. When clicked they take the reader to a citation in a reference section near the bottom of the article. While editing a page that uses the most common footnote style you will see inline citations displayed between ref...ref tags. If you are creating a new page or adding references to a page that didnt previously have any remember to add a References section like the one below near the end of the article Referencesreflist Note This is by far the most popular system for inline citations but sometimes you will find other styles being used in an article. This is acceptable and you shouldnt change it or mix styles. To add a new reference just copy and modify an existing one. References  Wales Jimmy 2024. What is an inline citation. Wikipublisher. p. 6. RefToolbar Shortcut WPINTREF3 This screencast walks through how to use RefTools Manually adding references can be a slow and tricky process. Fortunately there is a tool called RefToolbar built into the Wikipedia edit window which makes it much easier. To use it click on Cite at the top of the edit window having already positioned your cursor after the sentence or fact you wish to reference. Then select one of the Templates from the dropdown menu that best suits the type of source. These are cite web for references to general websites cite news for newspapers and news websites cite book for references to books cite journal for magazines academic journals and papers A template window then pops up where you fill in as much information as possible about the source and give a unique name for it in the Ref name field. Click the Insert button which will add the required wikitext in the edit window. If you wish you can also Preview how your reference will look first. Some fields such as a web address also known as a URL will have a icon next to them. After filling in this field you can click it to handily autofill the remaining fields. It doesnt always work properly though so be sure to double check it. Often you will want to use the same source more than once in an article to support multiple facts. In this case you can click Named references in the toolbar and select a previously added source to reuse. Using the 2017 wikitext editor As an alternative to the RefToolbar it is possible to insert citations in the source editor using a similar automated tool as the one used in the visual editor. For this you need to enable the 2017 wikitext editor in your preferences. You will then be able to edit the source of pages while inserting citations using the automated tool of the visual editor. Reliable sources Shortcut WPINTREF4 Wikipedia articles require reliable published sources that directly support the information presented in the article. Now you know how to add sources to an article but which sources should you use The word source in Wikipedia has three meanings the work itself for example a document article paper or book the creator of the work for example the writer and the publisher of the work for example Cambridge University Press. All three can affect reliability. Reliable sources are those with a reputation for factchecking and accuracy. They tend to have an editorial process with multiple people scrutinizing work before it is published. Academic and peerreviewed publications are usually the most reliable sources. Other reliable sources include university textbooks books published by respected publishing houses magazines journals and news coverage not opinions from mainstream newspapers. Selfpublished media where the author and publisher are the same are usually not acceptable as sources. These can include newsletters personal websites press releases patents open wikis personal or group blogs and tweets. However if an author is an established expert with a previous record of thirdparty publications on a topic their selfpublished work may be considered reliable for that particular topic. Whether a source is usable also depends on context. Sources that are reliable for some material are not reliable for other material. For instance otherwise unreliable selfpublished sources are usually acceptable to support uncontroversial information about the sources author. You should always try to use the best possible source particularly when writing about living people. These are general guidelines but the topic of reliable sources is a complicated one and is impossible to fully cover here. You can find more information at WikipediaVerifiability and at WikipediaReliable sources. There is also a list of commonly used sources with information on their reliability. Try it Take a quiz on reliable sources See also WikipediaVisualEditorUser guide  Adding a new reference WikipediaVisualEditorUser guide  Editing references HelpReferencing for beginners without using templates HelpReferencing for beginners with citation templates HelpCitations quick reference HelpReferences and page numbers WikipediaReferences dos and donts WikipediaIdentifying reliable sources WikipediaCitation templates UserNick MoyesEasier Referencing for Beginners v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Referencetags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and donts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation Edit refs Refref Refref2 Refstart Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Citation Style 1 General templates Cite book books Cite conference conference papers Cite document short standalone offline documents Cite encyclopedia edited collections Cite interview interviews Cite journal academic journals Cite magazine magazines Cite mailing list public mailing lists Cite map maps Cite news news articles Cite newsgroup online newsgroups Cite press release press releases Cite report unpublished reports Cite sign signs plaques Cite speech speeches Cite tech report technical reports Cite thesis theses Cite web web sources Preprint templates Cite arXiv Cite bioRxiv Cite CiteSeerX Cite medRxiv Cite SSRN Audiovisualrelated Cite AV media Cite AV media notes Cite episode Cite podcast Cite serial Categories Citation Style 1 templates Citation Style 1 specificsource templates Documentation Citation Style documentation Citation Style 1 noticeboard Introduction Starting introduction Policies and Guidelines Source editor Editing Referencing Images Tables VisualEditor Editing Referencing Images Tables Talk pages Navigating Manual of Style Conclusion Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHelpReferencingforbeginnersoldid1204331802 Categories Wikipedia howto Wikipedia quick introductions Wikipedia sources Hidden category Wikipedia semiprotected project pages This page was last edited on 6 February 2024 at 2259 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width