Tefnakht II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 Tefnakht I and Tefnakht II 
3 References Toggle the table of contents Tefnakht II 10 languages  Deutsch  Franais Italiano Magyar  Srpskohrvatski     Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Tefnakht II Stephinates A scarab attributed to a king Menibre1 who according to Kitchen may have been Tefnakht II. Bologna Museo Civico Archeologico KS 2670. Pharaoh Reign 695  688 BC Predecessor Ammeris as governor of Sais Successor Nekauba Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Menibre or Iribre Nomen Tefnakht Children Nekauba Necho I Dynasty ProtoSaite Dynasty Tefnakht II Ancient Greek  Stephints  Stephinthis Latin Stephinates Stephinathis was an ancient Egyptian ruler of the city of Sais during the early 
7 th century BC. He is recognized as an early member of the socalled ProtoSaite Dynasty2 which directly preceded the 
26 th Dynasty of Egypt. Biographyedit Tefnakht II is mainly known by Manethos Aegyptiaca under the name Stephinates. Based on Manethos work Sextus Julius Africanus called Stephinates the founder of the 
26 th Dynasty while another historian Eusebius placed a certain Ammeris the Nubian just before him. In both cases the two historians credited Stephinates with a 
7 yearlong reign.3 In 1917 Flinders Petrie was the first to argue that Stephinates was probably an Ancient Greek render of the Egyptian name Tefnakht and first called this ruler Tefnakht II in order to distinguish him by the namesake Great Chief of the West who few decades earlier clashed against pharaoh Piye of the Kushite 
25 th Dynasty and later rose to kingship under the name Shepsesre Tefnakht I founding the shortlived Saite 
24 th Dynasty.4 Kenneth Kitchen hypothesized that Tefnakht II may have been a relative of pharaoh Bakenranef  son and successor of Tefnakht I  who was probably killed by Shebitqo and then replaced by a faithful governor the aforementioned Ammeris. Thus according to Kitchen Tefnakht II effectively restored a Saite dynasty and ruled from 695 to 688 BC.3 He was then succeeded by another relative called Nekhepsos in Greek and identified with the Egyptian Nekauba. It is possible that many scarabs datable to this period and bearing the otherwise unknown throne names Menibre and Iribre belongs indeed to Tefnakht II and Nekauba.4 In 2011 Kim Ryholt made a case for Tefnakht II being the father of the later pharaoh Necho I according to a papyrus from Tebtunis the latter was the son of a king named Tefnakht with the most likely choice being Tefnakht II.5 Tefnakht I and Tefnakht IIedit Year 8 stela of king Shepsesre Tefnakht. Oliver Perdu suggested to identify him with Tefnakht II rather than Tefnakht I Since the initial claim by Petrie there were scholars whom questioned the distinction between Tefnakht I and Tefnakht II. In 1956 Wolfgang Helck equated the two figures64 a position later rejected by KarlHeinz Priese who stated that there was no compelling reason to identify Tefnakht II with Tefnakht I aside from the similarity of their names.7 In more recent times Oliver Perdu noticed close similarities in style form and content between a newly discovered donation stela dating to Year 2 of Necho I and a Year 8 donation stela of Shepsesre Tefnakht I. Perdu argued that these two Saite rulers were more close contemporaries than usually believed and suggested that Shepsesre Tefnakht is in fact Tefnakht II and not Tefnakht I the former having lived just few years before Necho I while the latter several decades before.8 Perdus arguments were put in discussion by Danel Kahn who note that his epigraphic criteria here  such as the use of the tripartite wig the slender figure of the king and the method through which the falconheaded god keeps his head upright in stelas and temple wall reliefs contemporary with Tefnakht Is time  appear in use already in the early 
25 th Dynasty during Piyes or Shabakas reign and even in Shoshenq Vs Year 38 donation stela of the Chief of the Ma Tefnakht I who was Piyes rival.9 Referencesedit  Jaeger B. 1993. Les scarabes  noms royaux du Museo civico archeologico de Bologna. N114  Kitchen Kenneth A. 1996. The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC. Warminster Aris  Phillips Limited. ISBN 0856682985. revised Table 4  a b Kitchen op. cit.  116  a b c Kitchen op. cit.  117  Ryholt Kim 2011. King Necho I son of king Tefnakhte II. In Feder F. Morenz L. Vittman G. eds.. Von Theben nach Giza. Festmiszellen fr Stefan Grunert zum 65. Geburtstag. Gttinger Miszellen Beihefte 10. pp. 123127.  Helck Wolfgang 1956. Untersuchungen zu Manetho p. 48  Priese KarlHeinz 1970. Der Beginn der kuschitischen Herrschaft in gypten. ZS. 98 1632.  Perdu Oliver 2002. De Stphinats  Nchao ou les dbuts de la XXVIe dynastie. Comptes rendus des sances de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et BellesLettres. 146 4 12151244. doi
10.3 4
06 crai.20
02.2 2514.  Kahn Danel 2007. The Transition from Libyan to Nubian Rule in Egypt Revisiting the Reign of Tefnakht. In Broekman G.P.F. Demare R.J. Kaper O.E. eds.. The Libyan Period in Egypt Historical and Cultural Studies into the 
21 st  
24 th Dynasties Proceedings of a Conference at Leiden University 2527 October 2007. pp. 139148. Preceded by Ammeris as governor of Sais Pharaoh of Egypt ProtoSaite Dynasty Succeeded by Nekauba v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTefnakhtIIoldid1190562152 Categories 
7 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Latinlanguage text This page was last edited on 18 December 2023 at 1606 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width