File:Necho I Horus.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileNecho I Horus.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. NechoIHorus.png 267  433 pixels file size 186 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionNecho I Horus.png Small pottery statue resembling Horus bearing the cartouches of Menkheperre Necho I XXVI dynasty now in the Petrie Museum. Source Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. LIV Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic     Items portrayed in this file depicts File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1952 30 September 2013 267  433 186 KB Khruner Information DescriptionSmall pottery statue resembling Horus bearing the cartouches of Menkheperre Necho I XXVI dynasty now in the Petrie Museum. SourceFlinders Petrie Scarabs and Cylinders with names. Date1917 Authordrawing by Flind... File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Necho I UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org       Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Usage on fa.wikipedia.org     Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org   Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Horus Periodo tardo dellEgitto Necao I Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 1 Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov estindvajseta egipanska dinastija Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  I Usage on th.wikipedia.org   1 Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  I Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Necho I Danh sch pharaon Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
37.7 9 dpc Vertical resolution 
37.7 9 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileNechoIHorus.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width