Tantamani - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Filiation 
2 Conflict with Ashurbanipal of Assyria 
3 Later rule 
4 Tomb in ElKurru 
5 Artifacts 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Tantamani 35 languages Afrikaans   Catal Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Kushite King of Napata Tantamani Kushite King of Napata Statue of Kushite ruler and last pharaoh of the 
25 th Dynasty Tantamani Louvre Museum reconstruction through colorpigment analysis Predecessor Taharqa Successor Atlanersa Burial ElKurru K. 16 Spouse Piankharty ..salka possibly Malaqaye Issue Possibly Atlanersa Queen Yeturow Queen Khaliset Names Tantamani Father Shabaka or Shebitku Mother Queen Qalhata Tantamani Ancient Egyptian tnwtjmn NeoAssyrian tanamman Ancient Greek  Temnths1 also known as Tanutamun or Tanwetamani d. 653 BC was ruler of the Kingdom of Kush located in Northern Sudan and the last pharaoh of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt. His prenomen or royal name was Bakare which means Glorious is the Soul of Re.2 Filiationedit See also Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt family tree He was the son of King Shabaka and the nephew of his predecessor Taharqa.3 In some sources he is said to be the son of Shebitku.4 Assyrian records call Tantamani a son of Shabaka and refer to his mother Qalhata as a sister of Taharqa. Some Egyptologists interpreted the Assyrian text as stating that Tantamani was a son of Shebitku but it is now more common to consider Tantamani a son of Shabaka.5 Part of a series on Kushite Monarchs and Rulers Main Topics Main article Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Qore Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Conflict with Ashurbanipal of Assyriaedit Main article Assyrian conquest of Egypt Portrait of Tantamani Sudan National Museum. Ashurbanipals account of his Second Campaign in Egypt against Tantamani Urdamanee Ruddamon in the Rassam cylinder nomen or birth name t n w t mn Tenutamun in hieroglyphs Soon after the Assyrians had appointed Necho I as king and left Tantamani invaded Egypt in hopes of restoring his family to the throne. Tantamani marched down the Nile from Nubia and reoccupied all of Egypt including Memphis. Necho I and the Assyrians representative were killed in Tantamanis campaign. This led to a renewed conflict with Ashurbanipal in 663 BCE. The Assyrians led by Ashurbanipal returned to Egypt in force. Together with Psamtik Is army which included Carian mercenaries they fought a pitched battle in north Memphis close to the temple of Isis between the Serapeum and Abusir. Tantamani was defeated and fled to Upper Egypt. Forty days after the battle Ashurbanipals army arrived in Thebes. Tantamani had already left the city for Kipkipi a location that remains uncertain but might be Kom Ombo some 200 km 120 mi south of Thebes.6265 The city of Thebes was conquered smashed as if by a floodstorm and heavily plundered in the Sack of Thebes.7 The event is not mentioned in Egyptian sources but is known from the Assyrian annals8 which report that the inhabitants were deported. The Assyrians took a large booty of gold silver precious stones clothes horses fantastic animals as well as two obelisks covered in electrum weighing 
2.5 00 talents c. 
75.5  tons or 166500 lb7 Capture of Memphis by the Assyrians in 663 BCE. This city the whole of it I conquered it with the help of Ashur and Ishtar. Silver gold precious stones all the wealth of the palace rich cloth precious linen great horses supervising men and women two obelisks of splendid electrum weighing 2500 talents the doors of temples I tore from their bases and carried them off to Assyria. With this weighty booty I left Thebes. Against Egypt and Kush I have lifted my spear and shown my power. With full hands I have returned to Nineveh in good health. Rassam cylinder of Ashurbanipal9 The sack of Thebes was a momentous event that reverberated throughout the Ancient Near East. It is mentioned in the Book of Nahum chapter 3810 Art thou better than populous No that was situate among the rivers that had the waters round about it whose rampart was the sea and her wall was from the sea Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength and it was infinite Put and Lubim were thy helpers. Yet was she carried away she went into captivity her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets and they cast lots for her honourable men and all her great men were bound in chains A prophecy in the Book of Isaiah10 refers to the sack as well Just as my servant Isaiah has gone stripped and barefoot for three years as a sign and portent against Egypt and Cush so the king of Assyria will lead away stripped and barefoot the Egyptian captives and Cushite exiles young and old with buttocks baredto Egypts shame. Those who trusted in Cush and boasted in Egypt will be dismayed and put to shame. The Assyrian reconquest effectively ended Nubian control over Egypt although Tantamanis authority was still recognised in Upper Egypt until his 
8 th Year in 656 BCE when Psamtik Is navy peacefully took control of Thebes and effectively unified all of Egypt. These events marked the start of the Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt. Later ruleedit Thereafter Tantamani ruled only Nubia Kush. He died in 653 BC and was succeeded by Atlanersa a son of Taharqa. He was buried in the family cemetery at ElKurru. The archaeologist Charles Bonnet discovered the statue of Tantamani at Kerma now called Doukki Gel in 20
03.1 1 Tomb in ElKurruedit The tomb of Tantamani was located below a pyramid now disappeared at the site of ElKurru. Only the entrance and the chambers remain which are beautifully decorated with mural paintings. Exterior of the Nubian tomb of Tantamani.12 Portrait of Tantamani in his tomb in ElKurru Tomb of the pyramide of Tantamani at the site of ElKurru Burial Chamber of Tantamani Tomb of Tantamani Burial Chamber of Tantamani Tomb of Tantamani Artifactsedit King Tantamani National Museum of Sudan Statue of Tantamani Kerma Museum Yet another statue of Tantamani Kerma Museum Tanotamun portrait in Kerma Museum Tantamani in profile. Kerma Museum Tantamani statue Toledo Museum of Art Painting of Tantamani in Thebes Statuette of god Amon dedicated by Tantamani Head of AmonRam dedicated by Tantamani Muse du Louvre Stele of the Dream by Tantamani Jebel Barkal Sudan Stele of the Dream Tantamani making offerings to Egyptian Gods Prenomen and Nomen of Tantamani See alsoedit List of monarchs of Kush Referencesedit  URdammani TANUTAMON PHARAOH OF EGYPT RN. Oracc The Open Richly Annotated Cuneiform Corpus.  Clayton Peter A. 1994. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. London Thames and Hudson. p. 190. ISBN 0500050740.  Dodson Aidan Hilton Dyan 2004. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500051283.  Dunham Dows Macadam M. F. Laming 1949. Names and Relationships of the Royal Family of Napata. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 35 139149. doi
10.1 177030751334903500124. S
2 CID 192423817.  Morkot R. G. 2000. The Black Pharaohs Egypts Nubian Rulers. The Rubicon Press. ISBN 0948695234.  Kahn Danel 2006. The Assyrian Invasions of Egypt 673663 B.C. and the Final Expulsion of the Kushites. Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur. 34 251267. JSTOR 25157757.  a b Kahn 2006 p. 265.  Robert G. Morkot The Black Pharaohs Egypts Nubian Rulers London ISBN 0948695234 p. 296  Ashurbanipal auto biography cylinder c. 668 BCE in James B. Pritchard ed. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament with Supplement Princeton UP 195019692014 29495. ISBN 9781400882762. Translated earlier in John Pentland Mahaffy et al. eds. A History of Egypt vol. 3 London Scribner 1905 307. Google Books partialview books.google.combooksid
04 VUAAAAYAAJpgPA307 and E. A. Wallis Budge A History of Ethiopia Volume I Nubia and Abyssinia London Taylor  Francis 19282014 38. ISBN 9781317649151  2035  Digging into Africas past. Archived from the original on November 11 2007.  Sudan National Museum. sudannationalmuseum.com. Further readingedit Morkot Robert 2000. The Black Pharaohs Egypts Nubian Rulers. The Rubicon Press. ISBN 0948695234. Regnal titles Preceded by Taharqa Pharaoh of Egypt 664  656 BC Succeeded by Psamtik I King of Kush 664  653 BC Succeeded by Atlanersa v t e Kushite monarchs and rulers Main topics Main article Qore Kandake Kingdom of Kush Nubia Pharaoh Viceroy Viceroys at Kerma SiTayit Turo Seni Penre Amenemnekhu Nehi Usersatet Amenhotep Merymose Tuthmose Amenhotep called Huy Paser I Amenemopet Yuny Heqanakht Paser II Huy Setau Anhotep Mernudjem Khaemtir Messuy Seti Hori I Hori II Siese Nahihor Wentawat Ramessesnakht Pinehesy Setmose Piankh Herihor Akheperre Neskhons Pamiu I Napatan Alara Kashta Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tantamani Atlanersa Senkamanisken Anlamani Aspelta Early Meroitic Aramatleqo Malonaqen Analmaye Amaninatakilebte Piankhariten Karkamani Amaniastabarqa Siaspiqa Nasakhma Malewiebamani Talakhamani Amanineteyerike Baskakeren Harsiotef Akhraten Amanibakhi Nastasen Aktisanes Aryamani Kash...amani Arikepiankhiqo Sabrakamani Late Meroitic Arakamani Amanislo Amantekha Arnekhamani Arqamani Adikhalamani Tabirqo Nahirqo Tanyidamani Pakhedateqo Naqyrinsan Teriteqas Amanirenas Amanishakheto Shanakdakhete Nawidemak Amanikhabale Natakamani Amanitore Shorkaror Amanikhareqerem Amanitenmemide Amanikhatashan Tarekeniwal Amanikhalika Aritenyesbokhe Amanitaraqide Amanikhedolo Takideamani Mashadakhel Teqorideamani Tamelerdeamani Talakhidamani Aryesbokhe Yesebokheamani Patrapeamani Amanipilade Category v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTantamanioldid1217882584 Categories 653 BC deaths 
7 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
7 thcentury BC monarchs of Kush Pharaohs of the Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Egyptian people of Nubian descent Kingdom of Kush Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 8 April 2024 at 1229 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width