File:Psammetique Ier TPabasa.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FilePsammetique Ier TPabasa.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 422  599 pixels. Other resolutions 169  240 pixels  583  827 pixels. Original file 583  827 pixels file size 581 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionPsammetique Ier TPabasa.jpg Franais  Relief reprsentant Psammtique Ier faisant une offrande au dieu RHorakhty  Tombe de Pabasa  Thbes  XXVIe dynastie gyptienne English Psammetichus I adoring RaHarakhte  Pabasas tomb in the Theban Necropolis  
26 th dynasty of Egypt. Using the milkjug hieroglyph in text in front of Pharaoh and two milk jugs in hands Making offering of Milk Date 22 August 2005 Source travail personnel  Casio EXS500 Author Neithsabes Other versions Derivative works of this file Psammetique Ier T Pabasa.jpg Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse I the copyright holder of this work release this work into the public domain. This applies worldwide. In some countries this may not be legally possible if so I grant anyone the right to use this work for any purpose without any conditions unless such conditions are required by law. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts creator some value Wikimedia username Neithsabes author name string Neithsabes URL httpscommons.wikimedia.orgwikiuserNeithsabes copyright status copyrighted dedicated to the public domain by copyright holder copyright license released into the public domain by the copyright holder inception 22 August 2005 exposure time 
0.0 1 second fnumber 3 focal length 
7.6  millimetre File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1400 19 March 2017 583  827 581 KB Soerfm Color 1813 18 August 2008 583  827 369 KB Neithsabes  Description  Information DescriptionfrRelief reprsentant Psammtique Ier faisant une offrande au dieu RHorakhty  Tombe de Pabasa  Thbes  XXVIe dynastie gyptienne enPsammetichus I adoring RaHarakhte  Pabasas tomb in the Th File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed 656 BC List of pharaohs List of portraiture offerings with Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs Sack of Thebes UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Psamtik I Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org       Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  I Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on el.wikipedia.org     Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Saqueo de Tebas Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Psammtique Ier Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org  Usage on hr.wikipedia.org Psamtik I. Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Psamtik I Usage on it.wikipedia.org Sacco di Tebe Usage on ka.wikipedia.org  I Usage on mk.wikipedia.org 7  ... Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Penjarahan Thebes Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Psamtik I Usage on ru.wikipedia.org    I    XXVI  Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org     Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Psametik I. estindvajseta egipanska dinastija Usage on sr.wikipedia.org    I Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Plundringen av Thebe Usage on ta.wikipedia.org       Usage on th.wikipedia.org  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi I. Psamtik Usage on uk.wikipedia.org     I Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Camera manufacturer CASIO COMPUTER CO.LTD. Camera model EXS500 Exposure time 1100 sec 
0.0 1 Fnumber f3 Date and time of data generation 0927 22 August 2005 Lens focal length 
7.6  mm Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 72 dpi Vertical resolution 72 dpi Software used 
1.0 0 File change date and time 0927 22 August 2005 Exposure Program Normal program Exif version 
2.2 1 Date and time of digitizing 0927 22 August 2005 Meaning of each component Y Cb Cr does not exist Image compression mode 5 Exposure bias 0 Maximum land aperture 
2.8  APEX f
2.6 4 Metering mode Pattern Light source Unknown Flash Flash did not fire compulsory flash suppression Supported Flashpix version 1 Color space sRGB File source Digital still camera Custom image processing Normal process Exposure mode Auto exposure White balance Auto white balance Digital zoom ratio 0 Focal length in 35 mm film 47 mm Scene capture type Standard Scene control Low gain up Contrast Normal Saturation Normal Sharpness Normal IIM version 2 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFilePsammetiqueIerTPabasa.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width