Necho II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 
1.1 Lineage and early life 
1.2 Military campaigns 

1.2.1 First campaign 

1.2.2 Second campaign 
1.3 Ambitious projects 
1.4 Phoenician expedition 
1.5 Death and succession 
2 Further reading 
3 See also 
4 References 
5 External articles Toggle the table of contents Necho II 41 languages   Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais   Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Necho II Nekau A small kneeling bronze statuette likely Necho II now residing in the Brooklyn Museum Pharaoh Reign 610595 BC Predecessor Psamtik I Successor Psamtik II Royal titulary Horus name Maaib Nebty name Maakheru Golden Horus Merynetjeru Prenomen Praenomen Wahemibre Nomen Necho Consort Khedebneithirbinet I Died 595 BC Dynasty 
26 th dynasty Necho II1 sometimes Nekau2 Neku3 Nechoh4 or Nikuu5 Greek  678 Hebrew  Modern Ne Tiberian N of Egypt was a king of the 
26 th Dynasty 610595 BC which ruled from Sais.9 Necho undertook a number of construction projects across his kingdom.10 In his reign according to the Greek historian Herodotus Necho II sent out an expedition of Phoenicians which in three years sailed from the Red Sea around Africa to the Strait of Gibraltar and back to Egypt.11 His son Psammetichus II upon succession may have removed Nechos name from monuments.12 Necho played a significant role in the histories of the NeoAssyrian Empire the NeoBabylonian Empire and the Kingdom of Judah. Necho II is most likely the pharaoh Neco who was mentioned in 2 Kings 2 Chronicles and Jeremiah of the Bible.131415 The aim of the second of Nechos campaigns was Asiatic conquest1617 to contain the westward advance of the NeoBabylonian Empire and cut off its trade route across the Euphrates. However the Egyptians were defeated by the unexpected attack of the Babylonians and were eventually expelled from Syria. The Egyptologist Donald B. Redford observed that Necho II was a man of action from the start and endowed with an imagination perhaps beyond that of his contemporaries who had the misfortune to foster the impression of being a failure.18 Biographyedit See also Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Lineage and early lifeedit Necho II was the son of Psammetichus I by his Great Royal Wife Mehtenweskhet. His prenomen or royal name WahemIbRe means Carrying out the Heart i.e. Wish of Re.19 Upon his ascension Necho was faced with the chaos created by the raids of the Cimmerians and the Scythians who had not only ravaged Asia west of the Euphrates but had also helped the Babylonians shatter the Assyrian Empire. That once mighty empire was now reduced to the troops officials and nobles who had gathered around a general holding out at Harran who had taken the throne name of Ashuruballit II. Necho attempted to assist this remnant immediately upon his coronation but the force he sent proved to be too small and the combined armies were forced to retreat west across the Euphrates.citation needed Military campaignsedit First campaignedit In the spring of 609 BC Necho personally led a sizable force to help the Assyrians. At the head of a large army consisting mainly of his mercenaries Necho took the coast route Via Maris into Syria supported by his Mediterranean fleet along the shore and proceeded through the low tracts of Philistia and Sharon. At Megiddo according to 2 Kings 23 he engaged the Judean king Josiah and had the Judean king killed 20 an alternative version in 2 Chronicles 35 of a battle in Megiddo also exists. Herodotus reports the campaign of the pharaoh in his Histories Book 2159 Necos then stopped work on the canal and turned to war some of his triremes were constructed by the northern sea and some in the Arabian Gulf Red Sea by the coast of the Sea of Erythrias. The windlasses for beaching the ships can still be seen. He deployed these ships as needed while he also engaged in a pitched battle at Magdolos with the Syrians and conquered them and after this he took Cadytis Kadesh which is a great city of Syria. He sent the clothes he had worn in these battles to the Branchidae of Miletus and dedicated them to Apollo. Necho soon captured Kadesh on the Orontes and moved forward joining forces with Ashuruballit and together they crossed the Euphrates and laid siege to Harran. Although Necho became the first pharaoh to cross the Euphrates since Thutmose III he failed to capture Harran and retreated back to northern Syria. At this point Ashuruballit vanished from history and the Assyrian Empire was conquered by the Babylonians. Aerial view of Tel Megiddo site of the battle of Megiddo in 609 BC. Leaving a sizable force behind Necho returned to Egypt. On his return march he found that the Judeans had selected Jehoahaz to succeed his father Josiah whom Necho deposed and replaced with Jehoiakim.21 He brought Jehoahaz back to Egypt as his prisoner where Jehoahaz ended his days 2 Kings 2331 2 Chronicles 3614. Second campaignedit In 605 BC an Egyptian force fought the Babylonians at Battle of Carchemish helped by the remnants of the army of the former Assyria but this was met with defeat. The Babylonian king was planning on reasserting his power in Syria. In 609 BC King Nabopolassar captured Kumukh which cut off the Egyptian army then based at Carchemish. Necho responded the following year by retaking Kumukh after a fourmonth siege and executed the Babylonian garrison. Nabopolassar gathered another army which camped at Qurumati on the Euphrates. However Nabopolassars poor health forced him to return to Babylon in 605 BC. In response in 606 BC the Egyptians attacked the leaderless Babylonians probably then led by the crown prince Nebuchadrezzar who fled their position.citation needed At this point the aged Nabopolassar passed command of the army to his son Nebuchadnezzar II who led them to a decisive victory over the Egyptians at Carchemish in 605 BC and pursued the fleeing survivors to Hamath. Nechos dream of restoring the Egyptian Empire in the Middle East as had occurred under the New Kingdom was destroyed as Nebuchadnezzar conquered Egyptian territory from the Euphrates to the Brook of Egypt Jeremiah 462 2 Kings 2329 down to Judea. Although Nebuchadnezzar spent many years in his new conquests on continuous pacification campaigns Necho was unable to recover any significant part of his lost territories. For example when Ashkalon rose in revolt despite repeated pleas the Egyptians sent no help and were barely able to repel a Babylonian attack on their eastern border in 601 BC. When he did repel the Babylonian attack Necho managed to capture Gaza while pursuing the enemy. Necho turned his attention in his remaining years to forging relationships with new allies the Carians and further to the west the Greeks.citation needed Ambitious projectsedit See also Suez Canal  History At some point during his Syrian campaign Necho II initiated but never completed the ambitious project of cutting a navigable canal from the Pelusiac branch of the Nile to the Red Sea. Nechos Canal was the earliest precursor of the Suez Canal.22 It was in connection with a new activity that Necho founded a new city of PerTemu Tjeku which translates as The House of Atum of Tjeku at the site now known as Tell elMaskhuta23 about 15 km west of Ismailia. The waterway was intended to facilitate trade between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean. Necho also formed an Egyptian navy by recruiting displaced Ionian Greeks. This was an unprecedented act by the pharaoh since most Egyptians had traditionally harboured an inherent distaste for and fear of the sea.24 The navy which Necho created operated along both the Mediterranean and Red Sea coasts.25 Necho II constructed warships26 including questionably triremes.27 Phoenician expeditionedit The world according to Herodotus 440 BC A 
15 thcentury depiction of the Ptolemy world map reconstituted from Ptolemys Geographia c. 150 At some point between 610 and before 594 BC Necho reputedly commissioned an expedition of Phoenicians28 who it is said in three years sailed from the Red Sea around Africa back to the mouth of the Nile and would thereby be the first completion of the Cape Route.2930 Herodotus account was handed down to him by oral tradition31 but is seen as potentially credible because he stated with disbelief that the Phoenicians as they sailed on a westerly course round the southern end of Libya Africa they had the sun on their rightto northward of them The Histories 
4.4 
2.3 2 Pliny reported that Hanno had circumnavigated Africa which may have been a conflation with Nechos voyage while Strabo Polybius and Ptolemy doubted the description33 at the time it was not generally known that Africa was surrounded by an ocean with the southern part of Africa being thought connected to Asia.34 F. C. H. Wendel writing in 1890 concurred with Herodotus35 as did James Baikie.36 Egyptologist A. B. Lloyd disputed in 1977 that an Egyptian Pharaoh would authorize such an expedition3738 except for the reasons of Asiatic conquest3940 and trade in the ancient maritime routes.4142 Death and successionedit Necho II died in 595 BC and was succeeded by his son Psamtik II as the next pharaoh of Egypt. Psamtik II however apparently removed Nechos name from almost all of his fathers monuments for unknown reasons. However some scholars such as Roberto Gozzoli express doubt that this actually happened arguing that the evidence for this is fragmentary and rather contradictory.43 Further readingedit Pre19
00 s Encyclopdia Necho. Thomas Dobson at the Stone house no. 41 South Second street 1798. p785. Pantologia Necho. J. Walker 1819. p372. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland Volume 15. p430. Essay on the Hieroglyphic System of M. Champollion Jun. and on the Advantages which it Offers to Sacred Criticism. By J. G. Honor Greppo. p128129. Prolegomena Egypt Mesopotamia. Edited by Henry Smith Williams. Post19
00 s Petrie 1905. W.M. Flinders Petrie. A History of Egypt. From the XIXth to the XXXth Dynasties. London. See Nekau II pp. 335339. Max Cary Eric Herbert Warmington. The Ancient Explorers. Methuen  Company Limited 1929. Peter Clayton 1994. Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson. Arnold 1999. Dieter Arnold. Temples of the Last Pharaos. New YorkOxford See alsoedit Necho crater Hanno the Navigator List of biblical figures identified in extrabiblical sources Ancient Egyptian trade Bible and history Land of Punt Referencesedit General information Budge E. A. W. 1894. The mummy Chapters on Egyptian funereal archaeology. Cambridge England University Press. page 56. Budge E. A. W. 1904. A history of Egypt from the end of the Neolithic period to the death of Cleopatra VII B.C. 30. Books on Egypt and Chaldaea v. 916. London K. Paul Trench Trbner  Co. Page218. Alan B. Lloyd Necho and the Red Sea Some Considerations Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 63 1977. Herodotus By Alan B. Lloyd. BRILL 1988. Footnotes  Thomas Dobson. Encyclopdia Or A Dictionary of Arts Sciences and Miscellaneous Literature. Stone house no. 41 South Second street 1798. Page 785  A History of Egypt from the XIXth to the XXXth Dynasties. By Sir William Matthew Flinders Petrie. p336.  The Historians History of the World Prolegomena Egypt Mesopotamia. Edited by Henry Smith Williams. p183.  United States Exploring Expedition Volume 15. By Charles Wilkes United States. Congress. p53  The Bibliotheca Sacra Volume 45. Dallas Theological Seminary. 1888.  Essay on the Hieroglyphic System of M. Champollion Jun. and on the Advantages which it Offers to Sacred Criticism. By J. G. Honor Greppo. p128  Herodotus 2152. 2  W. Pape Wrterbuch der griechischen Eigennamen 1911  Cory Isaac Preston ed. 1828 The Ancient Fragments London William Pickering OCLC 1000992106 citing Manetho the high priest and scribe of Egypt being by birth a Sebennyte who wrote his history for Ptolemy Philadelphus 266 BCE  228 BCE.  The history of Egypt By Samuel Sharpe. E. Moxon 1852. Part 640. p138.  Herodotus 
4.4 2  The Popular Handbook of Archaeology and the Bible. Edited by Norman L. Geisler Joseph M. Holden. p287.  Encyclopdia britannica. Edited by Colin MacFarquhar George Gleig. p785  The Holy Bible According to the Authorized Version A.D. 1611. Edited by Frederic Charles Cook. p131  see Hebrew Bible  Old Testament  The temple of Mut in Asher. By Margaret Benson Janet A. Gourlay Percy Edward Newberry. p276. cf. Nekaus chief ambition lay in Asiatic conquest  Egypt Under the Pharaohs A History Derived Entireley from the Monuments. By Heinrich Brugsch Brodrick. p444 cf. Neku then attempted to assert the Egyptian supremacy in Asia.  Donald B. Redford Egypt Canaan and Israel in Ancient Times Princeton Princeton University Press 1992 p. 44748.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson 1994. p.195  Bernd Schipper 2010 Egypt and the Kingdom of Judah under Josiah and Jehoiakim p. 218  II. Chronicles by Philip Chapman Barker. p447448  Redmount Carol A. The Wadi Tumilat and the Canal of the Pharaohs Journal of Near Eastern Studies Vol. 54 No. 2 April  1995 pp. 127135  Shaw Ian and Nicholson Paul. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. The British Museum Press 1995. p.201  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson 1994 p.196  Herodotus 
2.1 58 Pliny N.H. 
6.1 
65 ff Diodorus Siculus 
3.4 3  The Cambridge Ancient History. Edited by John Boardman N. G. L. Hammond. p49  Carthage Must Be Destroyed The Rise and Fall of an Ancient Civilization. By Richard Miles. Penguin Jul 21 2011. p1781  Unlikely with the intent of circumnavigating Africa but for finding an alternative route to Asia than through the area near the Levant. Also such voyages were undertaken for trading with more southern African cities thereafter being blown offcourse if not tasked to sail around the lands.  Israel India Persia Phoenicia Minor Nations of Western Asia. Edited by Henry Smith Williams. p118  Anthony Tony Browder Nile valley contributions to civilizationVolume 1. 1992 cf. In the Twenty Fifth Dynasty during the reign of Necho II navigational technology had advanced to the point where sailors from Kemet successfully circumnavigated Africa and drew an extremely accurate map of the continent.  M. J. Cary. The Ancient Explorers. Penguin Books 1963. Page 114  As for Libya we know it to be washed on all sides by the sea except where it is attached to Asia. This discovery was first made by Necos the Egyptian king who on desisting from the canal which he had begun between the Nile and the Arabian gulf referring to the Red Sea sent to sea a number of ships manned by Phoenicians with orders to make for the Pillars of Hercules and return to Egypt through them and by the Mediterranean. The Phoenicians took their departure from Egypt by way of the Erythraean sea and so sailed into the southern ocean. When autumn came they went ashore wherever they might happen to be and having sown a tract of land with corn waited until the grain was fit to cut. Having reaped it they again set sail and thus it came to pass that two whole years went by and it was not till the third year that they doubled the Pillars of Hercules and made good their voyage home. On their return they declaredI for my part do not believe them but perhaps others maythat in sailing round Libya they had the sun upon their right hand. In this way was the extent of Libya first discovered. Book 4 . History of Herodotus  via Wikisource.  The Geographical system of Herodotus by James Rennel. p348  Die umsegelung Asiens und Europas auf der Vega. Volume 2. By Adolf Erik Nordenskild. p148  History of Egypt. By F. C. H. Wendel. American Book Co. 1890. p127 cf. Herodotus relates a story of a great maritime enterprise undertaken at this time which seems quite credible. He states that Nekau sent out Phoenician ships from the Red Sea to circumnavigate Africa and that in the third year of their journey they returned to the Mediterranean through the Straits of Gibraltar.  The Story of the Pharaohs. By James Baikie. p316  Lloyd Alan B. Necho and the Red SeaSome Considerations Journal of Egyptian Archaeology Vol. 63 No. 2 April  1995 pp. 142155 httpswww.jstor.orgstable38563
14 readnow
1 seq
1 metadatainfotabcontents  Lloyd is to hold the position that geographical knowledge at the time of Herodutus was such that Greeks would know that such a voyage would entail the sun being on their right but did not believe Africa could extend far enough for this to happen. He suggests that the Greeks at this time understood that anyone going south far enough and then turning west would have the sun on their right but found it unbelievable that Africa reached so far south. He wrote Given the context of Egyptian thought economic life and military interests it is impossible for one to imagine what stimulus could have motivated Necho in such a scheme and if we cannot provide a reason which is sound within Egyptian terms of reference then we have good reason to doubt the historicity of the entire episode. Alan B. Lloyd Necho and the Red Sea Some Considerations Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 63 1977 p.149.  Twentieth Century. Twentieth century 1908. p816  The Historians History of the World. Edited by Henry Smith Williams. p286 cf. Syria seems to have submitted to him as far as the countries bordering the Euphrates. Gaza offered resistance but was taken. But it was only for a short time that Neku II could feel himself a conqueror.  Cosmos A Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe. By Alexander von Humboldt. p489  The Cambridge History of the British Empire. CUP Archive 1963. p56  Gozzoli R. B. 2000 The Statue BM EA 37891 and the Erasure of Necho IIs Names Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 86 6780 External articlesedit Expedition Necho IIs African Circumnavigation Ancient Egyptian economy. www.reshafim.org.il Maritime economy Other Necho Pharaoh of Egypt. Egyptian History Archaeology and the Bible. Nekau II Wehemibre. digitalegypt.ucl.ac.uk v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNechoIIoldid1218168866 Categories Necho II 
7 thcentury BC births 595 BC deaths 
7 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
6 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Exploration of Africa Pharaohs in the Bible Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 10 April 2024 at 0351 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width