Apries - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 Monuments 
3 See also 
4 References Toggle References subsection 
4.1 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Apries 36 languages Afrikaans   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Polski Portugus    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Wahibre redirects here. Not to be confused with Wahibre Ibiau and Wahibre Psamtik I. Not to be confused with the Welsh name ap Rhys. Apries Wahibre head of Apries Louvre Pharaoh Reign 589570 BC Predecessor Psamtik II Successor Amasis II Royal titulary Horus name Wahib Wa jb He whose heart is constant Prenomen Praenomen Haaibre  jb r Jubilant is the Heart of Re Forever1 Nomen Wahibre Wa jb r Constant is the Heart of Re1 Children Khedebneithirbinet II Mother Takhuit Died 567 BC Dynasty 
26 th dynasty Apries Ancient Greek  is the name by which Herodotus ii. 161 and Diodorus i. 68 designate Wahibre Haaibre a pharaoh of Egypt 589 BC  570 BC the fourth king counting from Psamtik I of the Twentysixth dynasty of Egypt.2 He was equated with the Waphres of Manetho who correctly records that he reigned for 19 years. Apries is also called Hophra in Jeremiah 4430 Hebrew  Modern ofra Tiberian Hopra Greek  romanized Ouafris.3 Biographyedit Apries inherited the throne from his father pharaoh Psamtik II in February 589 BC.1 Apries was an active builder who constructed additions to the temples at Athribis Tell Atrib Bahariya Oasis Memphis and Sais.4 In Year 4 of his reign Apries sister Ankhnesneferibre was adopted as the new Gods Wife of Amun at Thebes.4 However Apries reign was also fraught with internal problems. In 588 BC Apries dispatched a force to Jerusalem to protect it from Babylonian forces sent by Nebuchadnezzar II Jer. 375 3421. His forces quickly withdrew however apparently avoiding a major confrontation with the Babylonians.56 Jerusalem following an 
18 monthlong siege was destroyed by the Babylonians in either 587 BC or 586 BC. Apriess unsuccessful attempt to intervene in the politics of the Kingdom of Judah was followed by a mutiny of soldiers from the strategically important Aswan garrison.15 According to classical historians Apries campaigned in the Levant took Sidon and so terrified the other cities of Phoenicia that he secured their submission.78 However this supposed submission was likely short lived.9 A recently uncovered stela from Tahpanhes records that Nebuchadnezzar II attempted to invade Egypt in 582 BC but Apries forces were capable to repel the invasion.10 In Cyrenaica to the west Battus II of Cyrene had encouraged further Greek settlement in his city especially from the Peloponnese and Crete. This sparked conflict with the indigenous Libyans whose king Adicran appealed to Apries for help around 570 BC. Apries launched a military expedition against Cyrene but was decisively defeated at the Battle of Irasa.11121 When the defeated army returned home a civil war broke out in the Egyptian army between the indigenous troops and the foreign mercenaries. The Egyptians threw their support to Amasis II a general who had led Egyptian forces in a highly successful invasion of Nubia in 592 BC under Pharaoh Psamtik II Apries father.1 Amasis quickly declared himself pharaoh in 570 BC and Apries fled Egypt and sought refuge in a foreign country. When Apries marched back to Egypt in 567 BC with the aid of a Babylonian army to reclaim the throne of Egypt he was likely killed in battle with Amasis forces.13414 Alternatively Herodotus Histories 
2.1 69 holds that Apries survived the battle and was captured and treated well by the victorious Amasis until the Egyptian people demanded justice against him whereby he was placed into their hands and strangled to death.15 Amasis thus secured his kingship over Egypt and was then its unchallenged ruler. Amasis however reportedly treated Apries mortal remains with respect and observed the proper funerary rituals by having Apries body carried to Sais and buried there with full military honours.4 Amasis the former general who had declared himself pharaoh also married Apries daughter Khedebneithirbinet II to legitimise his accession to power. While Herodotus claimed that the wife of Apries was called Nitetis  in Greek there are no contemporary references naming her in Egyptian records.4 Eusebius placed the eclipse of Thales in 585 BC in the eighth or twelfth year of Apries reign. Monumentsedit An obelisk which Apries erected at Sais was moved by the 
3 rd century AD Roman Emperor Diocletian and originally placed at the Temple of Isis in Rome. It is today located in front of the Santa Maria sopra Minerva basilica church in Rome. Sphinx of Pharaoh Apries from the collection of Count Caylus now in the Louvre Museum Apries obelisk in Rome is known as the Pulcino della Minerva See alsoedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Apries. Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt family tree List of biblical figures identified in extrabiblical sources Referencesedit  a b c d e f Clayton Peter A. 2006. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt Paperback ed.. Thames  Hudson. pp. 195197. ISBN 0500286280.  Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Apries . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 2 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 230.  Cf. Theis Christoffer 2011. Sollte Re sich schmen Eine subliminale Bedeutung von  in Jeremia 4430. UgaritForschungen in German. 42 677691. ISSN 03422356 for the writing of this particular name.  a b c d e Shaw Ian Nicholson Paul 1995. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. Harry N. Abrams. pp. 3637. ISBN 0810932253.  a b Miller J. Maxwell Hayes John H. 1986. A History of Ancient Israel and Judah Hardback ed.. Westminster Press. p. 414. ISBN 0664212
62 X.  Nour Mostafa Hassan Iskander John M. Hashem Sameh 2023. The Stela of King Apries from ElQantara Gharb A Royal Journey to the Eastern Borders. Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur. 52 221239. ISSN 03402215. Link for page 238.  Herodotus II 161  Diodorus Siculus Bibliotheca Historica Book I Chapter 68  Elayi Josette 2018. The History of Phoenicia. Lockwood Press. pp. 195196.  Abd ElMaksoud Mohamed Valbelle Dominique 2013. Une stle de lan 7 dApris dcouverte sur le site de Tell Dfenneh. Revue dgyptologie in French. 64 113. doi
10.2 1
43 RE.

64.0.3 011326.  Kenrick 2013 p. 2.  Rosamilia 2023 p. 19.  Wahibre  Shaw  Nicholson write that Apries probably died in battle in 567 BC  Herodotus Histories Book II Chapter 169 Works citededit Kenrick Philip 2013. Cyrenaica. Libya Archaeological Guides. Vol. 2. Silphium Press. ISBN 9781900971140. Rosamilia Emilio 2023. La citt del silfio. Istituzioni culti ed economia di Cirene classica ed ellenistica attraverso le fonti epigrafiche in Italian. Pisa Scuola Normale Superiore. ISBN 9788876427367. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleApriesoldid1222803290 Categories 570 BC deaths 
6 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Pharaohs in the Bible Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text Articles containing Greeklanguage text Instances of Langel using second unnamed parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 Italianlanguage sources it Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 8 May 2024 at 0033 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width