File:Stela Cambyses Apis closeup.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStela Cambyses Apis closeup.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. StelaCambysesApiscloseup.jpg 414  302 pixels file size 178 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStela Cambyses Apis closeup.jpg English Apis stele dated to the regnal year 6 of Cambyses 524 BCE and depicting the king kneeling left as an Egyptian pharaoh while worshiping a dead Apis bull right.1 Later Greek traditions depicted Cambyses as the slayer of this Apis bull. Date 28 April 2019 102742 Source httpwww.livius.org Author Jona Lendering Other versions This file has been extracted from another file  Cambyses apis.JPG Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse Public domain This media file is in the public domain in the United States. This applies to U.S. works where the copyright has expired often because its first publication occurred prior to January 1 1929 and if not then due to lack of notice or renewal. See this page for further explanation. United States This image might not be in the public domain outside of the United States this especially applies in the countries and areas that do not apply the rule of the shorter term for US works such as Canada Mainland China not Hong Kong or Macao Germany Mexico and Switzerland. The creator and year of publication are essential information and must be provided. See WikipediaPublic domain and WikipediaCopyrights for more details. Annotations InfoField This image is annotated View the annotations at Commons 13 116 121 162 414 302 Cambyses as a pharaoh 146 7 39 107 414 302 Hor Smatawy Cambyses Horus name 99 11 44 101 414 302 Mesutire Cambyses Egyptian throne name 229 68 171 200 414 302 Deceased Apis bull  Posener G. 1936. La premire domination perse en Egypte pp. 3035 Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts Room 318 inception 28 April 2019 media type imagejpeg File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0833 28 April 2019 414  302 178 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Cambyses II List of pharaohs Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox UserSomeGuyWhoRandomlyEditsList of rulers in Israel Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on arz.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org hmnilr slalsi stifadiAtro SAzrbaycan hkmdarlarnn siyahs Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cambises II de Prsia Usage on cy.wikipedia.org Cambyses II brenin Persia Usage on el.wikipedia.org     Usage on eo.wikipedia.org Kambizo la 
2 a Persio Usage on es.wikipedia.org Conquistadores Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Kanbises II.a Usage on fa.wikipedia.org         Amssirani Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Cambises II Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org   Usage on hy.wikipedia.org  II     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Kambisus II Usage on it.wikipedia.org Cambise II di Persia Usage on mk.wikipedia.org   Usage on mzn.wikipedia.org  Usage on no.wikipedia.org Kambyses II av Persia Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de monarcas da Prsia Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Cambyses al IIlea Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  II Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam perzijskih kraljev Kambiz II. Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Kambyses II Usage on ta.wikipedia.org         Usage on tg.wikipedia.org  II Usage on th.wikipedia.org    2 Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Vng triu th Hai Mi By ca Ai Cp Usage on war.wikipedia.org Cambyses II Usage on www.wikidata.org Q182483 Usage on yi.wikipedia.org    Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Cambyses 
2 k Usage on zhyue.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 300 dpi Vertical resolution 300 dpi Software used GIMP 
2.1 
0.1 0 File change date and time 1027 28 April 2019 Y and C positioning Centered Exif version 
2.2 1 Meaning of each component Y Cb Cr does not exist Supported Flashpix version 1 Color space sRGB Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileStelaCambysesApiscloseup.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width