Satrap - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 History Toggle History subsection 
2.1 MedoPersian 
2.2 Seleucid 
2.3 Parthian and Sassanian 
2.4 Indian 
3 See also 
4 References 
5 Further reading 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Satrap 70 languages Afrikaans  Asturianu    Bosanski Brezhoneg  Catal ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Euskara  Franais Galego    Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Jawa Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha    Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog   tatara    Trke  Ting Vit Winaray   Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Satrapy Ruler of a province in ancient Persia The Herakleia head probable portrait of a Persian Achaemenid Empire Satrap of Asia Minor end of 
6 th century BCE probably under Darius I1 A satrap strp was a governor of the provinces of the ancient Median and Persian Achaemenid Empires and in several of their successors such as in the Sasanian Empire and the Hellenistic empires.2 A satrapy is the territory governed by a satrap.3 A satrap served as a viceroy to the king though with considerable autonomy. The word came to suggest tyranny or ostentatious splendour45 and its modern usage is a pejorative and refers to any subordinate or local ruler usually with unfavourable connotations of corruption.6 Etymologyedit The word satrap is derived via Latin satrapes from Greek satrpes  itself borrowed from an Old Iranian khshathrapa.7 In Old Persian which was the native language of the Achaemenids it is recorded as khshathapavan  literally protector of the province. The Median form is reconstructed as khshathrapavan.8 Its Sanskrit cognate is kshatrapa .9 The Biblical Hebrew form is aashdarpan  as found in Esther 3
12.1 011 In the Parthian language of the Arsacid Empire and Middle Persian the language of the Sassanian Empire it is recorded in the forms ahrab and asab respectively.12 In modern Persian the descendant of khshathrapavan is shahrbn  but the components have undergone semantic shift so the word now means town keeper shahr  meaning town  ban  meaning keeper. Historyedit MedoPersianedit satrapies of the Achaemenid Empire A dignitary of Asia Minor in Achaemenid style c.475 BC. Karaburun tomb near Elmal Lycia13 Although the first largescale use of satrapies or provinces originates from the inception of the Achaemenid Empire under Cyrus the Great beginning at around 530 BCE provincial organization actually originated during the Median era from at least 648 BCE. Up to the time of the conquest of Media by Cyrus the Great emperors ruled the lands they conquered through client kings and governors. The main difference was that in Persian culture the concept of kingship was indivisible from divinity divine authority validated the divine right of kings. The twentysix satraps established by Cyrus were never kings but viceroys ruling in the kings name although in political reality many took advantage of any opportunity to carve themselves an independent power base. Darius the Great gave the satrapies a definitive organization increased their number to thirtysix and fixed their annual tribute Behistun inscription. Coin of Themistocles a former Athenian general as Achaemenid Empire Satrap of Magnesia c.465459 BC The satrap was in charge of the land that he owned as an administrator and found himself surrounded by an allbutroyal court he collected the taxes controlled the local officials and the subject tribes and cities and was the supreme judge of the province before whose chair Nehemiah 37 every civil and criminal case could be brought. He was responsible for the safety of the roads cf. Xenophon and had to put down brigands and rebels. He was assisted by a council of Persians to which also provincials were admitted and which was controlled by a royal secretary and emissaries of the king especially the eye of the king who made an annual inspection and exercised permanent control. Coinage of Tiribazos Satrap of Achaemenid Lydia 388380 BC There were further checks on the power of each satrap besides his secretarial scribe his chief financial official Old Persian ganzabara and the general in charge of the regular army of his province and of the fortresses were independent of him and periodically reported directly to the shah in person. The satrap was allowed to have troops in his own service. The great satrapies provinces were often divided into smaller districts the governors of which were also called satraps and by GrecoRoman authors also called hyparchs actually Hyparkhos in Greek viceregents.14 The distribution of the great satrapies was changed repeatedly and often two of them were given to the same man. Achaemenid Satrap Autophradates receiving visitors on the Tomb of Payava c.380 BC As the provinces were the result of consecutive conquests the homeland had a special status exempt from provincial tribute both primary and subsatrapies were often defined by former states andor ethnoreligious identity. One of the keys to the Achaemenid success was their open attitude to the culture and religion of the conquered people so the Persian culture was the one most affected as the Great King endeavoured to meld elements from all his subjects into a new imperial style especially at his capital Persepolis. Banquet scene of a Satrap on the Sarcophagus of the Satrap Sidon 
4 th century BC Whenever central authority in the empire weakened the satrap often enjoyed practical independence especially as it became customary to appoint him also as generalinchief of the army district contrary to the original rule. When his office became hereditary the threat to the central authority could not be ignored Olmstead. Rebellions of satraps became frequent from the middle of the 
5 th century BCE. Darius I struggled with widespread rebellions in the satrapies and under Artaxerxes II occasionally the greater parts of Asia Minor and Syria were in open rebellion Revolt of the Satraps. The last great rebellions were put down by Artaxerxes III. Seleucidedit Further information Partition of Babylon and Partition of Triparadisus The satraps appointed by Alexander the Great during his campaign Bagadates I Minted 290280 BC the first indigenous satrap to be appointed by the Seleucid Empire1516 The satrapic administration and title were retainedeven for GrecoMacedonian incumbentsby Alexander the Great who conquered the Achaemenid Empire and by his successors the Diadochi and their dynasties who carved it up especially in the Seleucid Empire where the satrap generally was designated as strategos in other words military generals but their provinces were much smaller than under the Persians. They would ultimately be replaced by conquering empires especially the Parthians. Parthian and Sassanianedit In the Parthian Empire the kings power rested on the support of noble families who ruled large estates and supplied soldiers and tribute to the king. Citystates within the empire enjoyed a degree of selfgovernment and paid tribute to the king. Administration of the Sassanid Empire was considerably more centralized than that of the Parthian Empire the semiindependent kingdoms and selfgoverning city states of the Parthian Empire were replaced with a system of royal cities which served as the seats of centrally appointed governors called shahrabs as well as the location of military garrisons. Shahrabs ruled both the city and the surrounding rural districts. Exceptionally the Byzantine Empire also adopted the title satrap for the semiautonomous princes that governed one of its Armenian provinces the Satrapiae. Indianedit Main articles Northern Satraps and Western Satraps Coin of Western Satrap Nahapana c.120 CE The Western Satraps or Kshatrapas 35405 CE of the Indian subcontinent were Saka rulers in the western and central part of the Sindh region of Pakistan and the Saurashtra and Malwa regions of western India. They were contemporaneous with the Kushans who ruled the northern part of the subcontinent from the area of Peshawar and were possibly their overlords and with the Satavahana who ruled in central India to their south and east and the Kushan state to their immediate west. See alsoedit Taxation districts of the Achaemenid Empire Orontid dynasty Suzerainty Referencesedit  Cahn Herbert A. Gerin Dominique 1988. Themistocles at Magnesia. The Numismatic Chronicle. 148 1320. JSTOR 42668124.  Satrap. Free MerriamWebster Dictionary. MerriamWebster. Retrieved 26 January 2012.  satrapy. Wiktionary.org. Retrieved 14 August 2020.  satrap. Oxford English Dictionary.  Trollope Anthony 12 May 2011. The Eustace Diamonds. Oxford Oxford University Press. p. 626. ISBN 9780191620416. Retrieved 28 November 2020.  Butterfield Jeremy ed. 2015. satrap. Fowlers Dictionary of Modern English Usage 4 ed.. Oxford University Press. p. 724. ISBN 9780199661350.  Greece xii. Persian Loanwords and Names in Greek. Encyclopdia Iranica. 2012. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024.  Bukharin Mikhail. Towards the Discussion on the Language of the Scythians The Transition of OIr x  s and its Reflection in the Ancient Greek       .. x  s     .    . 2013. 2.   60 .. . . 263285.  Kshatrapa Katrapa Kshatrapa 8 definitions. Wisdom Library.  Esther 312 The Bible Jewish Publication Society 1917  adarpnm H323 in Strongs Concordance  MacKenzie David Neil 1971. asab. A Concise Pahlavi Dictionary.  AndrSalvini Batrice 2005. Forgotten Empire The World of Ancient Persia. University of California Press. p. 46. ISBN 9780520247314.  Tuplin Christopher The Administration of the Achaemenid Empire. In I. Carradice ed. Coinage and Administration in the Athenian and Persian Empires 1987 Oxford BAR 109166.  Mrkholm Otto 1991. Early Hellenistic Coinage From the Accession of Alexander to the Peace of Apamea. Cambridge University Press. p. 
73 f.  Curtis John Tallis Nigel AndrSalvini Batrice 2005. Forgotten Empire The World of Ancient Persia. pp. 25859 fig. 454 Silver tetradrachm of Bagadates. Further readingedit Ashley James R. 2004 First published 1998. Appendix H Kings and Satraps. The Macedonian Empire The Era of Warfare Under Philip II and Alexander the Great 359323 B.C. Jefferson NC McFarland. pp. 385391. ISBN 9780786419180. Jacobs Bruno 1994. Die Satrapienverwaltung im Perserreich zur Zeit Darius III. Tbinger Atlas des Vorderen Orients Beihefte vol. B 87. Wiesbaden Reichert ISBN 3882268182. Klinkott Hilmar 2000. Die Satrapienregister der Alexander und Diadochenzeit. Historia Einzelschriften vol. 145. Stuttgart Franz Steiner ISBN 3515077014. Klinkott Hilmar 2005. Der Satrap. Ein achaimenidischer Amtstrger und seine Handlungsspielrume. Oikumene. Studien zur antiken Weltgeschichte vol. 1. Frankfurt Verlag Antike ISBN 3938032022 A. T. Olmstead History of the Persian Empire 1948. PaulyWissowa comprehensive encyclopaedia on Antiquity in German. Petit Thierry 1990. Satrapes et Satrapies dans lempire achmnide de Cyrus le Grand  Xerxs Ier. Bibliothque de la Facult de Philosophie et Lettres de lUniversit de Lige vol. 254. Genve Droz ISBN 2251662545. Robert Dick Wilson. The Book of Daniel A Discussion of the Historical Questions 1917. Available on home.earthlink.net. Rdiger Schmitt Der Titel Satrap in Studies Palmer ed. Meid 1976 373390. This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Satrap. Encyclopdia Britannica 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press.. External linksedit Look up satrap in Wiktionary the free dictionary. Livius.org Satraps and satrapies v t e Provinces of the Achaemenid Empire Behistun  Persepolis  Naqshe Rustam  Susa  Daeva inscriptions Akaufaka Quhistan Amyrgoi Arabia Arachosia Aria Armenia Assyria Babylonia Bactria Cappadocia Caria Carmania Chorasmia Cilicia Colchis Dahae Drangiana 
1 st Egypt  
2 nd Egypt EberNari Levant Elam Kush Nubia Gandra Gandhara Gedrosia Hyrcania Ionia Hindush Libya Lydia Maka Margiana Media Massagetae Parthia Persis Phoenicia Phrygia Hellespontine Phrygia Greater Phrygia Saka Samaritan Province Sattagydia Skudra Thrace Sogdia Yehud See also Taxation districts of the Achaemenid Empire according to Herodotus v t e Designations for types of administrative division English terms Common English terms Area Insular area Local government area Special area Unincorporated area Unorganized area Borough County borough Metropolitan borough Canton Halfcanton Capital Federal capital Imperial capital City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Incorporated city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Community Autonomous community Residential community County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated citycounty County seat County town Metropolitan county Nonmetropolitan county Regional county municipality Viscounty Country Overseas country Department Overseas department District Capital district City district Congressional district Electoral district Federal district Indian government district Land district Local government district Metropolitan district Nonmetropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Service district Educational service district Local service district School district Intermediate school district Special district in the US Urban district Division Census division Police division Subdivision of India Indian reservereservation Indian reservation United States Indian reserve Canada Municipality City municipality County municipality Directcontrolled municipality District municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality Resort municipality Mountain resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Superprefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Special administrative region Autonomous region Capital region National capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Subregion State Protostate Citystate Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory National capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Incorporated territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Town Census town Market town Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Regional unit Territorial unit Autonomous territorial unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Exclusion zone Military exclusion zone Free speech zone Neutral zone Selfadministered zone Trade zone Freetrade zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Constituency Duchy District Eldership Emirate Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Manor Royal Muftiate Neighbourhood Parish Precinct Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Riding Sector Autonomous Shire Sultanate Suzerainty Townland Village Summer Ward Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing Viceroyalty NonEnglish terms or loanwords Current Amt Apskritis Bakhsh Barangay Bashki Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comarca Comune Frazione Freguesia Fu Gemeinde Austria Germany South Tyrol Switzerland Gemeente Gmina Hromada Jude Kampong KommunKunta Finland Sweden Ln Sweden Landskap Finland Localit Maakunta Megye Muban Mukim Njsi administrative Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostn Poblacion Purok Qark Raion Savivaldyb Seninija Shahrestn Sum China Ssla Tehsil Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Komun Kping Korale LnLni Landskap Sweden Landskommun Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plas Rreth Satrapy Socken Subah Syssel Zhou Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics. See also Census division Electoral district List of administrative divisions by country Slavic administrative divisions v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Hellenistic satraps Satraps under Alexander the Great 334323 BC Ada Queen of Caria Asander Menander Lydia Calas Demarchus Hellespontine Phrygia Antigonus Greater Phrygia Balakros Menes Cilicia Abistamenes Cappadocia Abdalonymus Sidon Mithrenes Armenia Mazaeus Stamenes Babylon Mazakes Mesopotamia Abulites Susiana Oxydates Atropates Media Phrasaortes Oxines Peucestas Persis Cleomenes of Naucratis Egypt Satibarzanes Aria Sibyrtius Carmania Autophradates Tapuri Mardi Andragoras Parthia Amminapes Phrataphernes Pharismanes Hyrcania and Parthia Artabazos Cleitus the Black Amyntas Bactria Oxyartes Paropamisia Philip Eudemus India Peithon son of Agenor Gandhara Taxiles Punjab Porus Indus Satraps at the Partition of Babylon 323 BC Antipater Macedon and Greece Philo Illyria Lysimachus Thrace Leonnatus Hellespontine Phrygia Antigonus Phrygia Asander Caria Nearchus Lycia and Pamphylia Menander Lydia Philotas Cilicia Eumenes Cappadocia and Paphlagonia Ptolemy Egypt Laomedon of Mytilene Syria Neoptolemus Armenia Peucestas Persis Arcesilaus Mesopotamia Peithon Greater Media Atropates Lesser Media Scynus Susiana Tlepolemus Persia Nicanor Parthia Phrataphernes Armenia Parthia Antigenes Susiana Archon Pelasgia Philip Hyrcania Stasanor Aria and Drangiana Sibyrtius Arachosia and Gedrosia Amyntas Bactria Scythaeus Sogdiana Oxyartes Paropamisia Taxiles Punjab Peithon son of Agenor Gandhara Porus Indus Satraps at the Partition of Triparadisus 321 BC Antipater Macedon and Greece Lysimachus Thrace Arrhidaeus Hellespontine Phrygia Antigonus Phrygia Lycia and Pamphylia Cassander Caria Cleitus the White Lydia Philoxenus Cilicia Nicanor Cappadocia and Paphlagonia Ptolemy Egypt Laomedon of Mytilene Syria Peucestas Persis Amphimachus Mesopotamia Peithon Media Tlepolemus Carmania Philip Parthia Antigenes Susiana Seleucus Babylonia Stasanor Bactria and Sogdiana Stasander Aria and Drangiana Sibyrtius Arachosia and Gedrosia Oxyartes Paropamisia Taxiles Punjab Peithon son of Agenor Gandhara Porus Indus Later Satraps Peithon son of Agenor Babylon Sibyrtius Arachosia Drangiana Eudemus Indus Bagadates Ardakhshir I Wahbarz Vadfradad I Vadfradad II Alexander c.220 BC Persis Andragoras Parthia Demodamas Bactria Sogdiana Diodotus Bactria Alexander Lydia Molon c.220 BC Timarchus c.175 BC Media Apollodorus Susiana Ptolemaeus Commagene Noumenios Hyspaosines c.150 BC Characene Hellenistic satraps were preceded by Achaemenid rulers and followed or ruled by Hellenistic rulers Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSatrapoldid1222706050 Categories Satraps Positions of subnational authority Achaemenid Empire Types of administrative division Gubernatorial titles Iranian inventions Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 Articles containing explicitly cited Englishlanguage text Articles containing Latinlanguage text Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text Articles containing Persianlanguage text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Articles with GND identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 7 May 2024 at 1334 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width