Shah - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 History 
3 Shah in the Armenian language 
4 Ruler styles 
5 Shahzade 
6 Other styles 
7 Related terms 
8 See also 
9 References 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Shah 73 languages Afrikaans  Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca     Bnlmg    Bosanski Catal Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hausa   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano    Kiswahili Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Ozbekcha     Polski Portugus  Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Taclit  Trke Trkmene   Ting Vit   Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Shahanshahs Royal title of Persian origin Shahanshah redirects here. For other uses see Shah disambiguation and Shahanshah disambiguation. This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Shah  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR February 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Shahanshah of Iran from 1941 to 1979 was the last ruler to hold the title of shah. Part of a series on Imperial royal noble gentry and chivalric ranks in West Central South Asia and North Africa Emperor Caliph Shahanshah King of Kings Padishah Banbishn Sultan of Sultans Chakravarti Samrat Maharajadhiraja Khagan King Maharaja Malik Sultan Sultana Shah Shahbanu Shirvanshah Khan Khatun Hatun Dey Nizam Nawab Amir alumara Khagan Bek Prince or Duke Emir Sheikh Raja Rana Ikhshid Beylerbey Pasha Babu Saheb Sardar Mandal Patil Rajkumar Sahibzada Chhatrapati Nawab Nawabzada Yuvraj Thakur ehzade Mirza Morza Tegin Khedive Nizam Yabghu Ishkhan Shahzada Vali Ahd Prince of the Said Mir Shad Khanum Earl or Count Mankari Dewan Bahadur Sancak bey Rao Bahadur Rai Bahadur Khan Bahadur Atabeg Boila Wli Sparapet Azat Viscount Zamindar Khan Sahib Bey Kadi Baig or Begum Begzada U bey Baron Lala Agha Hazinedar Rais Jagirdar Saranjamdar Taluqdar Tarafdar Sikdar Royal house Damat Gurkani Nobleman Jenmi Mankari Mian Mirza Pasha Bey Baig Begzada alDawla Bibi Governmental Lala Vizier Dewan Agha Hazinedar Faujdar Lambardar Mridha Chowdhury Mostowfi olMamalek v t e Shah  Persian  h h lit.king is a royal title that was historically used by the leading figures of Iranian monarchies.1 It was also used by a variety of Persianate societies such as the Ottoman Empire the Kazakh Khanate the Khanate of Bukhara the Emirate of Bukhara the Mughal Empire the Bengal Sultanate historical Afghan dynasties and among Gurkhas.2 Rather than regarding himself as simply a king of the concurrent dynasty i.e. Europeanstyle monarchies each Iranian ruler regarded himself as the Shahanshah  hanh lit.King of Kings or Padishah  Pdeh lit.Master King in the sense of a continuation of the original Persian Empire. Etymologyedit The word descends from Old Persian xyaiya king which used to be considered a borrowing from Median3 as it was compared to Avestan xara power and command corresponding to Sanskrit katra same meaning from which katriya warrior is derived. Most recently the form xyaiya has been analyzed as a genuine inherited Persian formation with the meaning pertaining to reigning ruling. This formation with the origin suffix iya is derived from a deverbal abstract noun xyaa rule ruling Herrschaft from the Old Persian verb xy to rule reign.4 The full Old Persian title of the Achaemenid rulers of the First Persian Empire was Xyaiya Xyaiynm or Middle Persian hn h King of Kings5 or Emperor. This title has ancient Near Eastern or Mesopotamian precedents. The earliest attestation of such a title dates back to the Middle Assyrian period as ar arrni in reference to the Assyrian ruler TukultiNinurta I 12431207 BC. Historyedit Xerxes I Xayr the great Shah of Persia. h or hanh King of Kings to use the fulllength term was the title of the Persian emperors. It includes rulers of the first Persian Empire the Achaemenid dynasty who unified Persia in the sixth century BC and created a vast intercontinental empire as well as rulers of succeeding dynasties throughout history until the 
20 th century and the Imperial House of Pahlavi. While in Western sources the Ottoman monarch is most often referred to as a Sultan in Ottoman territory he was most often referred to as Padishah and several used the title Shah in their tughras. Their male offspring received the title of ehzade or prince literally offspring of the Shah from Persian shahzadeh. The full title of the Achaemenid rulers was Xyaiya Xyaiynm literally King of Kings in Old Persian corresponding to Middle Persian hn h and Modern Persian  hanh.67 In Greek this phrase was translated as    basileus tn basiln King of Kings equivalent to Emperor. Both terms were often shortened to their roots shah and basileus. In Western languages Shah is often used as an imprecise rendering of hanh. The term was first recorded in English in 1564 as a title for the King of Persia and with the spelling Shaw. For a long time Europeans thought of Shah as a particular royal title rather than an imperial one although the monarchs of Persia regarded themselves as emperors of the Persian Empire later the Empire of Iran. The European opinion changed in the Napoleonic era when Persia was an ally of the Western powers eager to make the Ottoman Sultan release his hold on various mainly Christian European parts of the Ottoman Empire and western Christian emperors had obtained the Ottoman acknowledgement that their western imperial styles were to be rendered in Turkish as padishah. In the twentieth century the Shah of Persia Mohammad Reza Pahlavi officially adopted the title  hanh and in western languages the rendering Emperor. He also styled his wife  Shahbn Empress. Mohammad Reza Pahlavi was the last Shah as the Iranian monarchy was abolished after the 1979 Iranian Revolution. Shah in the Armenian languageedit Armenian compound personal names often contain the element ah meaning king in Middle Persian and New Persian. These names can be found in both masculine and feminine forms and may include native Armenian or foreign components. The element ah can appear as either the first or second component and is sometimes part of doublet forms with the components reversed. For example masculine names include ahamir and Amirah ahparon and Paronah and Vahramah feminine names include ahxatun and Xatunah and ahtikin. Some examples of these compound names include masculine ahaziz and feminine Azizah masculine Sultanah and feminine ahsultan and masculine Melikah and feminine ahmelik. These names particularly the feminine forms sometimes vary in gender depending on the source. The name Artamin for instance is based on Artam from Old Iranian Rtma interpreted as having power offrom Rta. The auslaut of the Armenian name suggests a connection to the Iranian word for king h found in various languages including Middle Persian and New Persian. In another example the name ati is interpreted as ahLady with the second component reflecting the Arabic term sitt meaning My lady lady. This name is found in a colophon from the Kobay monastery as the name of a sister of Dawit and priest Vardan. Overall Armenian compound names containing the element ah provide insight into the linguistic and cultural interactions between Armenian and Iranian languages and cultures.8 Ruler stylesedit From the reign of Ashot II the Bagratid kings of Armenia used the title shahanshah meaning king of kings.9 The title Padishah Great King was adopted from the Iranians by the Ottomans and by various other monarchs claiming imperial rank such as the Mughals that established their dynasty in the Indian subcontinent. Another subsidiary style of the Ottoman and Mughal rulers was Shahi Alam Panah meaning the king that is the refuge of the world. The ShahArmens Kings of Armenia sometimes known as Ahlahshahs used the title Shhi Arman lit. Shah of Armenians.10 Some monarchs were known by a contraction of the kingdoms name with shah such as Khwarezmshah ruler of the realm of Khwarezmia in the Central Asia or the Shirvanshah of the historical region of Shirvan in Caucasia presentday Republic of Azerbaijan The kings of Georgia called themselves shahanshah alongside their other titles. The Georgian title mepetmepe also meaning King of Kings Mepeking in Georgian was also inspired by the shahanshah title. Shahzadeedit Shahzade Persian  transliterated as hzde. In the realm of a shah or a loftier derived ruler style a prince or princess of the royal blood was logically called shahzada as the term is derived from shah using the Persian patronymic suffix zde or zdeh born from or descendant of. However the precise full styles can differ in the court traditions of each shahs kingdom. This title was given to the princes of the Ottoman Empire ehzade Ottoman Turkish  and was used by the princes of Islamic India Shahzda Urdu  Bengali  romanized Shhozda such as in the Mughal Empire. The Mughals and the Sultans of Delhi were not of Indian origin but of MongolTurkic origin and were heavily influenced by Persian culture111213 a continuation of traditions and habits ever since Persian language was first introduced into the region by Persianised Turkic and Afghan dynasties centuries earlier.1415 Thus in Oudh only sons of the sovereign shah bahadur see above were by birthright styled Shahzada personal title Mirza personal name Bahadur though this style could also be extended to individual grandsons and even further relatives. Other male descendants of the sovereign in the male line were merely styled Mirza personal name or personal name Mirza. This could even apply to nonMuslim dynasties. For example the younger sons of the ruling Sikh maharaja of Punjab were styled Shahzada personal name Singh Bahadur. The borrowing shahajada Shahs son taken from the Mughal title Shahzada was the usual princely title borne by the grandsons and male descendants of a Nepalese sovereign in the male line of the Shah dynasty until its abolition in 2008. For the heir to a Persianstyle shahs royal throne more specific titles were used containing the key element Vali Ahad usually in addition to shahzada where his junior siblings enjoyed this style.16 Other stylesedit Shahbanu Persian  ahbn Persian term using the word shah and the Persian suffix banu lady Empress in modern times the official title of Empress Farah Pahlavi. Shahpur Persian  hpur also been derived from shah using the archaic Persian suffix pur son male descendant to address the Prince. Shahdokht Persian  hdoxt is also another term derived from shah using the Persian patronymic suffix dokht daughter female descendant to address the Princess of the imperial households. Shahzade Persian  hzde Persian termination for prince lit offspring of the Shah used by Ottoman Turks in the form ehzade. Malek olMoluk Persian   king of kings an Arabic title used by the Iranian Buyids a Persianized form of the Abbasid amir alumara Related termsedit Satrap the term in Western languages for a governor of a Persian province is a distortion of xarapvan literally guardian of the realm which derives from the word xara an Old Persian word meaning realm province and related etymologically to shah. Deeply revered among both the Hindus and Muslims 
1 st Guru of Sikhism Guru Nanak Dev was referred to as Shah by the Muslims and as Fakir by the Hindus the highest honour in both the religions and hence came to known as Nanak Shah Fakir. Maqadh Persian   Maqadh the phrase from which the name of Mogadishu is believed to be derived which means seat of the Shah a reflection of the citys early Persian influence.17 The English word checkmate is in fact derived from shah from Persian via Arabic Latin and French. Related terms such as chess and exchequer likewise originate from the Persian word their modern senses having developed from the original meaning of the king piece.18 See alsoedit Ikhshid Mirmiran Shah surname Referencesedit  Yarshater Ehsan Persia or Iran Persian or Farsi Archived 20101024 at the Wayback Machine Iranian Studies vol. XXII no. 1 1989  Siddiq Mohammad Yusuf SpringSummer 2015. Titles and Islamic Culture as Reflected in the Islamic Architectural Inscriptions of Bengal 12051707. Islamic Studies. 54 12 5051. JSTOR 44629923. Shh ... a Persian title ... sometimes in different compound forms such as Bdshh or Pdshh ... stands for monarch which has become part of the popular vocabulary over years in a number of South Asian languages including Bengali Urdu and Hindi in addition to the languages of neighbouring regions. The last Afghan king Zhr Shh for instance used to be called Bdshh until his dethronement in 1973. Used by all the Mughal emperors in India the title appeared in a few Bengal Sultanate inscriptions as well.  An introduction to Old Persian p. 149. Prods Oktor Skjrv. Harvard University. 2003.  Schmitt Rdiger 2014. Wrterbuch der altpersischen Knigsinschriften. Wiesbaden Reichert Verlag. pp. 286287. ISBN 9783954900176.  Old Persian. Appendices Glossaries Indices  Transcriptions. Prods Oktor Skjrv. Harvard University. 2003.  D. N. MacKenzie. A Concise Pahlavi Dictionary. Routledge Curzon 2005. ISBN 0197135595  M. Moin. An Intermediate Persian Dictionary. Six Volumes. Amir Kabir Publications Teheran 1992.  Martirosyan Hrach. Two Armenian Personal Names with ah King.  Tim Greenwood Emergence of the Bagratuni Kingdoms p. 52 in Armenian Kars and Ani Richard Hovannisian ed.  Clifford Edmund Bosworth The New Islamic Dynasties A Chronological and Genealogical Manual. The Shhi Armanids p. 197.  Richards John F. 1995 The Mughal Empire Cambridge University Press p. 6 ISBN 9780521566032  Schimmel Annemarie 2004 The Empire of the Great Mughals History Art and Culture Reaktion Books p. 22 ISBN 9781861891853  Balabanlilar Lisa 2012 Imperial Identity in Mughal Empire Memory and Dynastic Politics in Early Modern Central Asia I.B. Tauris p. 2 ISBN 9781848857261  Sigfried J. de Laet. History of Humanity From the seventh to the sixteenth century UNESCO 1994. ISBN 9231028138 p. 734  Bennett Clinton Ramsey Charles M. 2012. South Asian Sufis Devotion Deviation and Destiny. ISBN 9781441151278. Retrieved 2 January 2015.  Shahzada son of shah Newsvine.com  David D. Laitin Said S. Samatar Somalia Nation in Search of a State Westview Press 1987 p. 12.  Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Shah . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 24 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 769. External linksedit Look up shah in Wiktionary the free dictionary. Last name Shah at surnamedb.com WorldStatesmen  here Iran see each present country Shah  Etymology OnLine Portals Iran Asia Monarchy Royalty v t e Imperial royal and noble styles Forms of address for popes royalty and nobility Africa Ngus Ngst Nkosi Pharaoh Western Holiness Imperial and Royal Majesty HIRM Imperial and Most Faithful Majesty Imperial Majesty HIM Apostolic Majesty HAM Catholic Monarchs Catholic Majesty HCM Most Christian Majesty HMCM Most Faithful Majesty HFM Orthodox Majesty HOM Britannic Majesty HBM Most Excellent Majesty Most Gracious Majesty Royal Majesty HRM Majesty HM Grace HG Royal Highness HRH Monseigneur Msgr Most Eminent Highness HMEH Exalted Highness HEH Highness HH Serene Highness HSH Illustrious Highness HIll.H Excellency HE Most Excellent Most Illustrious Hochgeboren Hochwohlgeboren Wohlgeboren Much Honoured The Much Hon. Milord Millourt Antiquity Ancient Rome Pater Patriae Augustus Sebastos Dominus Georgia Mepe Middle Ages Imperial and Royal Highness HIRH Imperial Highness HIH Royal Highness HRH Grand Ducal Highness HGDH Highness HH Ducal Serene Highness HDSH Serene Highness HSH Serenity HS Illustrious Highness HIll.H Grace HG Excellency HE Asian Baghatur Duli Yang Maha Mulia Great king Khan Khagan King of Kings Maharaja Mikado Shah Shogun Son of Heaven Islamic Amir alMuminin Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques Hadrat Sharif Sultanic Highness Countries France Georgia Netherlands Portugal Serbia Sweden United Kingdom Canada Scotland See also By the Grace of God Divine right of kings Defender of the Faith Fidei defensor Defender of the Holy Sepulchre Great Catholic Monarch List of current sovereign monarchs List of current constituent monarchs Sacred king Translatio imperii Victory title Don honorific WikipediaWikiProject Royalty and Nobility Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleShaholdid1219647732 Categories Shahs Royal titles Noble titles Persian words and phrases Titles of national or ethnic leadership Ottoman titles Titles in Iran Titles in Azerbaijan Titles in Bangladesh Titles in Pakistan Government of the Sasanian Empire Government of the Parthian Empire Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2021 Use Oxford spelling from December 2021 Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Persianlanguage text Pages with Persian IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Bengalilanguage text Instances of Langbn using second unnamed parameter This page was last edited on 19 April 2024 at 0051 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width