Cyrus the Great - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Dynastic history 
3 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 
3.1 Mythology 
4 Rise and military campaigns Toggle Rise and military campaigns subsection 
4.1 Median Empire 
4.2 Lydian Empire and Asia Minor 
4.3 Eastern Campaigns 
4.4 NeoBabylonian Empire 
5 Death Toggle Death subsection 
5.1 Burial 
6 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 
6.1 Religion and philosophy 

6.1.1 Jewish texts 
6.2 Politics and management 
6.3 Cyrus Cylinder 
6.4 Currency denomination 
7 Titles 
8 Family tree 
9 See also 
10 Notes 
11 References 
12 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 
12.1 Ancient sources 
12.2 Modern sources 
13 Further reading 
14 External links Toggle the table of contents Cyrus the Great 121 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch   Aragons Asturianu Avae Azrbaycanca     Bnlmg      Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  Cebuano etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Fiji Hindi Froyskt Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego   Gungbe Hakkng  Hausa   Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano    Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyl gwiyannen Kurd  Ladin Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy  Mori     Bahasa Melayu  Nederlands   Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha      Patois Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn   Sakizaya Shqip Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara    Trke   Vahcuengh Vepsn kel Ting Vit  Winaray    Zazaki emaitka  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Founder of the Achaemenid Empire c. 600530 BC Cyrus the Great  King of Anshan King of Persia King of Media King of Lydia King of the World King of Kings Great King King of Babylon King of Sumer and Akkad King of the Four Corners of the World King of the Universe Winged Genius statue at Pasargadae with braided hair and a Hemhem crown traditionally identified as Cyrus
1 a King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Reign 550530 BC Predecessor Empire established Successor Cambyses II King of Persia Reign 559530 BC Predecessor Cambyses I Successor Cambyses II King of Media Reign 549530 BC Predecessor Astyages Successor Cambyses II King of Lydia Reign 547530 BC Predecessor Croesus Successor Cambyses II King of Babylon Reign 539530 BC Predecessor Nabonidus Successor Cambyses II Born c.600 BC4 Anshan Persis presentday Fars Province Iran Died 4 December 530 BC5 aged 70 Pasargadae Persis Burial Pasargadae Consort Cassandane Issue Cambyses II Bardiya Artystone Atossa Roxane5 House Teispid Father Cambyses I Mother Mandane of Media v t e Campaigns of Cyrus the Great Battles against the Satraps Assyrian Camp Persian Revolt Hyrba Persian Border Pasargadae Hill Invasion of Anatolia Pteria Thymbra Sardis Invasion of Babylonia Opis Babylon Standard of Cyrus the Great Derafsh Shahbaz founder of the Achaemenid Empire featuring the Shahbaz see List of Iranian flags Cyrus II of Persia Old Persian  Kru c.600530 BCb commonly known as Cyrus the Great6 was the founder of the Achaemenid Persian Empire.7 Hailing from Persis he brought the Achaemenid dynasty to power by defeating the Median Empire and embracing all of the previous civilized states of the ancient Near East7 expanding vastly and eventually conquering most of West Asia and much of Central Asia to create what would soon become the largest polity in human history at the time.7 The Achaemenid Empires largest territorial extent was achieved under Darius the Great whose rule stretched from the Balkans Eastern BulgariaPaeonia and ThraceMacedonia and the rest of Southeast Europe in the west to the Indus Valley in the east. After conquering the Median empire Cyrus led the Achaemenids to conquer the Lydian Empire and eventually the NeoBabylonian Empire. He also led an expedition into Central Asia which resulted in major military campaigns that were described as having brought into subjection every nation without exception8 Cyrus allegedly died in battle with the Massagetae a nomadic Eastern Iranian tribal confederation along the Syr Darya in December 530 BC.
9 c However Xenophon of Athens claimed that Cyrus did not die fighting and had instead returned to the city of Persepolis which served as the Achaemenid ceremonial capital.10 He was succeeded by his son Cambyses II whose campaigns into North Africa led to the conquests of Egypt Nubia and Cyrenaica during his short rule. To the Greeks he was known as Cyrus the Elder Greek    Kros ho Presbteros. Cyrus was particularly renowned among contemporary scholars because of his habitual policy of respecting peoples customs and religions in the lands that he conquered.11 He was influential in developing the system of a central administration at Pasargadae to govern the Achaemenid Empires border satraps which worked for the profit of both rulers and subjects.712 Following the Achaemenid conquest of Babylon Cyrus issued the Edict of Restoration in which he authorized and encouraged the return of the Jewish people to what had been the Kingdom of Judah officially ending the Babylonian captivity. He is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible and left a lasting legacy on Judaism due to his role in facilitating the return to Zion a migratory event in which the Jews returned to the Land of Israel following Cyrus establishment of Yehud Medinata and subsequently rebuilt the Temple in Jerusalem which had been destroyed by the Babylonian siege of Jerusalem. According to Chapter 451 of the Book of Isaiah13 Cyrus was anointed by the Jewish God for this task as a biblical messiah he is the only nonJewish figure to be revered in this capacity.14 In addition to his influence on the traditions of both the Eastern world and the Western world Cyrus is also recognized for his achievements in human rights politics and military strategy. The Achaemenid Empires prestige in the ancient world would eventually extend as far west as Athens where upperclass Greeks adopted aspects of the culture of the ruling Persian class as their own.15 As the founder of the first Persian empire Cyrus played a crucial role in defining the national identity of the Iranian nation the Achaemenid Empire was instrumental in spreading the ideals of Zoroastrianism as far east as China.161718 He remains a cult figure in modernday Iran with the Tomb of Cyrus at Pasargadae serving as a spot of reverence for millions of the countrys citizens.19 Etymologyedit Further information Cyrus The name Cyrus is a Latinized form derived from the Greeklanguage name  Kros which itself was derived from the Old Persian name Kru.2021 The name and its meaning have been recorded within ancient inscriptions in different languages. The ancient Greek historians Ctesias and Plutarch stated that Cyrus was named from the Sun Kuros a concept which has been interpreted as meaning like the Sun Khurvash by noting its relation to the Persian noun for Sun khor while using vash as a suffix of likeness.22 Karl Hoffmann has suggested a translation based on the meaning of an IndoEuropean root to humiliate and accordingly the name Cyrus means humiliator of the enemy in verbal contest.21 Another possible Iranian derivation would mean the young one child similar to Kurdish kur son little boy or Ossetian igurun to be born and kur young bull.23 In the Persian language and especially in Iran Cyrus name is spelled as  Kro kuo.24 In the Bible he is referred to in the Hebrew language as Koresh  .25 Some pieces of evidence suggest that Cyrus is Kay Khosrow a legendary Persian king of the Kayanian dynasty and a character in Shahnameh a Persian epic.26 Some scholars however believe that neither Cyrus nor Cambyses were Iranian names proposing that Cyrus was Elamite27 in origin and that the name meant he who bestows care in the extinct Elamite language.28 One reason is that while Elamite names may end in u no Elamite texts spell the name this way  only Kura.23 Meanwhile Old Persian did not allow names to end in a so it would make sense for Persian speakers to change an original Kura into the more grammatically correct form Kuru.23 Elamite scribes on the other hand would not have had a reason to change an original Kura into Kuru since both forms were acceptable.23 Therefore Kura probably represents the original form.23 Another scholarly opinion is that Kuru was a name of IndoAryan origin in honour of the IndoAryan Kuru and Kamboja mercenaries from eastern Afghanistan and Northwest India that helped in the conquest of the Middle East.2930 d Dynastic historyedit See also Achaemenes Achaemenid family tree and Teispids The fourwinged guardian figure that may depict Cyrus known from a basrelief on a doorway pillar from Pasargadae. An inscription says I am Cyrus the King an Achaemenian.3132 Scholars doubting the relief depicts Cyrus note the inscription was inscribed in a later period and that the same inscription is found on other palaces in the complex.332 The Persian domination and kingdom in the Iranian plateau started as an extension of the Achaemenid dynasty who expanded their earlier dominion possibly from the 
9 th century BC onward. The eponymous founder of the dynasty was Achaemenes from Old Persian Haxmani. Achaemenids are descendants of Achaemenes as Darius the Great the ninth king of the dynasty traced his ancestry to him declaring for this reason we are called Achaemenids. Achaemenes built the state of Parsumash in the southwest of Iran and was succeeded by Teispes who took the title King of Anshan after seizing the city Anshan and enlarging his kingdom further to include Pars proper.34 Ancient documents35 mention that Teispes had a son called Cyrus I who also succeeded his father as king of Anshan. Cyrus I had a full brother whose name is recorded as Ariaramnes.7 In 600 BC Cyrus I was succeeded by his son Cambyses I who reigned until 559 BC. Cyrus II the Great was a son of Cambyses I who had named his son after his father Cyrus I.36 There are several inscriptions of Cyrus the Great and later kings that refer to Cambyses I as the great king and king of Anshan. Among these are some passages in the Cyrus cylinder where Cyrus calls himself son of Cambyses great king king of Anshan. Another inscription from CMs mentions Cambyses I as a mighty king and an Achaemenian which according to the bulk of scholarly opinion was engraved under Darius and considered as a later forgery by Darius.3738 However Cambyses IIs maternal grandfather Pharnaspes is named by historian Herodotus as an Achaemenian.39 Xenophons account in his Cyropdia names Cambysess wife as Mandane and mentions Cambyses as king of Iran ancient Persia. These agree with Cyruss own inscriptions as Anshan and Parsa were different names for the same land. These also agree with other nonIranian accounts except on one point from Herodotus which states that Cambyses was not a king but a Persian of good family.40 However in some other passages Herodotus account is wrong also on the name of the son of Chishpish which he mentions as Cambyses but according to modern scholars should be Cyrus I.41 The traditional view based on archaeological research and the genealogy given in the Behistun Inscription and by Herodotus7 holds that Cyrus the Great was an Achaemenid. However M. Waters has suggested that Cyrus is unrelated to the Achaemenids or Darius the Great and that his family was of Teispid and Anshanite origin instead of Achaemenid.42 Early lifeedit I am Cyrus the King an Achaemenian in Old Persian Elamite and Akkadian languages. It is known as the CMa inscription carved in a column of Palace P in Pasargadae.43 These inscriptions on behalf of Cyrus were probably made later by Darius I in order to affirm his lineage using the Old Persian script he had designed.38 Cyrus was born to Cambyses I King of Anshan and Mandane daughter of Astyages King of Media during the period of 600599 BC. By his own account generally believed now to be accurate Cyrus was preceded as king by his father Cambyses I grandfather Cyrus I and greatgrandfather Teispes.44 Cyrus married Cassandanecitation needed who was an Achaemenian and the daughter of Pharnaspes who bore him two sons Cambyses II and Bardiya along with three daughters Atossa Artystone and Roxane.citation needed Cyrus and Cassandane were known to love each other very much  Cassandane said that she found it more bitter to leave Cyrus than to depart her life.45 After her death Cyrus insisted on public mourning throughout the kingdom.46 The Nabonidus Chronicle states that Babylonia mourned Cassandane for six days identified as 2126 March 538 BC.47 After his fathers death Cyrus inherited the Persian throne at Pasargadae which was a vassal of Astyages. The Greek historian Strabo has said that Cyrus was originally named Agradates28 by his stepparents. It is possible that when reuniting with his original family following the naming customs Cyruss father Cambyses I named him Cyrus after his grandfather who was Cyrus I.citation needed There is also an account by Strabo that claimed Agradates adopted the name Cyrus after the Cyrus river near Pasargadae.28 Mythologyedit Painting of king Astyages sending Harpagus to kill young Cyrus Herodotus gave a mythological account of Cyruss early life. In this account Astyages had two prophetic dreams in which a flood and then a series of fruitbearing vines emerged from his daughter Mandanes pelvis and covered the entire kingdom. These were interpreted by his advisers as a foretelling that his grandson would one day rebel and supplant him as king. Astyages summoned Mandane at the time pregnant with Cyrus back to Ecbatana to have the child killed. His general Harpagus delegated the task to Mithradates one of the shepherds of Astyages who raised the child and passed off his stillborn son to Harpagus as the dead infant Cyrus.48 Cyrus lived in secrecy but when he reached the age of 10 during a childhood game he had the son of a nobleman beaten when he refused to obey Cyrus commands. As it was unheard of for the son of a shepherd to commit such an act Astyages had the boy brought to his court and interviewed him and his adoptive father. Upon the shepherds confession Astyages sent Cyrus back to Persia to live with his biological parents.49 However Astyages summoned the son of Harpagus and in retribution chopped him to pieces roasted some portions while boiling others and tricked his adviser into eating his child during a large banquet. Following the meal Astyagess servants brought Harpagus the head hands and feet of his son on platters so he could realize his inadvertent cannibalism.50 Rise and military campaignsedit Median Empireedit Main article Persian Revolt Cyrus the Great succeeded to the throne in 559 BC following his fathers death however Cyrus was not yet an independent ruler. Like his predecessors Cyrus had to recognize Median overlordship. Astyages last king of the Median Empire and Cyruss grandfather may have ruled over the majority of the Ancient Near East from the Lydian frontier in the west to the lands of the Parthians and Persians in the east.citation needed Detail of Cyrus Hunting Wild Boar by Claude Audran the Younger Palace of Versailles According to the Nabonidus Chronicle Astyages launched an attack against Cyrus king of Ansan. According to the historian Herodotus it is known that Astyages placed Harpagus in command of the Median army to conquer Cyrus. However Harpagus contacted Cyrus and encouraged his revolt against Media before eventually defecting along with several of the nobility and a portion of the army. This mutiny is confirmed by the Nabonidus Chronicle. The Chronicle suggests that the hostilities lasted for at least three years 553550 BC and the final battle resulted in the capture of Ecbatana. This was described in the paragraph that preceded the entry for Naboniduss year 7 which detailed Cyruss victory and the capture of his grandfather.51 According to the historians Herodotus and Ctesias Cyrus spared the life of Astyages and married his daughter Amytis. This marriage pacified several vassals including the Bactrians Parthians and Saka.52 Herodotus notes that Cyrus also subdued and incorporated Sogdia into the empire during his military campaigns of 546539 BC.5354 With Astyages out of power all of his vassals including many of Cyruss relatives were now under his command. His uncle Arsames who had been the king of the citystate of Parsa under the Medes therefore would have had to give up his throne. However this transfer of power within the family seems to have been smooth and it is likely that Arsames was still the nominal governor of Parsa under Cyruss authoritymore a Prince or a Grand Duke than a King.55 His son Hystaspes who was also Cyruss second cousin was then made satrap of Parthia and Phrygia. Cyrus the Great thus united the twin Achaemenid kingdoms of Parsa and Anshan into Persia proper. Arsames lived to see his grandson become Darius the Great Shahanshah of Persia after the deaths of both of Cyruss sons.56 Cyruss conquest of Media was merely the start of his wars.57 Lydian Empire and Asia Minoredit Further information Battle of Pteria Battle of Thymbra and Siege of Sardis 547 BC Victory of Cyrus over Lydias Croesus at the Battle of Thymbra 546 BC The exact dates of the Lydian conquest are unknown but it must have taken place between Cyruss overthrow of the Median kingdom 550 BC and his conquest of Babylon 539 BC. It was common in the past to give 547 BC as the year of the conquest due to some interpretations of the Nabonidus Chronicle but this position is currently not much held.58 The Lydians first attacked the Achaemenid Empires city of Pteria in Cappadocia. The king of Lydia Croesus besieged and captured the city enslaving its inhabitants. Meanwhile the Persians invited the citizens of Ionia who were part of the Lydian kingdom to revolt against their ruler. The offer was rebuffed and thus Cyrus levied an army and marched against the Lydians increasing his numbers while passing through nations in his way. The Battle of Pteria was effectively a stalemate with both sides suffering heavy casualties by nightfall. Croesus retreated to Sardis the following morning.59 While in Sardis Croesus sent out requests for his allies to send aid to Lydia. However near the end of the winter before the allies could unite Cyrus the Great pushed the war into Lydian territory and besieged Croesus in his capital Sardis. Shortly before the final Battle of Thymbra between the two rulers Harpagus advised Cyrus the Great to place his dromedaries in front of his warriors the Lydian horses not used to the dromedaries smell would be very afraid. The strategy worked the Lydian cavalry was routed. Cyrus defeated and captured Croesus. Cyrus occupied the capital at Sardis conquering the Lydian kingdom in 546 BC.59 According to Herodotus Cyrus the Great spared Croesuss life and kept him as an advisor but this account conflicts with some translations of the contemporary Nabonidus Chronicle which interpret that the king of Lydia was slain.60 Croesus on the pyre. Attic redfigure amphora 500490 BC Louvre G 197 Before returning to the capital Commagene was incorporated into Persia in 546 BC.61 Later a Lydian named Pactyas was entrusted by Cyrus the Great to send Croesuss treasury to Persia. However soon after Cyruss departure Pactyas hired mercenaries and caused an uprising in Sardis revolting against the Persian satrap of Lydia Tabalus. Cyrus sent Mazares one of his commanders to subdue the insurrection but demanded that Pactyas be returned alive. Upon Mazaress arrival Pactyas fled to Ionia where he had hired more mercenaries. Mazares marched his troops into the Greek country and subdued the cities of Magnesia and Priene. The fate of Pactyas is unknown but after capture he was probably sent to Cyrus and put to death after being tortured.62 Mazares continued the conquest of Asia Minor but died of unknown causes during his campaign in Ionia. Cyrus sent Harpagus to complete Mazaress conquest of Asia Minor. Harpagus captured Lycia Aeolia and Caria using the technique of building earthworks to breach the walls of besieged cities a method unknown to the Greeks. He ended his conquest of the area in 542 BC and returned to Persia.63 Eastern Campaignsedit Main article Gedrosian Campaign of Cyrus The Great Further information Gedrosia Painting from Charles Texier for Cyrus The Great Paris 1852 After the conquest of Lydia Cyrus campaigned in the east between around 545 BC to 540 BC. Cyrus first tried to conquer Gedrosia however he was decisively defeated and departed Gedrosia.64 Gedrosia was most likely conquered during the reign of Darius I. After the failed attempt to conquer Gedrosia Cyrus attacked the regions of Bactria Arachosia Sogdia Saka Chorasmia Margiana and other provinces in the east. In 533 BC Cyrus the Great crossed the Hindu Kush mountains and collected tribute from the Indus cities. Thus Cyrus probably had established vassal states in western India.65 Cyrus then returned with his army to Babylon due to the unrest taking place in and around Babylon. NeoBabylonian Empireedit Further information Battle of Opis and Fall of Babylon By the year 540 BC Cyrus captured Elam and its capital Susa.66 The Nabonidus Chronicle records that prior to the battles the king of the NeoBabylonian Empire Nabonidus had ordered cult statues from outlying Babylonian cities to be brought into the capital suggesting that the conflict had begun possibly in the winter of 540 BC.67 Just before October 539 BC Cyrus fought the Battle of Opis in or near the strategic riverside city of Opis on the Tigris north of Babylon. The Babylonian army was routed and on 10 October Sippar was seized without a battle with little to no resistance from the populace.68 It is probable that Cyrus engaged in negotiations with the Babylonian generals to obtain a compromise on their part and therefore avoid an armed confrontation.69 Nabonidus who had retreated to Sippar following his defeat at Opis fled to Borsippa.70 Ancient Near East circa 540 BC prior to the invasion of Babylon by Cyrus the Great Around71 12 October72 Persian general Gubarus troops entered Babylon again without any resistance from the Babylonian armies and detained Nabonidus.73 Herodotus explains that to accomplish this feat the Persians using a basin dug earlier by the Babylonian queen Nitokris to protect Babylon against Median attacks diverted the Euphrates river into a canal so that the water level dropped to the height of the middle of a mans thigh which allowed the invading forces to march directly through the river bed to enter at night.74 Shortly thereafter Nabonidus returned from Borsippa and surrendered to Cyrus.75 On 29 October Cyrus entered the city of Babylon.76 Prior to Cyruss invasion of Babylon the NeoBabylonian Empire had conquered many kingdoms. In addition to Babylonia Cyrus probably incorporated its subnational entities into his Empire including Syria Judea and Arabia Petraea although there is no direct evidence to support this assumption.577 After taking Babylon Cyrus the Great proclaimed himself king of Babylon king of Sumer and Akkad king of the four corners of the world in the famous Cyrus Cylinder an inscription on a cylinder that was deposited in the foundations of the Esagila temple dedicated to the chief Babylonian god Marduk. The text of the cylinder denounces Nabonidus as impious and portrays the victorious Cyrus as pleasing the god Marduk. It describes how Cyrus had improved the lives of the citizens of Babylonia repatriated displaced peoples and restored temples and cult sanctuaries. Although some have asserted that the cylinder represents a form of human rights charter historians generally portray it in the context of a longstanding Mesopotamian tradition of new rulers beginning their reigns with declarations of reforms.78 Cyrus the Greats dominions composed the largest empire the world had ever seen to that point.79 At the end of Cyruss rule the Achaemenid Empire stretched from Asia Minor in the west to the Indus River in the east.5 Deathedit The details of Cyruss death vary by account. Ctesias in his Persica has the longest account which says Cyrus met his death while putting down resistance from the Derbices infantry aided by other Scythian archers and cavalry plus Indians and their warelephants. According to him this event took place northeast of the headwaters of the Syr Darya.80 The account of Herodotus from his Histories provides the secondlongest detail in which Cyrus met his fate in a fierce battle with the Massagetae a Scythian tribal confederation from the southern deserts of Khwarezm and Kyzyl Kum in the southernmost portion of the Eurasian Steppe regions of modernday Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan following the advice of Croesus to attack them in their own territory.81 The Massagetae were related to the Scythians in their dress and mode of living they fought on horseback and on foot. In order to acquire her realm Cyrus first sent an offer of marriage to their ruler the empress Tomyris a proposal she rejected.citation needed Achaemenid soldiers left fighting against Scythians 
5 th century BC. Cylinder seal impression drawing.82 He then commenced his attempt to take Massagetae territory by force c. 529 BC83 beginning by building bridges and towered war boats along his side of the river Oxus or Amu Darya which separated them. Sending him a warning to cease his encroachment a warning which she stated she expected he would disregard anyway Tomyris challenged him to meet her forces in honorable warfare inviting him to a location in her country a days march from the river where their two armies would formally engage each other. He accepted her offer but learning that the Massagetae were unfamiliar with wine and its intoxicating effects he set up and then left camp with plenty of it behind taking his best soldiers with him and leaving the least capable ones.citation needed The general of Tomyriss army Spargapises who was also her son and a third of the Massagetian troops killed the group Cyrus had left there and finding the camp well stocked with food and the wine unwittingly drank themselves into inebriation diminishing their capability to defend themselves when they were then overtaken by a surprise attack. They were successfully defeated and although he was taken prisoner Spargapises committed suicide once he regained sobriety. Upon learning of what had transpired Tomyris denounced Cyruss tactics as underhanded and swore vengeance leading a second wave of troops into battle herself. Cyrus the Great was ultimately killed and his forces suffered massive casualties in what Herodotus referred to as the fiercest battle of his career and the ancient world. When it was over Tomyris ordered the body of Cyrus brought to her then decapitated him and dipped his head in a vessel of blood in a symbolic gesture of revenge for his bloodlust and the death of her son.8184 However some scholars question this version mostly because even Herodotus admits this event was one of many versions of Cyruss death that he heard from a supposedly reliable source who told him no one was there to see the aftermath.85 Queen Tomyris of the Massagetae receiving the head of Cyrus Herodotus also recounts that Cyrus saw in his sleep the oldest son of Hystaspes Darius I with wings upon his shoulders shadowing with the one wing Asia and with the other wing Europe.86 Archaeologist Sir Max Mallowan explains this statement by Herodotus and its connection with the four winged basrelief figure of Cyrus the Great in the following way86 Herodotus therefore as I surmise may have known of the close connection between this type of winged figure and the image of Iranian majesty which he associated with a dream prognosticating the kings death before his last fatal campaign across the Oxus. Muhammad Dandamayev says that Persians may have taken Cyruss body back from the Massagetae unlike what Herodotus claimed.5 According to the Chronicle of Michael the Syrian AD 11661199 Cyrus was killed by his wife Tomyris queen of the Massagetae Maksata in the 
60 th year of Jewish captivity.87 An alternative account from Xenophons Cyropaedia contradicts the others claiming that Cyrus died peacefully at his capital.88 The final version of Cyruss death comes from Berossus who only reports that Cyrus met his death while warring against the Dahae archers northwest of the headwaters of the Syr Darya.89 Burialedit Main article Tomb of Cyrus Tomb of Cyrus in Pasargadae Iran a UNESCO World Heritage Site 2015 Cyrus the Greats remains may have been interred in his capital city of Pasargadae where today a limestone tomb built around 540530 BC90 still exists which many believe to be his. Strabo and Arrian give nearly identical descriptions of the tomb based on the eyewitness report of Aristobulus of Cassandreia who at the request of Alexander the Great visited the tomb twice.91 Though the city itself is now in ruins the burial place of Cyrus the Great has remained largely intact and the tomb has been partially restored to counter its natural deterioration over the centuries. According to Plutarch his epitaph read O man whoever you are and wherever you come from for I know you will come I am Cyrus who won the Persians their empire. Do not therefore begrudge me this bit of earth that covers my bones.92 Cuneiform evidence from Babylon proves that Cyrus died around December 530 BC93 and that his son Cambyses II had become king. Cambyses continued his fathers policy of expansion and captured Egypt for the Empire but soon died after only seven years of rule. He was succeeded either by Cyruss other son Bardiya or an impostor posing as Bardiya who became the sole ruler of Persia for seven months until he was killed by Darius the Great.94 The translated ancient Roman and Greek accounts give a vivid description of the tomb both geometrically and aesthetically the tombs geometric shape has changed little over the years still maintaining a large stone of quadrangular form at the base followed by a pyramidal succession of smaller rectangular stones until after a few slabs the structure is curtailed by an edifice with an arched roof composed of a pyramidal shaped stone and a small opening or window on the side where the slenderest man could barely squeeze through.95 Within this edifice was a golden coffin resting on a table with golden supports inside of which the body of Cyrus the Great was interred. Upon his resting place was a covering of tapestry and drapes made from the best available Babylonian materials utilizing fine Median worksmanship below his bed was a fine red carpet covering the narrow rectangular area of his tomb.95 Translated Greek accounts describe the tomb as having been placed in the fertile Pasargadae gardens surrounded by trees and ornamental shrubs with a group of Achaemenian protectors called the Magi stationed nearby to protect the edifice from theft or damage.9596 Years later in the chaos created by Alexander the Greats invasion of Persia and after the defeat of Darius III Cyrus the Greats tomb was broken into and most of its luxuries were looted. When Alexander reached the tomb he was horrified by the manner in which the tomb was treated and questioned the Magi and put them to court.95 On some accounts Alexanders decision to put the Magi on trial was more about his attempt to undermine their influence and his show of power in his newly conquered empire than a concern for Cyruss tomb.97 However Alexander admired Cyrus from an early age reading Xenophons Cyropaedia which described Cyruss heroism in battle and governance as a king and legislator.98 Regardless Alexander the Great ordered Aristobulus to improve the tombs condition and restore its interior.95 Despite his admiration for Cyrus the Great and his attempts at renovation of his tomb Alexander had six years previously 330 BC sacked Persepolis the opulent city that Cyrus may have chosen the site for and either ordered its burning as an act of proGreek propaganda or set it on fire during drunken revels.99 The edifice has survived the test of time through invasions internal divisions successive empires regime changes and revolutions. The last prominent Persian figure to bring attention to the tomb was Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Shah of Iran the last official monarch of Persia during his celebrations of 2500 years of monarchy. Just as Alexander the Great before him the Shah of Iran wanted to appeal to Cyruss legacy to legitimize his own rule by extension.100 The United Nations recognizes the tomb of Cyrus the Great and Pasargadae as a UNESCO World Heritage site.90 Legacyedit Cyrus the Great is said in the Bible to have liberated the Jews from the Babylonian captivity to resettle and rebuild Jerusalem earning him an honored place in Judaism. British historian Charles Freeman suggests that In scope and extent his achievements Cyrus ranked far above that of the Macedonian king Alexander who was to demolish the Achaemenid empire in the 3
20 s but fail to provide any stable alternative.101 Cyrus has been a personal hero to many people including Thomas Jefferson Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and David BenGurion.102 The achievements of Cyrus the Great throughout antiquity are reflected in the way he is remembered today. His own nation the Iranians have regarded him as The Father the very title that had been used during the time of Cyrus himself by the many nations that he conquered as according to Xenophon103 And those who were subject to him he treated with esteem and regard as if they were his own children while his subjects themselves respected Cyrus as their Father ... What other man but Cyrus after having overturned an empire ever died with the title of The Father from the people whom he had brought under his power For it is plain fact that this is a name for one that bestows rather than for one that takes away The Babylonians regarded him as The Liberator as they were offended by their previous ruler Nabonidus for committing sacrilege.104 The Book of Ezra narrates a story of the first return of exiles in the first year of Cyrus in which Cyrus proclaims All the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD the God of heaven given me and He hath charged me to build Him a house in Jerusalem which is in Judah.Ezra 12 Cyrus was distinguished equally as a statesman and as a soldier. Due in part to the political infrastructure he created the Achaemenid Empire endured long after his death.citation needed The rise of Persia under Cyruss rule had a profound impact on the course of world history. Iranian philosophy literature and religion all played dominant roles in world events for the next millennium. Despite the Islamic conquest of Persia in the 
7 th century AD by the Islamic Caliphate Persia continued to exercise enormous influence in the Middle East during the Islamic Golden Age and was particularly instrumental in the growth and expansion of Islam.citation needed Many of the Iranian dynasties following the Achaemenid Empire and their kings saw themselves as the heirs to Cyrus the Great and have claimed to continue the line begun by Cyrus.105106 However there are different opinions among scholars whether this is also the case for the Sassanid Dynasty.107 Alexander the Great was himself infatuated with and admired Cyrus the Great from an early age reading Xenophons Cyropaedia which described Cyruss heroism in battle and governance and his abilities as a king and a legislator.98 During his visit to Pasargadae he ordered Aristobulus to decorate the interior of the sepulchral chamber of Cyruss tomb.98 Cyruss legacy has been felt even as far away as Iceland108 and colonial America. Many of the thinkers and rulers of Classical Antiquity as well as the Renaissance and Enlightenment era109 and the forefathers of the United States of America sought inspiration from Cyrus the Great through works such as Cyropaedia. Thomas Jefferson for example owned two copies of Cyropaedia one with parallel Greek and Latin translations on facing pages showing substantial Jefferson markings that signify the amount of influence the book has had on drafting the United States Declaration of Independence.110111112 According to Professor Richard Nelson Frye Cyruswhose abilities as conqueror and administrator Frye says are attested by the longevity and vigor of the Achaemenid Empireheld an almost mythic role among the Persian people similar to that of Romulus and Remus in Rome or Moses for the Israelites with a story that follows in many details the stories of hero and conquerors from elsewhere in the ancient world.113 Frye writes He became the epitome of the great qualities expected of a ruler in antiquity and he assumed heroic features as a conqueror who was tolerant and magnanimous as well as brave and daring. His personality as seen by the Greeks influenced them and Alexander the Great and as the tradition was transmitted by the Romans may be considered to influence our thinking even now.113 His rule was studied and admired by many of the great leaders such as Alexander the Great Julius Caesar and Thomas Jefferson.114 Religion and philosophyedit Main articles Cyrus the Great in the Bible and Cyrus the Great in the Quran Cyrus the Great center with his General Harpagus behind him as he receives the submission of Astyages 
18 th century tapestry Pierre Briant wrote that given the poor information we have it seems quite reckless to try to reconstruct what the religion of Cyrus might have been.115 It is also debated whether he was a practitioner of Zoroastrianism or whether Zoroastrianism only becomes involved with the imperial religion of the Achaemenid empire after him. The evidence in favor of it comes from some of the names of members of Cyrus family and similarities between the description of Cyrus in Isaiah 4048 and the Gathas.116 Against the thesis is how Cyrus treated local polytheistic cults acknowledging their gods and providing funding for the establishment of their temples and other holy sites as well as a possible latedate for the activity of the Iranian prophet Zoroaster who founded Zoroastrianism.117 The policies of Cyrus with respect to treatment of minority religions are documented in many historical accounts particularly Babylonian texts and Jewish sources.118 Cyrus had a general policy of religious tolerance throughout his vast empire. Whether this was a new policy or the continuation of policies followed by the Babylonians and Assyrians as Lester Grabbe maintains119 is disputed. He brought peace to the Babylonians and is said to have kept his army away from the temples and restored the statues of the Babylonian gods to their sanctuaries.11 Information about religion and ritual during the reign of Cyrus is also available from the Cyropaedia of Xenophon the Histories of Herodotus and inscriptions though these were written in later periods and so must be used carefully.120121 The Cyrus Cylinder was composed in the name of Cyrus with him as the firstperson speaker. The Cylinder is highly religious and is framed around the interventions of the god Marduk. It is Marduk who is praised in the outset of the text whose direct intervention is thought to be responsible for what happened in recent history and it is Marduk who summons Cyrus for the purpose of righting the wrongs of his predecessor Nabonidus.122 Furthermore Cyrus offers respect not only to the cult of Marduk but also to local cults.123 One inscription from Uruk states Cyrus loves Esangil and Ezida while another from Ur mentons that he returned the gods to their shrines. Another from Babylon or Sippar says that unlike Nabonidus Cyrus provided proper and even increased the sacrifices for the gods.124 Additional reliable information may come from the funerary customs around the tomb of Cyrus which indicates a privileged cult honoring Mithra.120125 Some have also identified the figure depicted in the basrelief from Pasargadae as Mithra further indicating the reverence of Cyrus for this deity.126 Additional evidence further indicates the connection between Cyrus and Mithra.127 Jewish textsedit The treatment of the Jews by Cyrus during their exile in Babylon after Nebuchadnezzar II destroyed Jerusalem is reported in the Bible. Cyrus is represented positively and as an agent of Yahweh even though he is said to not know Yahweh Isaiah 45
45.1 28 The Jewish Bibles Ketuvim ends in Second Chronicles with the decree of Cyrus which returned the exiles to the Promised Land from Babylon along with a commission to rebuild the temple.129 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia All the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD the God of heaven given me and He hath charged me to build Him a house in Jerusalem which is in Judah. Whosoever there is among you of all His people  the LORD his God be with him  let him go there.  2 Chronicles 3623 This edict is also fully reproduced in the Book of Ezra. In the first year of King Cyrus Cyrus the king issued a decree Concerning the house of God at Jerusalem let the temple the place where sacrifices are offered be rebuilt and let its foundations be retained its height being 60 cubits and its width 60 cubits with three layers of huge stones and one layer of timbers. And let the cost be paid from the royal treasury. Also let the gold and silver utensils of the house of God which Nebuchadnezzar took from the temple in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon be returned and brought to their places in the temple in Jerusalem and you shall put them in the house of God.  Ezra 635 The Cyrus Street Jerusalem The Jews honored him as a dignified and righteous king. In one Biblical passage Isaiah refers to him as Messiah lit. His anointed one Isaiah 451 making him the only gentile to be so referred. Elsewhere in Isaiah God is described as saying I will raise up Cyrus in my righteousness I will make all his ways straight. He will rebuild my city and set my exiles free but not for a price or reward says God Almighty. Isaiah 4513 As the text suggests Cyrus did ultimately release the nation of Israel from its exile without compensation or tribute. These particular passages Isaiah 4055 often referred to as DeuteroIsaiah are believed by most modern critical scholars to have been added by another author toward the end of the Babylonian exile c. 536 BC.130 Josephus the firstcentury Jewish historian relates the traditional view of the Jews regarding the prediction of Cyrus in Isaiah in his Antiquities of the Jews book 11 chapter 1131 In the first year of the reign of Cyrus which was the seventieth from the day that our people were removed out of their own land into Babylon God commiserated the captivity and calamity of these poor people according as he had foretold to them by Jeremiah the prophet before the destruction of the city that after they had served Nebuchadnezzar and his posterity and after they had undergone that servitude seventy years he would restore them again to the land of their fathers and they should build their temple and enjoy their ancient prosperity. And these things God did afford them for he stirred up the mind of Cyrus and made him write this throughout all Asia Thus saith Cyrus the king Since God Almighty hath appointed me to be king of the habitable earth I believe that he is that God which the nation of the Israelites worship for indeed he foretold my name by the prophets and that I should build him a house at Jerusalem in the country of Judea. This was known to Cyrus by his reading the book which Isaiah left behind him of his prophecies for this prophet said that God had spoken thus to him in a secret vision My will is that Cyrus whom I have appointed to be king over many and great nations send back my people to their own land and build my temple. This was foretold by Isaiah one hundred and forty years before the temple was demolished. Accordingly when Cyrus read this and admired the Divine power an earnest desire and ambition seized upon him to fulfill what was so written so he called for the most eminent Jews that were in Babylon and said to them that he gave them leave to go back to their own country and to rebuild their city Jerusalem and the temple of God for that he would be their assistant and that he would write to the rulers and governors that were in the neighborhood of their country of Judea that they should contribute to them gold and silver for the building of the temple and besides that beasts for their sacrifices. Painting of Daniel and Cyrus before the Idol Bel While Cyrus is praised in the Tanakh Isaiah 4516 and Ezra 1111 there was Jewish criticism of him after he was lied to by the Cuthites who wanted to halt the building of the Second Temple. They accused the Jews of conspiring to rebel so Cyrus in turn stopped the construction which would not be completed until 515 BC during the reign of Darius I.132133 According to the Bible it was King Artaxerxes who was convinced to stop the construction of the temple in Jerusalem. Ezra 4724 Statue of Cyrus the Great at Olympic Park in Sydney The historical nature of this decree has been challenged. Professor Lester L Grabbe argues that there was no decree but that there was a policy that allowed exiles to return to their homelands and rebuild their temples. He also argues that the archaeology suggests that the return was a trickle taking place over perhaps decades resulting in a maximum population of perhaps 300
00.1 34 Philip R. Davies called the authenticity of the decree dubious citing Grabbe and adding that arguing against the authenticity of Ezra 
1.1 4 is J. Briend in a paper given at the Institut Catholique de Paris on 15 December 1993 who denies that it resembles the form of an official document but reflects rather biblical prophetic idiom.135 Mary Joan Winn Leith believes that the decree in Ezra might be authentic and along with the Cylinder that Cyrus like earlier rulers was through these decrees trying to gain support from those who might be strategically important particularly those close to Egypt which he wished to conquer. She also wrote that appeals to Marduk in the cylinder and to Yahweh in the biblical decree demonstrate the Persian tendency to coopt local religious and political traditions in the interest of imperial control.136 Some modern Muslims have suggested that the Quranic figure of Dhu alQarnayn is a representation of Cyrus the Great but the scholarly consensus is that he is a development of legends concerning Alexander the Great.137 Politics and managementedit Cyrus founded the empire as a multistate empire governed by four capital states Pasargadae Babylon Susa and Ecbatana. He allowed a certain amount of regional autonomy in each state in the form of a satrapy system. A satrapy was an administrative unit usually organized on a geographical basis. A satrap governor was the vassal king who administered the region a general supervised military recruitment and ensured order and a state secretary kept the official records. The general and the state secretary reported directly to the satrap as well as the central government.citation needed During his reign Cyrus maintained control over a vast region of conquered kingdoms achieved through retaining and expanding the satrapies. Further organization of newly conquered territories into provinces ruled by satraps was continued by Cyruss successor Darius the Great. Cyruss empire was based on tribute and conscripts from the many parts of his realm.138 Through his military savvy Cyrus created an organized army including the Immortals unit consisting of 10000 highly trained soldiers.139 He also formed an innovative postal system throughout the empire based on several relay stations called Chapar Khaneh.140 Cyruss conquests began a new era in the age of empire building where a vast superstate comprising many dozens of countries races religions and languages were ruled under a single administration headed by a central government. This system lasted for centuries and was retained both by the invading Seleucid dynasty during their control of Persia and later Iranian dynasties including the Parthians and Sasanians.141 
17 thcentury bust of Cyrus the Great in Hamburg Germany Cyrus has been known for his innovations in building projects he further developed the technologies that he found in the conquered cultures and applied them in building the palaces of Pasargadae. He was also famous for his love of gardens the recent excavations in his capital city has revealed the existence of the Pasargadae Persian Garden and a network of irrigation canals. Pasargadae was a place for two magnificent palaces surrounded by a majestic royal park and vast formal gardens among them was the fourquartered wall gardens of Paradisia with over 1000 meters of channels made out of carved limestone designed to fill small basins at every 16 meters and water various types of wild and domestic flora. The design and concept of Paradisia were exceptional and have been used as a model for many ancient and modern parks ever since.142 The English physician and philosopher Sir Thomas Browne penned a discourse entitled The Garden of Cyrus in 1658 in which Cyrus is depicted as an archetypal wise ruler  while the Protectorate of Cromwell ruled Britain. However despite being featured in the title Cyrus was not a main focus of Brownes work.143 Cyrus the elder brought up in Woods and Mountains when time and power enabled pursued the dictate of his education and brought the treasures of the field into rule and circumscription. So nobly beautifying the hanging Gardens of Babylon that he was also thought to be the authour thereof.144 Cyruss standard described as a golden eagle mounted upon a lofty shaft remained the official banner of the Achaemenids.145 Cyrus Cylinderedit Main article Cyrus Cylinder The Cyrus cylinder a contemporary cuneiform script proclaiming Cyrus as legitimate king of Babylon One of the few surviving sources of information that can be dated directly to Cyruss time is the Cyrus Cylinder Persian   a document in the form of a clay cylinder inscribed in Akkadian cuneiform. It had been placed in the foundations of the Esagila the temple of Marduk in Babylon as a foundation deposit following the Persian conquest in 539 BC. It was discovered in 1879 and is kept today in the British Museum in London.146 The text of the cylinder denounces the deposed Babylonian king Nabonidus as impious and portrays Cyrus as pleasing to the chief god Marduk. It describes how Cyrus had improved the lives of the citizens of Babylonia repatriated displaced peoples and restored temples and cult sanctuaries.147 Although not mentioned specifically in the text the repatriation of the Jews from their Babylonian captivity has been interpreted as part of this general policy.148 In the 19
70 s the Shah of Iran adopted the Cyrus cylinder as a political symbol using it as a central image in his celebration of 2500 years of Iranian monarchy149 and asserting that it was the first human rights charter in history.150 This view has been disputed by some as rather anachronistic and tendentious151 as the modern concept of human rights would have been quite alien to Cyruss contemporaries and is not mentioned by the cylinder.152153 The cylinder has nonetheless become seen as part of Irans cultural identity.149 The United Nations has declared the relic to be an ancient declaration of human rights since 1971 approved by then Secretary General Sithu U Thant after he was given a replica by the sister of the Shah of Iran.154 The British Museum describes the cylinder as an instrument of ancient Mesopotamian propaganda that reflects a long tradition in Mesopotamia where from as early as the third millennium BC kings began their reigns with declarations of reforms.78 The cylinder emphasizes Cyruss continuity with previous Babylonian rulers asserting his virtue as a traditional Babylonian king while denigrating his predecessor.155 Neil MacGregor Director of the British Museum has stated that the cylinder was the first attempt we know about running a society a state with different nationalities and faiths  a new kind of statecraft.156 He explained that It has even been described as the first declaration of human rights and while this was never the intention of the document  the modern concept of human rights scarcely existed in the ancient world  it has come to embody the hopes and aspirations of many.157 Currency denominationedit See also Croeseid Achaemenid coinage and Kuru Achaemenid version of the Croeseid minted in Lydia under the rule of Cyrus the Great Old Persian  Kru to Darius I Old Persian  Drayavau circa 545520 BC. It only weighs 
8.0 6 grams compared to the standard 
10.7  grams of the original Croeseid minted by King Croesus of Lydia which was the worlds first gold coin.158 The use of the name Kuru as a currency denomination for coinage goes back to the 
6 th century BC dating to the time of the Croeseid the worlds first gold coin originally minted by King Croesus of Lydia. The Croeseid was later continued to be minted and spread in a wide geographical area by Cyrus the Great Old Persian  Kru the founder of the Achaemenid Empire who defeated King Croesus and conquered Lydia with the Battle of Thymbra in 547 BC. Cyrus Kru made the Croeseid the standard gold coin of his vast empire using the same lion and bull design but with a reduced weight 
8.0 6 grams instead of the standard 
10.7  grams of the original version issued by King Croesus due to the need for larger amounts of these coins for a much larger population. Titlesedit Winged genius relief Pasargadae in art His regal titles in full were The Great King King of Persia King of Anshan King of Media King of Babylon King of Sumer and Akkad and King of the Four Corners of the World. The Nabonidus Chronicle notes the change in his title from King of Anshan to King of Persia. Assyriologist Franois Vallat wrote that When Astyages marched against Cyrus Cyrus is called King of Anshan but when Cyrus crosses the Tigris on his way to Lydia he is King of Persia. The coup therefore took place between these two events.159 Family treeedit Further information Achaemenid family tree v t e Cyrus family tree160 Achaemenes King of Persia Teispes King of Persia Ariaramnes Ruler of Persiai Cyrus I Ruler of Anshan Arsames Ruler of Persiai Cambyses I Ruler of Anshan Hystaspes Prince Cyrus the Great Cyrus II King of Persia Darius the Great Darius I King of Persia Cambyses II King of Persia Bardiya Smerdis Prince imposter Gaumata ruled as Smerdisi Artystone Princess Atossa Princess Notes  a b c Unconfirmed rulers due to the Behistun Inscription See alsoedit 2016 Cyrus the Great Revolt Kay Bahman List of biblical figures identified in extrabiblical sources List of people known as the Great Notesedit  In more recent years historians have moved away from identifying this figure with Cyrus the Great.23  Image  Cyruss date of death can be deduced from the last two references to his own reign a tablet from Borsippa dated to 12 August and the final from Babylon 12 September 530 BC and the first reference to the reign of his son Cambyses a tablet from Babylon dated to 31 August and or 4 September but an undocumented tablet from the city of Kish dates the last official reign of Cyrus to 4 December 530 BC see R.A. Parker and W.H. Dubberstein Babylonian Chronology 626 B.C.  A.D. 75 1971.  Kura is also attested as an Elamite name before Cyruss lifetime.23 Referencesedit  Curzon 2018 p. 75.  a b Sekunda 2010 p. 268271.  Stronach 2010 p. 9.  Ilya Gershevitch ed. 1985. The Cambridge History of Iran The Median and Achaemenian periods. Vol. 2. Cambridge University Press. p. 404. ISBN 9780521200912. Archived from the original on 11 October 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020.  a b c d e Dandamayev 1993 pp. 516521.  Xenophon Anabasis I. IX see also M. A. Dandamaev Cyrus II in Encyclopaedia Iranica.  a b c d e f Schmitt 1983 Achaemenid dynasty i. The clan and dynasty  Cambridge Ancient History IV Chapter 
3 c. p. 170. The quote is from the Greek historian Herodotus.  Beckwith Christopher. 2009. Empires of the Silk Road A History of Central Eurasia from the Bronze Age to the Present. Princeton and Oxford Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691135892. p. 63.  Bassett Sherylee R. 1999. The Death of Cyrus the Younger. The Classical Quarterly. 49 2 473483. doi
10.1 0
93 cq

49.2.4 73. ISSN 00098388. JSTOR 639872. PMID 16437854.  a b Dandamayev Cyrus iii. Cyrus the Great Cyruss religious policies.  The Cambridge Ancient History Vol. IV p. 42. See also G. Buchaman Gray and D. Litt The foundation and extension of the Persian empire Chapter I in The Cambridge Ancient History Vol. IV 
2 nd edition published by The University Press 1927. p. 15. Excerpt The administration of the empire through satrap and much more belonging to the form or spirit of the government was the work of Cyrus ...  Jona Lendering 2012. Messiah  Roots of the concept From Josiah to Cyrus. livius.org. Archived from the original on 31 December 2011. Retrieved 26 January 2012.  The Biblical Archaeology Society BAS 24 August 2015. Cyrus the Messiah. bibarch.org. Archived from the original on 26 January 2015. Retrieved 27 July 2015.  Margaret Christina Miller 2004. Athens and Persia in the Fifth Century BC A Study in Cultural Receptivity. Cambridge University Press. p. 243. ISBN 9780521607582. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020.  Vesta Sarkhosh Curtis Sarah Stewart 2005. Birth of the Persian Empire. I.B. Tauris. p. 7. ISBN 9781845110628. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2020.verification needed  Amelie Kuhrt 3 December 2007. The Persian Empire A Corpus of Sources from the Achaemenid Period. Routledge. p. 47. ISBN 9781134076345. Archived from the original on 8 January 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.  Shabnam J. Holliday 2011. Defining Iran Politics of Resistance. Ashgate Publishing Ltd. pp. 3840. ISBN 9781409405245. Archived from the original on 8 January 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.  LlewellynJones 2017 p. 67.  Schmitt Rdiger. Cyrus name. Encyclopdia Iranica. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2016.  a b Schmitt 2010 p. 515.   Plutarch Artaxerxes 1. 3 classics.mit.edu Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Photius Epitome of Ctesias Persica 52 livius.org Archived 23 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine  a b c d e f Tavernier Jan 2007. Iranica in the Achaemenid Period ca. 550330 B.C.. Leuven Peeters. pp. 5289. ISBN 9789042918337. OCLC 167407632.  Dandamaev 1989 p. 71  Tait 1846 p. 342343.  AlBiruni 1879 1000. The Chronology of Ancient Nations. Translated by Sachau C. Edward. p. 152.  D.T.Potts Birth of the Persian Empire Vol. I ed. Curtis  Stewart I.B.TaurisBritish Museum London 2005 p.1322  a b c Waters 2014 p. 171.  Eric G. L. Pinzelli 2022. Masters of Warfare Fifty Underrated Military Commanders from Classical Antiquity to the Cold War. Pen and Sword Military. p. 3. ISBN 9781399070157.  The Modern Review Volume 89. the University of Michigan. 1951. which should really be Kurush an Indoaryan name cf. Kuru of the Mahabharata legend. Thus Cambyses was really Kambujiya  Max Mallowan p. 392. and p. 417  Kuhrt 2013 p. 177.  Stronach David 2003. HERZFELD ERNST ii. HERZFELD AND PASARGADAE. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition. Encyclopdia Iranica. Archived from the original on 11 May 2021. Retrieved 8 March 2021.  Schmitt 1983 under i. The clan and dynasty.  e. g. Cyrus Cylinder Fragment A.  21.  Schmitt R. Iranian Personal Names i.PreIslamic Names. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Vol. 4. Naming the grandson after the grandfather was a common practice among Iranians.  Visual representation of the divine and the numinous in early Achaemenid Iran old problems new directions Mark A. Garrison Trinity University San Antonio Texas last revision 3 March 2009 see page 11 Archived 26 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine  a b Briant 2002 p. 63.  Waters 2004 p. 92.  Dandamev M. A. 1990. Cambyses. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Encyclopaedia Iranica Foundation. ISBN 0710091
32 X. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2011.  Dandamaev 1989 p. 9  Waters 2004 p. 97.  Pasargadae Palace P  Livius. www.livius.org. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2019.  Amlie Kuhrt The Ancient Near East c. 3000330 BC Routledge Publishers 1995 p.661 ISBN 0415167620  Benjamin G. Kohl Ronald G. Witt Elizabeth B. Welles 1978. The Earthly republic Italian humanists on government and society. Manchester University Press ND. p. 198. ISBN 9780719007347. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2022.  Kuhrt 2013 p. 106.  Grayson 1975 p. 111.  Herodotus p. 
1.9 5.  Herodotus p. 
1.1 0721.  Stories of the East From Herodotus pp. 7980  Briant 2002 p. 31.  Briant 2002 pp. 3133.  Antoine Simonin. 8 Jan 2012. Sogdiana Archived 21 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine. Ancient History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 1 September 2016.  Kirill Nourzhanov Christian Bleuer 2013 Tajikistan a Political and Social History Canberra Australian National University Press p. 12 ISBN 9781925021158.  Jack Martin Balcer 1984. Sparda by the bitter sea imperial interaction in western Anatolia. Scholars Press. p. 137. ISBN 9780891306573. Archived from the original on 17 August 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020.  A. Sh. Sahbazi Arsama in Encyclopaedia Iranica.  The encyclopdia britannica a dictionary of arts sciences literature and general information Volume 21 edited by Hugh Chrisholm b1911 pp. 20607  Rollinger Robert The Median Empire the End of Urartu and Cyrus the Greats Campaign in 547 B.C. Archived 4 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine Lendering Jona The End of Lydia 547 Archived 6 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine.  a b Herodotus The Histories Book I Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine 440 BC. Translated by George Rawlinson.  Croesus Archived 30 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine Fifth and last king of the Mermnad dynasty.  Syria  Urartu 612501.  The life and travels of Herodotus Volume 2 by James Talboys Wheeler 1855 pp. 27174  Herodotus A. Barguet. LEnqute in French. Bibliothque de la Pliade. pp. 111124.  Ancient India by Vidya Dhar Mahajan 2019 pp. 203  Chronology of the Ancient World by H. E. L. Mellersh 1994  Tavernier Jan. Some Thoughts in NeoElamite Chronology PDF. p. 27. Archived PDF from the original on 30 July 2013. Retrieved 13 March 2009.  Kuhrt Amlie. Babylonia from Cyrus to Xerxes in The Cambridge Ancient History Vol IV  Persia Greece and the Western Mediterranean pp. 11238. Ed. John Boardman. Cambridge University Press 1982. ISBN 0521228042  Nabonidus Chronicle 14 Archived 26 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine.  Tolini Gauthier Quelques lments concernant la prise de Babylone par Cyrus Paris. Il est probable que des ngociations sengagrent alors entre Cyrus et les chefs de larme babylonienne pour obtenir une reddition sans recourir  laffrontement arm. p. 10 Archived 8 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine PDF  Bealieu PaulAlain 1989. The Reign of Nabonidus King of Babylon 536539 B.C. New Haven and London Yale University Press. p. 230. ISBN 0300043147.  The date depends on when exactly the lunar month was deemed to have begun.  Briant 2002 p. 41.  Nabonidus Chronicle 1516 Archived 26 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine.  Potts Daniel 1996. Mesopotamian civilization the material foundations. Cornell University Press. pp. 2223. ISBN 9780801433399. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020.  Bealieu PaulAlain 1989. The Reign of Nabonidus King of Babylon 536539 B.C. New Haven and London Yale University Press. p. 231. ISBN 0300043147.  Nabonidus Chronicle 18 Archived 26 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine.  Briant 2002 pp. 4449.  a b British Museum Website The Cyrus Cylinder. Britishmuseum.org. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  Kuhrt 1995 p. 647.  A history of Greece Volume 2 By Connop Thirlwall Longmans 1836 p. 174  a b Ancient History Sourcebook Herodotus Queen Tomyris of the Massagetai and the Defeat of the Persians under Cyrus. Fordham.edu. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 30 December 2012.  Hartley Charles W. Yaziciolu G. Bike Smith Adam T. 2012. The Archaeology of Power and Politics in Eurasia Regimes and Revolutions. Cambridge University Press. p. 83. ISBN 9781107016521. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 21 February 2019.  Grousset Rene 1970. The Empire of the Steppes. Rutgers University Press. p. 9. ISBN 0813513049.  Tomyris Queen of the Massagetae Defeats Cyrus the Great in Battle Archived 29 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine Herodotus The Histories  Nino Luraghi 2001. The historians craft in the age of Herodotus. Oxford University Press US. p. 155. ISBN 9780199240500. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2022.  a b Ilya Gershevitch ed. 1985. The Cambridge History of Iran The Median and Achaemenian periods Volume 2. Cambridge University Press. pp. 39298. ISBN 9780521200912. Archived from the original on 11 October 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020.  Michael the Syrian. Chronicle of Michael the Great Patriarch of the Syrians  via Internet Archive.  Xenophon Cyropaedia VII. 7 M.A. Dandamaev Cyrus II in Encyclopaedia Iranica p. 250. See also H. SancisiWeerdenburg Cyropaedia Archived 17 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine in Encyclopaedia Iranica on the reliability of Xenophons account.  A political history of the Achaemenid empire By M.A. Dandamaev Brill 1989 p. 67.  a b UNESCO World Heritage Centre 2006. Pasargadae. Archived from the original on 5 March 2020. Retrieved 26 December 2010.  Strabo Geographica 

15.3.7  Arrian Anabasis Alexandri 
6.2 9  Life of Alexander 69 in Plutarch The Age of Alexander translated by Ian ScottKilvert Penguin Classics 1973 p. 326. similar inscriptions give Arrian and Strabo.  Cyruss date of death can be deduced from the last reference to his own reign a tablet from Borsippa dated to 12 Augustus 530 and the first reference to the reign of his son Cambyses a tablet from Babylon dated to 31 August see R.A. Parker and W.H. Dubberstein Babylonian Chronology 626 B.C.  A.D. 75 1971.  Mark Joshua J. Behistun Inscription. World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 6 March 2024.  a b c d e grk. Lucius Flavius Arrianus en. Arrian trans. Charles Dexter Cleveland 1861. A compendium of classical literaturecomprising choice extracts translated from Greek and Roman writers with biographical sketches. Biddle. p. 313. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020.cite book CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  Abraham Valentine Williams Jackson 1906. Persia past and present. The Macmillan Company. p. 278. tomb of cyrus the great.  Ralph Griffiths George Edward Griffiths 1816. The Monthly review. 1816. p. 509. Cyrus influence on persian identity.  a b c Ulrich Wilcken 1967. Alexander the Great. W.W. Norton  Company. p. 146. ISBN 9780393003819. Alexander admiration of cyrus.  John Maxwell OBrien 1994. Alexander the Great the invisible enemy. Psychology Press. pp. 10001. ISBN 9780415106177. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020.  James D. Cockcroft 1989. Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Shah of Iran. Chelsea House Publishers. ISBN 9781555468477. Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and the Cyrus legacy.  Freeman 1999 p. 188  The Cyrus cylinder Diplomatic whirl. The Economist. 23 March 2013. Archived from the original on 22 June 2017. Retrieved 26 August 2017.  Xenophon 1855. The Cyropaedia. H.G. Bohn. cyropaedia.  Cardascia G. Babylon under Achaemenids in Encyclopedia Iranica.  Richard Nelson Frye 1963. The Heritage of Persia. World Pub. Co.  Cyrus Kadivar 25 January 2002. We are Awake. The Iranian.  E. Yarshater for example rejects that Sassanids remembered Cyrus whereas R.N. Frye do propose remembrance and line of continuity See A. Sh. Shahbazi Early Sassanians Claim to Achaemenid Heritage Nameye Irane Bastan Vol. 1 No. 1 pp. 6173 M. Boyce The Religion of Cyrus the Great in A. Kuhrt and H. SancisiWeerdenburg eds. Achaemenid History III. Method and Theory Leiden 1988 p. 30 and The History of Ancient Iran by Frye p. 371 and the debates in Vesta Sarkhosh Curtis et al. The Art and Archaeology of Ancient Persia New Light on the Parthian and Sasanian Empires Published by I. B. Tauris in association with the British Institute of Persian Studies 1998 ISBN 1860640451 pp. 18 3851.  Jakob Jonson Cyrus the Great in Icelandic epic A literary study. Acta Iranica. 1974 4950  Nadon Christopher 2001 Xenophons Prince Republic and Empire in the Cyropaedia Berkeley UC Press ISBN 0520224043  Cyrus and Jefferson Did they speak the same language. www.payvand.com. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 26 December 2015.  Cyrus Cylinder How a Persian monarch inspired Jefferson. BBC News. 11 March 2013. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018.  Boyd Julian P. The Papers of Thomas Jefferson. Retrieved 18 August 2010.  a b Cyrus II Encyclopdia Britannica 2008. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. Original.britannica.com. Retrieved 30 December 2012.permanent dead link  Cyrus the Great Biography . Biography Online. Retrieved 5 December 2023.  Briant 2002 p. 94.  Boyce Mary 2014. Achaemenid Religion. Encyclopedia Iranica.  Shannon Avram 2007. The Achaemenid Kings and the Worship of Ahura Mazda ProtoZoroastrianism in the Persian Empire. Studia Antiqua. 5 2 7985.  Crompton Samuel Willard 2008. Cyrus the Great. New York Chelsea House Publishers. p. 80. ISBN 9780791096369.  Oded Lipschitz Manfred Oeming eds. 2006. The Persian Documents in the Book of Ezra Are They Authentic. Judah and the Judeans in the Persian period. Eisenbrauns. p. 542. ISBN 9781575061047.  a b Briant 2002 p. 9396.  Daryaee 2013 p. 31.  Finkel 2013 p. 2324.  Finkel 2013 p. 120.  Daryaee 2013 p. 27.  Daryaee 2013 p. 33.  Soudavar 2012 p. 4952.  Daryaee 2013 p. 3336.  Lind Millard 1990. Monotheism power justice collected Old Testament essays. Wipf  Stock Publishers. p. 158. ISBN 9780936273167.  Bible Gateway passage 2 Chronicles 36  New Living Translation. Bible Gateway. Retrieved 9 October 2023.  Simon John De Vries From old Revelation to new a traditionhistorical and redactioncritical study of temporal transitions in prophetic prediction Archived 8 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing 1995 ISBN 9780802806833 p. 126  Josephus Flavius. The Antiquities of the Jews Book 11 Chapter 1 1 Archived 20 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine  Goldwurm Hersh 1982. History of the Jewish People The Second Temple Era. ArtScroll. pp. 26 29. ISBN 0899064
54 X.  Schiffman Lawrence 1991. From text to tradition a history of Second Temple and Rabbinic Judaism. KTAV Publishing. pp. 35 36. ISBN 9780881253726.  Grabbe Lester L. 2004. A History of the Jews and Judaism in the Second Temple Period Yehud A History of the Persian Province of Judah v. 1. T  T Clark. p. 355. ISBN 9780567089984. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020.  Philip R. Davies 1995. John D Davies ed.. Words Remembered Texts Renewed Essays in Honour of John F.A. Sawyer. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 219. ISBN 9781850755425. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020.  Winn Leith Mary Joan 2001 1998. Israel among the Nations The Persian Period. In Michael David Coogan ed.. The Oxford History of the Biblical World Google Books. Oxford New York Oxford University Press. p. 285. ISBN 0195139372. LCCN 98016042. OCLC 44650958. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 14 December 2012.  Toorawa 2011 p. 8.  John Curtis Julian Reade Dominique Collon 1995. Art and empire. The Trustees of the British Museum by British Museum Press. ISBN 9780714111407. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020.  From Cyrus to Alexander A History of the Persian Empire Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine by Pierre Briant  Herodotus Herodotus trans. A.D. Godley vol. 4 book 8 verse 98 pp. 9697 1924.  Wilcox Peter MacBride Angus 1986. Romes Enemies Parthians And Sassanid Persians. Osprey Publishing. p. 14. ISBN 0850456886.  Persepolis Recreated Publisher NEJ International Pictures 
1 ST edition 2005 ISBN 9789640645253  The Garden of Cyrus Chapter I. penelope.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 21 April 2024.  The Garden of Cyrus Chapter I. penelope.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 21 April 2024.  Alireza Shapur Shahbazi 15 December 1994 DERAF Archived 26 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. VII Fasc. 3 pp. 312315.  H.F. Vos Archaeology of Mesopotamia p. 267 in The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia ed. Geoffrey W. Bromiley. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing 1995. ISBN 0802837816  The Ancient Near East Volume I An Anthology of Texts and Pictures. Vol. 1. Ed. James B. Pritchard. Princeton University Press 1973.  British Museum Cyrus Cylinder. British Museum. Archived from the original on 4 December 2009. Retrieved 28 October 2009.  a b British Museum explanatory notes Cyrus Cylinder In Iran the cylinder has appeared on coins banknotes and stamps. Despite being a Babylonian document it has become part of Irans cultural identity.  Neil MacGregor The whole world in our hands in Art and Cultural Heritage Law Policy and Practice pp. 38384 ed. Barbara T. Hoffman. Cambridge University Press 2006. ISBN 0521857643  Elton L. Daniel The History of Iran p. 39. Greenwood Publishing Group 2000. ISBN 0313307318 restricted online copy p. 39 at Google Books  John Curtis Nigel Tallis Beatrice AndreSalvini. Forgotten Empire p. 59. University of California Press 2005. restricted online copy p. 59 at Google Books  See also Amlie Kuhrt Babylonia from Cyrus to Xerxes in The Cambridge Ancient History Vol IV  Persia Greece and the Western Mediterranean p. 124. Ed. John Boardman. Cambridge University Press 1982. ISBN 0521228042  The telegraph 16 July 2008. Cyrus Cylinder. The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2010.  Hekster Olivier Fowler Richard 2005. Imaginary kings royal images in the ancient Near East Greece and Rome. Vol. Oriens et occidens 11. Franz Steiner Verlag. p. 33. ISBN 9783515087650.  Barbara Slavin 6 March 2013. Cyrus Cylinder a Reminder of Persian Legacy of Tolerance. AlMonitor. Archived from the original on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013.  MacGregor Neil 24 February 2013. A 26
00 yearold icon of freedom comes to the United States. CNN. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013.  Classical Numismatic Group  Franois Vallat 2013. Perrot Jean ed.. The Palace of Darius at Susa The Great Royal Residence of Achaemenid Persia. I.B.Tauris. p. 39. ISBN 9781848856219. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2018.  Family Tree of Darius the Great JPG. Encyclopdia Iranica. Retrieved 28 March 2011. Bibliographyedit Ancient sourcesedit The Nabonidus Chronicle of the Babylonian Chronicles The Verse account of Nabonidus The Prayer of Nabonidus one of the Dead Sea scrolls The Cyrus Cylinder Herodotus The Histories Ctesias Persica The biblical books of Isaiah Daniel Ezra and Nehemiah Flavius Josephus Antiquities of the Jews Thucydides History of the Peloponnesian War Plato Laws dialogue Xenophon Cyropaedia Quintus Curtius Rufus Library of World History Plutarch Plutarchs Lives Fragments of Nicolaus of Damascus Arrian Anabasis Alexandri Polyaenus Stratagems in War Justin Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus Archived 7 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine in English Polybius The Histories Polybius Diodorus Siculus Bibliotheca historica Athenaeus Deipnosophistae Strabo History Quran DhulQarnayn AlKahf Modern sourcesedit Boardman John ed. 1994. The Cambridge Ancient History IV Persia Greece and the Western Mediterranean C. 525479 B.C. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521228042. Briant Pierre 2002. From Cyrus to Alexander A History of the Persian Empire. Eisenbrauns. pp. 11196. ISBN 9781575061207. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 10 November 2020. Cardascia G 1988. Babylon under Achaemenids. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Vol. 3. London Routledge. ISBN 0939214784. Archived from the original on 17 November 2011. Retrieved 21 September 2011. Church Alfred J. 1881. Stories of the East From Herodotus. London Seeley Jackson  Halliday. Curzon George Nathaniel 2018. Persia and the Persian Question Volume 2. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781108080859. Dandamaev M. A. 1989. A political history of the Achaemenid empire. Leiden Brill. p. 373. ISBN 9004091726. Daryaee Touraj 2013. Religion of Cyrus the Great PDF. Cyrus the Great An Ancient Iranian King. Afshar Publishing. pp. 2542. Dandamayev Muhammad A. 1993. Cyrus iii. Cyrus II The Great. Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. IV Fasc. 7. pp. 516521. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2013. Finkel Irving 2013. The Cyrus Cylinder The Great Persian Edict from Babylon. I.B. Tauris. Freeman Charles 1999. The Greek Achievement The Foundation of the Western World. New York Viking. ISBN 0713992247. Frye Richard N. 1962. The Heritage of Persia. London Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 1568590083 Gershevitch Ilya 1985. The Cambridge History of Iran Vol. 2 The Median and Achaemenian periods. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521200911. Grayson 1975 Assyrian and Babylonian Chronicles Kuhrt Amlie 1995. 13. The Ancient Near East c. 3000330 BC. Routledge. p. 647. ISBN 0415167639. Kuhrt Amlie 2013. The Persian Empire A Corpus of Sources from the Achaemenid Period. Routledge. ISBN 9781136016943. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 16 March 2019. LlewellynJones Lloyd 2017. The Achaemenid Empire. In Daryaee Touraj ed.. King of the Seven Climes A History of the Ancient Iranian World 3000 BC  651 CE. UCI Jordan Center for Persian Studies. pp. 1236. ISBN 9780692864401. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Moorey P.R.S. 1991. The Biblical Lands VI. New York Peter Bedrick Books . ISBN 0872262472 Olmstead A. T. 1948. History of the Persian Empire Achaemenid Period. Chicago University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226627772 Palou Christine Palou Jean 1962. La Perse Antique. Paris Presses Universitaires de France. Schmitt Rdiger 1983. Achaemenid dynasty. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Vol. 3. London Routledge. Archived from the original on 3 December 2015. Retrieved 21 September 2011. Schmitt Rdiger 2010. CYRUS i. The Name. Routledge  Kegan Paul. Sekunda N.V. 2010. Changes in Achaemenid Royal Dress. In Curtis John Simpson John eds.. The World of Achaemenid Persia History Art and Society in Iran and the Ancient Near East. I.B. Tauris. pp. 255272. ISBN 9780857718013. Soudavar Abolala 2012. Astyages Cyrus and Zoroaster Solving a Historical Dilemma. Iran. 50 1 4578. doi
10.1 080057869
67.2 0
12.1 1834712. Stronach David 2010. Solomon at Pasargadae Some New Perspectives. Bulletin of the Asia Institute. 24 114. JSTOR 43896116. Tait Wakefield 1846. The Presbyterian review and religious journal. Oxford University. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Toorawa Shawkat M. 2011. Islam. In Allen Roger ed.. Islam A Short Guide for the Faithful. Eerdmans. p. 8. ISBN 9780802866004. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2020. Waters Matt 2004. Cyrus and the Achaemenids. Iran. 42. Taylor  Francis Ltd. 91102. doi
10.2 3074300665. JSTOR 4300665. registration required Waters Matt 2014. Ancient Persia A Concise History of the Achaemenid Empire 550330 BC. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1272. ISBN 9781107652729. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020. Further readingedit Ball Charles James 1899. Light from the East Or the witness of the monuments. London Eyre and Spottiswoode. Beckman Daniel 2018. The Many Deaths of Cyrus the Great. Iranian Studies. 51 1 121. doi
10.1 080002108
62.2 0
17.1 337503. S
2 CID 164674586. Bengtson Hermann. The Greeks and The Persians From the Sixth Century to the Fourth Century. Weidenfeld  Nicolson 1969. Bickermann Elias J. September 1946. The Edict of Cyrus in Ezra 1. Journal of Biblical Literature. 65 3 24975. doi
10.2 3073262665. JSTOR 3262665. Cannadine David Price Simon 1987. Rituals of royalty  power and ceremonial in traditional societies 1. publ. ed.. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521335132. Chavalas Mark W. ed. 2007. The ancient Near East  historical sources in translation. Malden MA Blackwell. ISBN 9780631235804. Curtis Vesta Sarkhosh Stewart Sarah 2010. Birth of the Persian Empire. I.B.Tauris. pp. 1160. ISBN 9780857710925. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020. Dougherty Raymond Philip 1929. Nabonidus and Belshazzar A Study of the Closing Events of the NeoBabylonian Empire. New Haven Yale University Press. Drews Robert October 1974. Sargon Cyrus and Mesopotamian Folk History. Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 33 4 38793. doi
10.1 086372377. S
2 CID 162226226. Fried Lisbeth S. 2002. Cyrus the Messiah The Historical Background to Isaiah 451. Harvard Theological Review. 95 4. doi
10.1 0
17 S0017816002000251. S
2 CID 162589455. Harmatta J. 1971. The Rise of the Old Persian Empire Cyrus the Great. Acta Antiquo. 19 315. Irannejad A. Mani 2022. The Ancient Iranian Perception of Cyrus the Great. Iranian Studies. 56 2 231253. doi
10.1 0
17 irn.20
22.5 4. S
2 CID 252353659. Lawrence John M. 1985. Cyrus Messiah Politician and General. Near East Archaeological Society Bulletin. n.s. 25 528. Lawrence John M. 1982. NeoAssyrian and NeoBabylonian Attitudes Towards Foreigners and Their Religion. Near East Archaeological Society Bulletin. n.s. 19 2740. Mallowan Max 1972. Cyrus the Great 558529 BC. Iran. 10 117. doi
10.2 3074300460. JSTOR 4300460. Mitchell Lynette 30 June 2023. Cyrus the Great A Biography of Kingship. Taylor  Francis. ISBN 9781000874396. Potts Daniel T. 2005. Cyrus the Great and the Kingdom of Anshan. Birth of the Persian Empire. London University of Sydney. pp. 127. Archived from the original on 31 July 2022. Waters Matt 1996. Darius and the Achaemenid Line. Ancient History Bulletin. 10. London 1118. Archived from the original on 22 June 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2020. Waters Matthew W. 2022. King of the world  the life of Cyrus the Great. New York NY Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780190927172. Wiesehfer Josef 1996. Ancient Persia  from 550 BC to 650 AD. Azizeh Azodi trans. London I. B. Tauris. ISBN 1850439990. External linksedit Cyrus the Great at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Cyrus Cylinder Archived 22 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Full Babylonian text of the Cyrus Cylinder as it was known in 2001 translation brief introduction Xenophon Cyropaedia the education of Cyrus translated by Henry Graham Dakyns and revised by F.M. Stawell Project Gutenberg. Cyrus the Great Achaemenid dynasty Born c.600 BC Died 530 BC New title Not previously established King of Kings of Persian Empire 530 BC Succeeded by Cambyses II Preceded by Cambyses I King of Persia 559530 BC Preceded by Astyages King of Media 550530 BC Preceded by Croesus King of Lydia 547530 BC Preceded by Nabonidus King of Babylon 539530 BC v t e Cyrus the Great Teispids Achaemenid Empire Family Cambyses I Mandane of Media Cassandane Amytis Children Cambyses II Bardiya Atossa Artystone Battles Persian Revolt Hyrba Persian Border Pasargadae Pteria Thymbra Sardis Opis Related Cyrus name Pasargadae Cyrus Cylinder Cyropaedia Tomb Cyrus in the Bible Edict of Cyrus Cyrus in the Quran DhulQarnayn Kay Bahman Cyrus the Great Day Cyrus the Great screenplay Ciro riconosciuto Cyropolis Category v t e Median and Achaemenid kings Family tree Median 728550 BC Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages Achaemenid 550330 BC Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cyrus II Cambyses II Smerdis Gaumata Darius the Great Darius I Xerxes the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Nothus Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Italics indicate kings not directly attested and so possibly legendary. v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Kings of Babylon List of kings of Babylon Royal titles Period Dynasty Kings foreign ruler vassal king female Old Babylonian Empire 18941595 BC I Sumuabum SumulaEl Sabium ApilSin SinMuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna AbiEshuh AmmiDitana AmmiSaduqa SamsuDitana II Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Unknown king  Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Kassite period 17291157 BC III Gandash Agum I Kashtiliash I Unknown king AbiRattash Kashtiliash II Urzigurumash Agum II HarbaShipak Shiptaulzi Unknown king Burnaburiash I Ulamburiash Kashtiliash III Agum III KadashmanSah Karaindash KadashmanHarbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I BurnaBuriash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Babylonian period 1157732 BC IV Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur V Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi VI Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna VII Marbitiaplausur VIII Nabmukinapli Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabusumaukin II NeoAssyrian period 732626 BC IX Nabumukinzeri TiglathPileser III Shalmaneser V Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon II Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Aurndinumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Sennacherib Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal amaumaukin Ashurbanipal Kandalanu Snumulir Sinsharishkun NeoBabylonian Empire 626539 BC X Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Babylon under foreign rule 539 BC  AD 224 Persian period 539331 BC XI Cyrus II Cambyses II Bardiya Nebuchadnezzar III Darius I Nebuchadnezzar IV Xerxes I Shamasheriba Belshimanni Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV NidinBel  Darius III Hellenistic period 331141 BC XII Alexander III Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antigonus I Monophthalmus XIII Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Seleucus Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III Megas Antiochus Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Timarchus Demetrius I Soter Alexander Balas Demetrius II Nicator Parthian period 141 BC  AD 224 XIV Mithridates I Phraates II Rinnu Antiochus VII Sidetes Phraates II Ubulna Hyspaosines Artabanus I Mithridates II Gotarzes I Asiabatar Orodes I Ispubarza Sinatruces Phraates III Piriustana Teleuniqe Orodes II Phraates IV Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Vonones II Vologases I Pacorus II Artabanus III Osroes I Vologases III Parthamaspates Vologases IV Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV Category v t e Book of Daniel Bible chapters Daniel 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Additions Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children Susanna and the Elders Bel and the Dragon Places Babylon Susa People Belshazzar Cyrus the Great Daniel Darius the Mede Jehoiakim Nebuchadnezzar II Shadrach Meshach and Abednego Angels Gabriel Michael Terms Abomination of desolation Ancient of Days Belshazzars feast Four kingdoms Lions den Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Territorial spirit Watcher angel Christian interpretations Futurism Historicism Historicist interpretations Idealism Preterism Manuscripts Papyrus 967 Papyrus 62 Codex Chisianus 45 Sources Hebrew Bible Septuagint Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version  Book of Ezekiel chapter 48 in Christian Bibles Book of Esther chapter 10 in the Hebrew Bible Bible portal Christianity portal Judaism portal Book of Hosea chapter 1 in Christian Bibles EzraNehemiah chapter 1 in the Hebrew Bible  Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 National Chile Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel United States Latvia Czech Republic Australia Greece Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCyrustheGreatoldid1222965747 Categories Battles of Cyrus the Great Cyrus the Great 530 BC deaths 6
00 s BC births 
6 thcentury BC Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Babylonian captivity City founders Founding monarchs Kings of Anshan Persia Kings of the Lands Kings of the Universe Monarchs killed in action Teispids Hidden categories All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2013 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr CS1 maint multiple names authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing Old Persian ca. 600400 B.C.language text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Persianlanguage text Pages with Persian IPA Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Pages with numeric Bible version references Pages with login required references or sources Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 0123 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width