Bardiya - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name and sources 
2 Traditional view Toggle Traditional view subsection 
2.1 In Herodotus Histories 
2.2 In Ctesias Persika 
3 Modern view 
4 Aftermath 
5 Bardiya in fiction 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Bardiya 40 languages      Catal etina Cymraeg Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Magyar Malagasy  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus  Scots Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska    Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Gautama disambiguation. Gaumata redirects here. For Hindu term see Gau Mata. For other uses see Bardiya disambiguation. Son of Cyrus the Great died c. 522 BC Bardiya  King of Kings Great King King of Persia King of Babylon Pharaoh of Egypt King of Countries Portrait of the Achaemenid ruler toppled by Darius as appearing on the Behistun inscription he was either the legitimate Bardiya or as claimed by Darius an imposter named Gaumta. King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 522 BC Predecessor Cambyses II Successor Darius the Great Burial 522 BC Spouse Phaedymia Issue Parmys Dynasty Achaemenid Father Cyrus the Great Mother Cassandane Religion Zoroastrianism Bardiya or Smerdis Old Persian 1 Bardiya2 Ancient Greek  Smrdis3 possibly died 522 BCE also named as Tanyoxarces Old Persian Tanvazraka Ancient Greek  Tanuoxrks by Ctesias was a son of Cyrus the Great and the younger brother of Cambyses II both Persian kings. There are sharply divided views on his life. Bardiya either ruled the Achaemenid Empire for a few months in 522 BCE or was impersonated by a magus called Gaumata Old Persian  Gaumta whose name is given by Ctesias as Sphendadates Old Persian Spantadtah Ancient Greek  Sphendadts until he was toppled by Darius the Great.42 Name and sourcesedit The princes name is listed variously in the historical sources. In Darius the Greats Behistun inscription his Persian name is Bardiya or Bardia. Herodotus calls him Smerdis which is the prevalent Greek form of his name the Persian name has been assimilated to the Greek Asiatic name Smerdis or Smerdies a name which also occurs in the poems of Alcaeus and Anacreon. Bardiya is called Tanyoxarces by Ctesias who also names Gaumta as Sphendadates5 he is called Tanooxares by Xenophon who takes the name from Ctesias6 and he is called Mergis and Merdis by Justin7 and Merdis by Aeschylus.8 In Englishlanguage histories he has traditionally been called Smerdis following Herodotus example but recent histories tend to call him Bardiya.910 Traditional viewedit Gaumata under Darius the Greats boot engraved at Behistun Inscription in Kermanshah. The traditional view is based on several ancient sources including the Behistun inscription11 as well as Herodotus12 in Ctesias13 and Justin although there are minor differences among them. The three oldest surviving sources agree that GaumataPseudoSmerdisSphendadates was overthrown by Darius and others in a coup dtat and that Darius then ascended the throne. Most sources including Darius himself Herodotus and Ctesias have Darius as part of a group of seven conspirators. In Greek and Latin sources Darius subsequently gained kingship by cheating in a contest. Bardiya was the younger son of Cyrus the Great and a full or halfbrother of Cambyses II. According to Ctesias on his deathbed Cyrus appointed Bardiya as satrap governor of some of the fareastern provinces.14 According to Darius the Great Cambyses II after becoming king of Persia but before setting out for Egypt killed Bardiya and kept this secret. However according to Herodotus who gives two detailed stories Bardiya went to Egypt with Cambyses and was there for some time but later Cambyses sent him back to Susa out of envy because Bardiya alone could draw the bow brought from the Ethiopian king. Herodotus then states that Cambyses had a dream in which he saw his brother sitting on the royal throne. As a result of this dream Cambyses sent his trusted counselor Prexaspes from Egypt to Susa with the order to kill Smerdis i.e. Bardiya.15 Bardiyas death was not known to the people and so in the spring of 522 BC a usurper pretended to be him and proclaimed himself king on a mountain near the Persian town of Paishiyauvada. Darius claimed that the real name of the usurper was Gaumata a Magian priest from Media this name has been preserved by Justin but given to his brother called Patizeithes by Herodotus who is said to have been the real promoter of the intrigue. According to Herodotus the name of the Magian usurper was Oropastes but according to Ctesias it was Sphendadates.citation needed The despotic rule of Cambyses coupled with his long absence in Egypt contributed to the fact that the whole people Persians Medes and all the other nations acknowledged the usurper especially as he granted a tax relief for three years.16 Cambyses began to march against him but died in the spring of 522 BC in disputed circumstances. Before his death he confessed to the murder of his brother and publicly explained the whole fraud but this was not generally believed. Nobody had the courage to oppose the new king who ruled for seven months over the whole empire. The new king transferred the seat of government to Media. A number of Persian nobles discovered that their new ruler was an impostor and a group of seven nobles formed a plot to kill him. They surprised him at a castle in Nisa home of the Nisean horses and stabbed him to death in September 522 BC. One of the seven Darius was proclaimed as ruler shortly after.citation needed While the primary sources do not agree on the names and many other details the three oldest surviving sources Darius himself Herodotus and Ctesias all portray GaumataPseudoSmerdisSphendadates as an imposter who usurped the throne by posing as one of the sons of Cyrus the Great i.e. as one of the brothers of Cambyses II. In Darius trilingual Behistun inscription the prince being impersonated is named Pirtiya in Elamite Bardiya in Old Persian and Barziya in Akkadian. In Herodotus Histories the prince and his imposter have the same name Smerdis. For Ctesias Sphendadates poses as Tanyoxarces. Other Greek sources have various other names for the figure being impersonated including Tanoxares Mergis and Mardos.1798 In Herodotus Historiesedit Phaedyme is sent by her father Otanes to check if King Smerdis has ears under his turban as the suspected imposter was known to have had them cut off in punishment for a crime. She found that indeed the king did not have ears anymore which proved that he was an imposter and justified the coup in favour of Darius I. The struggle between Gobryas and the false Smerdis 
19 th century print. Bardiya  Smerdis in relation to his successor Darius the Great in the Achaemenid lineage. A longer version of the story appears in Book 3 of Herodotus Histories written c. 450 BC. That story there 
3.1 38 
3.6 188 can be roughly summarized as follows1812 While in Egypt Cambyses wounds the thigh of the sacred bull worshipped as the god Apis and when the sacred bull dies from the wound Cambyses loses his already tenuous grasp on sanity 
3.2 
73.3 0. Jealous of his brother Smerdis skill with a particular bow brought from the king of Ethiopia Cambyses sends Smerdis back to Persis. Cambyses then has a dream in which Smerdis would supplant him so he sends a henchman to murder him secretly 
3.3 0. The assassination succeeds and is meant to be kept secret. One of the few that know of Smerdis death is Patizeithes the steward of Cambyses palace at Susa. That steward has a brother who greatly resembles Smerdis in appearance and whose name is also Smerdis 
3.6 
1.1 . The steward then puts his brother on the throne and has him pretend that he is the brother of Cambyses. The false Smerdis succeeds in the deception by not allowing anyone who knew the real Smerdis into his presence 
3.6 1. Still in Egypt Cambyses learns of the false Smerdis and knowing that the real Smerdis is dead recognises the deception. Cambyses then readies his army to return to Susa but while mounting his horse accidentally injures his thigh with the point of his sword. Cambyses dies from the wound a few days later 
3.6 
33.6 6. On his death bed Cambyses perceives Smerdis as favouring a return to Median hegemony 
3.6 5. The false Smerdis then continues to rule at Susa for some time and gains support from everyone except the Persians when he grants a threeyear military draft and tax exemption to the various peoples of the empire 
3.6 7. Meanwhile Otanes a nobleman of Persis suspects that the king is not the brother of Cambyses but rather the Smerdis whose ears Cyrus had commanded be cut off for some grave reason 
3.6 
9.6 . To confirm his suspicion Otanes asks his daughter Phaidyme  who is a member of the harem and thus has access to the king  to check whether the man has ears. Phaidyme does as asked and one night while the king is asleep confirms that the king does not in fact have ears. His suspicions confirmed Otanes then gathers six noblemen and plots to get rid of the false Smerdis. A seventh nobleman Darius arrives at the capital shortly thereafter and is then included in the group. The seven conspirators charge into the chambers of the king and while five deal with the guards Darius and Megabyzus kill the false Smerdis and a companion. Five days later after the tumult has died down the seven meet again to discuss a suitable form of government 
3.8 082. After some discussion over the merits of democracy proposed by Otanes and oligarchy proposed by Megabyzus and monarchy proposed by Darius four of the seven vote in favour of a monarchy. They then decide to hold a contest whereby whichever of them got his horse to neigh first after sunrise shall become king. Darius cheats and ascends the throne 
3.8 
43.8 7. In Ctesias Persikaedit Ctesias version c. 400 BC runs as follows XIF
9.8  and XIIF
13.1 117 via Photius Bibl. 721913 King Cyrus as he lay dying appointed his elder son Cambyses to the throne and appointed his younger son Tanyoxarces governor of the provinces of Bactria Chorasmia Parthia and Carmania. Shortly after Cambyses ascends the throne a certain Sphendadates who had been whipped by Tanyoxarces for some offence informs Cambyses that his brother is plotting against him. As proof of this he declares that Tanyoxarces would refuse to come if summoned. When Tanyoxarces does not immediately accede to the summons Cambyses begins to believe Sphendadates who then begins to slander Tanyoxarces more freely. By the time Tanyoxarces finally arrives Cambyses is determined to put him to death but hesitates. Sphendadates suggests that since he Sphendadates looks very much like Tanyoxarces he could take the princes place. Cambyses agrees and Tanyoxarces is killed by being forced to drink bulls blood. Sphendadates then takes the place as governor of the eastern provinces. Five years later while in Babylon Cambyses accidentally wounds himself in the thigh and dies eleven days later. Upon hearing of Cambyses death Sphendadates alias Tanyoxarces returns to the capital and succeeds Cambyses. Meanwhile Izabates a confidant of Cambyses who knew of the killing of Tanyoxarces is on his way with the body of Cambyses. Upon arriving at the capital and finding Sphendadates on the throne Izabates exposes the fraud. Then seven noblemen among them Darius conspire against Sphendadates. The seven are admitted to the palace by a coconspirator where Sphendadates is then killed. The seven then decide to hold a contest whereby whichever of them got his horse to neigh first after sunrise shall become king. Darius gets his horse to be the first to neigh F
13.1 7 the result of a cunning stratagem and he ascends the throne. Modern viewedit Medieval image of Bardiya. Most modern historians do not consider Darius version of events convincing and assume that the person who ruled for a few months was the real son of Cyrus and that the story of his impersonation by a magus was an invention of Darius to justify his seizure of the throne.2021222324 The key argument against a fabrication is that there is no evidence for it and lacking further discoveries that view must remain hypothetical.25 However the idea that Gaumata was a fabrication is nonetheless appealing because it was vital for a man like Darius who had no particular rights to the throne to invent a character Gaumta condemned for his acts against gods and men.26 There are some implausibilities in the official story e.g. the impostor resembled the real Bardiya so closely that most of his wives did not spot the difference except for queen Phaidyme.2728 Darius often accused rebels and opponents of being impostors such as Nebuchadnezzar III and it could be straining credibility to say that they all were.102329 Aftermathedit In the next year another person claiming to be Bardiya named Vahyazdta Old Persian 30 rose against Darius in eastern Persia and met with great success but he was finally defeated taken prisoner and executed.31 Perhaps he is identical with the King Maraphis the Maraphian name of a Persian tribe who occurs as successor in the list of Persian kings given by Aeschylus.32 The real Bardiya had only one daughter called Parmys who eventually married Darius the Great. Some contracts dating from his reign have been found in Babylonia where his name is spelt Barziya or Bardiya.33 Darius says that Bardiya destroyed some temples which Darius later restored. Bardiya also took away the herds and houses of the people which Darius corrected once he gained the throne.34 The death of the false Bardiya was annually celebrated in Persia by a feast called the killing of the magian Magiophani at which no magian was allowed to show himself.3536 Bardiya in fictionedit This episode is dealt with by Gore Vidal in his novel Creation. He takes the view that the person who ruled for a few months was the real Bardiya. The impostor Magian Smerdis is mentioned in the short story by Jorge Luis Borges Tln Uqbar Orbis Tertius. He is the only historical character that the protagonist is able to recognize when discovering the article on the fictitious nation of Uqbar and it is stated that his name has been invoked mainly as a metaphor. Referencesedit  Akbarzadeh D. A. Yahyanezhad 2006. The Behistun Inscriptions Old Persian Texts in Persian. KhaneyeFarhikhtagane Honarhaye Sonati. p. 59. ISBN 9648499055.  a b Kent Roland G. 1950. Old Persian Grammar Texts Lexicon.  Bardiya  king of Persia. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 20200814.  Akbarzadeh D. A. Yahyanezhad 2006. The Behistun Inscriptions Old Persian Texts in Persian. KhaneyeFarhikhtagane Honarhaye Sonati. p. 60. ISBN 9648499055.  Ctesias Persica 8  Xenophon Cyrop. Vin. 7.ii  Justin i.9  Aeschylus The Persians 774  Leick Gwendolyn Whos Who in the Ancient Near East  a b Van de Mieroop Marc A History of the Ancient Near East ca. 3000323 B.C. 
2 nd edition Oxford 2007 pp. 290291  livius.orgarticlesplacebehistun  a b A. D. Godley Herodotus  The Persian Wars  Books 34 Cambridge MA 1921 pp. 3841 76117 CommonsFileSmerdisHerodotus.pdf  a b Ctesias Stronk Jan P. tr. 2010 Ctesias Persian History Introduction text and translation Wellem pp. 3233
25 citation CS1 maint multiple names authors list link.  Ctesias Persica Book 11 Fragment 9 taken from Photius excerpt httpswww.livius.orgctczctesiasphotiuspersica.htmlA78 Archived 20161123 at the Wayback Machine cf. Xenophon Cyrop. vin. 7 if  Dandamaev M. 2001. Bardia. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Vol. 3. New York.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Herodotus III.68  Briant Pierre 2002 From Cyrus to Alexander A History of the Persian Empire Eisenbrauns.  Herodotus Godley A. D. tr. 1931 Herodotus with an English translation by A. D. Godley London Heinemanncitation CS1 maint multiple names authors list link.  Ctesias Nicols Andrew ed. tr. 2008 The Complete Fragments of Ctesias of Cnidus University of Florida PhD thesis pp. 25 90 92
93 citation CS1 maint multiple names authors list link.  Olmstead A. T. 1959 History of the Persian Empire University of Chicago Press.  Axworthy Michael 2008 Iran Empire of the Mind New York Basic Books.  Van De Mieroop Marc 2006 A History of the Ancient Near East 
2 nd ed. Blackwell.  a b Holland Tom Persian Fire  Allen Lindsay 2005 The Persian Empire London The British Museum press p. 42.  Dandamayev M. A. 1988 Bardiya Encyclopedia Iranica vol. 3 fasc. 8 Costa Mesa Mazda pp. 785786.  Briant Pierre 2000 Gaumta Encyclopedia Iranica vol. X fasc. 3 New York Routledge Kegan Paul pp. 333335.  Historical Persian Queens Empresses Warriors Generals of Persia. January 2023.  Bourke Dr. Stephen chief consultant The Middle East Cradle of Civilisation Revealed p. 225 ISBN 9780500251478  Behistun Inscription 
4.1  52  Akbarzadeh D. A. Yahyanezhad 2006. The Behistun Inscriptions Old Persian Texts in Persian. KhaneyeFarhikhtagane Honarhaye Sonati. p. 115. ISBN 9648499055.  Behistun Inscription  40 if.  Aeschylus Pers. 778  For the chronology see Parker  Dubberstein Babylonian Chronology.  Behistun Inscription i.14  Herodotus III.79  Ctesias Pers. 15 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Smerdis. Encyclopdia Britannica 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. Bardiya Achaemenid dynasty Died 522 BC Preceded by Cambyses II King of Kings of Persia 522 BC Succeeded by Darius the Great Pharaoh of Egypt XXVII Dynasty 522 BC Wikimedia Commons has media related to Smerdis. v t e Median and Achaemenid kings Family tree Median 728550 BC Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages Achaemenid 550330 BC Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cyrus II Cambyses II Smerdis Gaumata Darius the Great Darius I Xerxes the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Nothus Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Italics indicate kings not directly attested and so possibly legendary. v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Kings of Babylon List of kings of Babylon Royal titles Period Dynasty Kings foreign ruler vassal king female Old Babylonian Empire 18941595 BC I Sumuabum SumulaEl Sabium ApilSin SinMuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna AbiEshuh AmmiDitana AmmiSaduqa SamsuDitana II Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Unknown king  Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Kassite period 17291157 BC III Gandash Agum I Kashtiliash I Unknown king AbiRattash Kashtiliash II Urzigurumash Agum II HarbaShipak Shiptaulzi Unknown king Burnaburiash I Ulamburiash Kashtiliash III Agum III KadashmanSah Karaindash KadashmanHarbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I BurnaBuriash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Babylonian period 1157732 BC IV Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur V Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi VI Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna VII Marbitiaplausur VIII Nabmukinapli Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabusumaukin II NeoAssyrian period 732626 BC IX Nabumukinzeri TiglathPileser III Shalmaneser V Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon II Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Aurndinumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Sennacherib Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal amaumaukin Ashurbanipal Kandalanu Snumulir Sinsharishkun NeoBabylonian Empire 626539 BC X Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Babylon under foreign rule 539 BC  AD 224 Persian period 539331 BC XI Cyrus II Cambyses II Bardiya Nebuchadnezzar III Darius I Nebuchadnezzar IV Xerxes I Shamasheriba Belshimanni Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV NidinBel  Darius III Hellenistic period 331141 BC XII Alexander III Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antigonus I Monophthalmus XIII Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Seleucus Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III Megas Antiochus Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Timarchus Demetrius I Soter Alexander Balas Demetrius II Nicator Parthian period 141 BC  AD 224 XIV Mithridates I Phraates II Rinnu Antiochus VII Sidetes Phraates II Ubulna Hyspaosines Artabanus I Mithridates II Gotarzes I Asiabatar Orodes I Ispubarza Sinatruces Phraates III Piriustana Teleuniqe Orodes II Phraates IV Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Vonones II Vologases I Pacorus II Artabanus III Osroes I Vologases III Parthamaspates Vologases IV Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV Category v t e Cyrus the Great Teispids Achaemenid Empire Family Cambyses I Mandane of Media Cassandane Amytis Children Cambyses II Bardiya Atossa Artystone Battles Persian Revolt Hyrba Persian Border Pasargadae Pteria Thymbra Sardis Opis Related Cyrus name Pasargadae Cyrus Cylinder Cyropaedia Tomb Cyrus in the Bible Edict of Cyrus Cyrus in the Quran DhulQarnayn Kay Bahman Cyrus the Great Day Cyrus the Great screenplay Ciro riconosciuto Cyropolis Category v t e Historicity Methodology Bayes theorem Biblical criticism  Hadith studies Ilm alrijl Bibliography Demythologization Palaeography Philology Cognitive philology Decipherment Textual criticism Comparative linguistics Provenance Criteria Contextual credibility Dissimilarity Embarrassment Lectio difficilior potior Multiple attestation  Mutawatir Topics Texts Bible Acts of the Apostles Gospels Book of Esther Book of Joshua Book of Mormon The Iliad Quran People Abraham Bardiya  Smerdis The Buddha Caligulas horse Homer Jesus myth theory Quest Sources King Arthur King David Lei Feng Moses Muhammad Prester John Robin Hood Socrates Sun Tzu William Tell Events and places The Exodus Sources and parallels Founding of Rome Hanging Gardens of Babylon Kurukshetra War Massacre of the Innocents Geography of the Odyssey Related Apocrypha Pseudepigrapha Hadith terminology Historiography Religious studies Legends Linguistics Myth  Mythology Vaticinium ex eventu Category Authority control databases International FAST VIAF National Germany Israel United States People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBardiyaoldid1218569189 Categories 
6 thcentury BC Kings of the Achaemenid Empire 
6 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Achaemenid dynasty of Egypt Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt 522 BC deaths 
6 thcentury BC murdered monarchs Murdered Persian monarchs Deaths by stabbing in Iran Impostor pretenders Persian masculine given names Masculine given names Achaemenid dynasty Magi Teispids Hidden categories CS1 Persianlanguage sources fa CS1 maint multiple names authors list Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Old Persian ca. 600400 B.C.language text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 12 April 2024 at 1410 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width