Wikipedia:No original research - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Using sources Toggle Using sources subsection 
1.1 Reliable sources 
1.2 Primary secondary and tertiary sources 
2 Synthesis of published material 
3 What is not original research Toggle What is not original research subsection 
3.1 Original images 
3.2 Translations and transcriptions 
3.3 Acceptable media 
3.4 Routine calculations 
4 Related policies Toggle Related policies subsection 
4.1 Verifiability 
4.2 Neutral point of view 
5 See also Toggle See also subsection 
5.1 Guidelines 
5.2 Templates 
5.3 Supplemental pages 
5.4 Essays 
5.5 Research help 
6 Notes 
7 References 
8 Further reading 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents WikipediaNo original research 83 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch   Azrbaycanca         Boarisch Bosanski Catal etina Dansk  Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto  Franais Galego     Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa    Lietuvi Magyar     Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau  Nederlands   Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Qaraqalpaqsha Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska    tatara    Trke Trkmene   Ting Vit   Edit links Project page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikiversity Wikivoyage From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Wikimedia policy page WPNOR redirects here. For the Norway WikiProject see WikipediaWikiProject Norway. WPOR redirects here. For WikiProject Oregon see WikipediaWikiProject Oregon. For raising issues with specific articles see WikipediaNo original researchNoticeboard. This page documents an English Wikipedia policy. It describes a widely accepted standard that all editors should normally follow. Changes made to it should reflect consensus. Shortcuts WPOR WPNOR This page in a nutshell Wikipedia does not publish original thought. All material in Wikipedia must be attributable to a reliable published source. Articles must not contain any new analysis or synthesis of published material that reaches or implies a conclusion not clearly stated by the sources themselves. Simple calculations are not original research see  Routine calculations. Content policies Neutral point of view No original research Verifiability Article titles Biographies of living persons Image use policy What Wikipedia is not v t e Outside Wikipedia original research is a key part of scholarly work. However Wikipedia editors must base their contributions on reliable published sources not their own original research. Wikipedia articles must not contain original research. On Wikipedia original research means materialsuch as facts allegations and ideasfor which no reliable published source exists.a This includes any analysis or synthesis of published material that reaches or implies a conclusion not stated by the sources. To demonstrate that you are not adding original research you must be able to cite reliable published sources that are directly related to the topic of the article and directly supportb the material being presented. The prohibition against original research means that all material added to articles must be verifiable in a reliable published source even if not already verified via an inline citation. The verifiability policy says that an inline citation to a reliable source must be provided for all quotations and for anything challenged or likely to be challengedbut a source must exist even for material that is never challenged.a For example the statement the capital of France is Paris does not require a source to be cited nor is it original research because its not something you thought up and it is easily verifiable therefore no one is likely to object to it and we know that sources exist for it even if they are not cited. The statement is verifiable even if not verified. Despite the need for reliable sources you must not plagiarize them or violate their copyrights. Rewriting source material in your own words while retaining the substance is not considered original research. No original research NOR is one of three core content policies that along with Neutral point of view and Verifiability determines the type and quality of material acceptable in articles. Because these policies work in harmony they should not be interpreted in isolation from one another and editors should familiarize themselves with all three. For questions about whether any particular edit constitutes original research see the No original research noticeboard. This policy does not apply to talk pages and other pages which evaluate article content and sources such as deletion discussions or policy noticeboards. Using sources Shortcut WPSTICKTOTHESOURCE Wikipedia is fundamentally built on research that has been collected and organized from reliable sources as described in content policies such as this one. If no reliable independent sources can be found on a topic Wikipedia should not have an article about it. If you discover something new Wikipedia is not the place to announce such a discovery. The best practice is to research the most reliable sources on the topic and summarize what they say in your own words with each statement in the article being verifiable in a source that makes that statement explicitly. Source material should be carefully summarized or rephrased without changing its meaning or implication. Take care not to go beyond what the sources express or to use them in ways inconsistent with the intention of the source such as using material out of context. In short stick to the sources. Reliable sources Further information WikipediaVerifiability and WikipediaReliable sources Any material challenged or likely to be challenged must be supported by a reliable source. Material for which no reliable source can be found is considered original research. The only way you can show that your edit is not original research is to cite a reliable published source that contains the same material. Even with wellsourced material if you use it out of context or to reach or imply a conclusion not directly and explicitly supported by the source you are engaging in original research see below. In general the most reliable sources are Peerreviewed journals Books published by university presses Universitylevel textbooks Magazines journals and books published by respected publishing houses Mainstream newspapers However note that higher standards than this are required for medical claims. As a rule of thumb the more people engaged in checking facts analyzing legal issues and scrutinizing the writing the more reliable the publication. Selfpublished material whether on paper or online is generally not regarded as reliable. See selfpublished sources for exceptions. Information in an article must be verifiable in the references cited. In general article statements should not rely on unclear or inconsistent passages or on passing comments. Any passages open to multiple interpretations should be precisely cited or avoided. A summary of extensive discussion should reflect the conclusions of the source. Drawing conclusions not evident in the reference is original research regardless of the type of source. References must be cited in context and on topic. Primary secondary and tertiary sources Shortcut WPPSTS Further information WikipediaIdentifying and using primary sources WikipediaBased upon and WikipediaPublished Wikipedia articles should be based on reliable published secondary sources and to a lesser extent on tertiary sources and primary sources. Secondary or tertiary sources are needed to establish the topics notability and avoid novel interpretations of primary sources. All analyses and interpretive or synthetic claims about primary sources must be referenced to a secondary or tertiary source and must not be an original analysis of the primarysource material by Wikipedia editors. Appropriate sourcing can be a complicated issue and these are general rules. Deciding whether primary secondary or tertiary sources are appropriate in any given instance is a matter of good editorial judgment and common sense and should be discussed on article talk pages. A source may be considered primary for one statement but secondary for a different one. Even a given source can contain both primary and secondary source material for one particular statement. For the purposes of this policy primary secondary and tertiary sources are defined as followsc Shortcut WPPRIMARY WPPRIMARY redirects here. For the article naming guideline see WPPRIMARYTOPIC. Primary sources are original materials that are close to an event and are often accounts written by people who are directly involved. They offer an insiders view of an event a period of history a work of art a political decision and so on. Primary sources may or may not be independent sources. An account of a traffic incident written by a witness is a primary source of information about the event similarly a scientific paper documenting a new experiment conducted by the author is a primary source for the outcome of that experiment. For Wikipedias purposes breaking news stories are also considered to be primary sources. Historical documents such as diaries are as well.d Policy Unless restricted by another policy Primary sources that have been reputably published may be used in Wikipedia but only with care because it is easy to misuse them.e Any interpretation of primary source material requires a reliable secondary source for that interpretation. While a primary source is generally the best source for its own contents even over a summary of the primary source elsewhere do not put undue weight on its contents. A primary source may be used on Wikipedia only to make straightforward descriptive statements of facts that can be verified by any educated person with access to the primary source but without further specialized knowledge. For example an article about a musician may cite discographies and track listings published by the record label and an article about a novel may cite passages to describe the plot but any interpretation needs a secondary source. Do not analyze evaluate interpret or synthesize material found in a primary source yourself instead refer to reliable secondary sources that do so. Do not base an entire article on primary sources and be cautious about basing large passages on them. Do not add unsourced material from your personal experience because that would make Wikipedia a primary source of that material. Use extra caution when handling primary sources about living people see WPBiographies of living persons  Avoid misuse of primary sources which is policy. Shortcut WPSECONDARY A secondary source provides thought and reflection based on primary sources generally at least one step removed from an event. It contains analysis evaluation interpretation or synthesis of the facts evidence concepts and ideas taken from primary sources. Secondary sources are not necessarily independent sources. They rely on primary sources for their material making analytic or evaluative claims about them.f For example a review article that analyzes research papers in a field is a secondary source for the research.g Whether a source is primary or secondary depends on context. A book by a military historian about the Second World War might be a secondary source about the war but where it includes details of the authors own war experiences it would be a primary source about those experiences. A book review too can be an opinion summary or scholarly review.h Policy Wikipedia articles usually rely on material from reliable secondary sources. Articles may make an analytic evaluative interpretive or synthetic claim only if it has been published by a reliable secondary source. Shortcut WPTERTIARY Tertiary sources are publications such as encyclopedias and other compendia that summarize and often quote primary and secondary sources. Wikipedia is considered to be a tertiary source.i Many introductory undergraduatelevel textbooks are regarded as tertiary sources because they sum up multiple secondary sources. Policy Reliable tertiary sources can help provide broad summaries of topics that involve many primary and secondary sources and may help evaluate due weight especially when primary or secondary sources contradict each other. Some tertiary sources are more reliable than others. Within any given tertiary source some entries may be more reliable than others. Wikipedia articles may not be used as tertiary sources in other Wikipedia articles but are sometimes used as primary sources in articles about Wikipedia itself see CategoryWikipedia and CategoryWikiProject Wikipedia articles. Synthesis of published material Shortcut WPSYNTH See also WikipediaWhat SYNTH is not and WikipediaCiting sources  Textsource integrity Do not combine material from multiple sources to reach or imply a conclusion not explicitly stated by any source. Similarly do not combine different parts of one source to reach or imply a conclusion not explicitly stated by the source. If one reliable source says A and another reliable source says B do not join A and B together to imply a conclusion C not mentioned by either of the sources. This would be improper editorial synthesis of published material to imply a new conclusion which is original research.j A and B therefore C is acceptable only if a reliable source has published the same argument concerning the topic of the article. If a single source says A in one context and B in another without connecting them and does not provide an argument of therefore C then therefore C cannot be used in any article. Here are two sentences showing simple examples of improper editorial synthesis. Both halves of the first sentence may be reliably sourced but are combined to imply that the UN has failed to maintain world peace. If no reliable source has combined the material in this way it is original research. N The United Nations stated objective is to maintain international peace and security but since its creation there have been 160 wars throughout the world. In this second sentence the opposite is implied using the same material illustrating how easily such material can be manipulated when the sources are not adhered to N The United Nations stated objective is to maintain international peace and security and since its creation there have been only 160 wars throughout the world. Here are two paragraphs showing more complex examples of editorial synthesis. They are based on an actual Wikipedia article about a dispute between two authors here called Smith and Jones. This first paragraph is fine because each of the sentences is carefully sourced using a source that refers to the same dispute Y Smith stated that Jones committed plagiarism by copying references from another authors book. Jones responded that it is acceptable scholarly practice to use other peoples books to find new references. This second paragraph demonstrates improper editorial synthesis N If Jones did not consult the original sources this would be contrary to the practice recommended in the Harvard Writing with Sources manual which requires citation of the source actually consulted. The Harvard manual does not call violating this rule plagiarism. Instead plagiarism is defined as using a sources information ideas words or structure without citing them. The second paragraph is original research because it expresses a Wikipedia editors opinion that given the Harvard manuals definition of plagiarism Jones did not commit it. Making the second paragraph policycompliant would require a reliable source specifically commenting on the Smith and Jones dispute and making the same point about the Harvard manual and plagiarism. In other words that precise analysis must have been published by a reliable source concerning the topic before it can be published on Wikipedia. What is not original research Original images Shortcuts WPOI WPIMAGEOR See also WPManual of StyleImages  Pertinence and encyclopedic nature and WPImage use policy  Image titles and file names Because of copyright laws in several countries there are relatively few images available for use on Wikipedia. Editors are therefore encouraged to upload their own images releasing them under appropriate Creative Commons licenses or other free licenses. Original images created by a Wikipedian are not considered original research so long as they do not illustrate or introduce unpublished ideas or arguments the core reason behind the No original research policy. Image captions are subject to this policy no less than statements in the body of the article. It is not acceptable for an editor to use photo manipulation to distort the facts or position illustrated by an image. Manipulated images should be prominently noted as such. Any manipulated image where the encyclopedic value is materially affected should be posted to WikipediaFiles for discussion. Images of living persons must not present the subject in a false or disparaging light. Translations and transcriptions Shortcut WPTRANSCRIPTION See also WPTranslation Faithfully translating sourced material into English or transcribing spoken words from audio or video sources is not considered original research. For information on how to handle sources that require translation see WPVerifiability  NonEnglish sources. Acceptable media Shortcut WPORMEDIA Source information does not need to be in prose form any form of information such as maps charts graphs and tables may be used to provide source information. Any straightforward reading of such media is not original research provided that there is consensus among editors that the techniques used are correctly applied and a meaningful reflection of the sources. Routine calculations Shortcut WPCALC Routine calculations do not count as original research provided there is consensus among editors that the results of the calculations are correct and a meaningful reflection of the sources. Basic arithmetic such as adding numbers converting units or calculating a persons age is almost always permissible. See also CategoryConversion templates. Mathematical literacy may be necessary to follow a routine calculation particularly for articles on mathematics or in the hard sciences. In some cases editors may show their work in a footnote. Comparisons of statistics present particular difficulties. Editors should not compare statistics from sources that use different methodologies. Related policies Verifiability Main page WikipediaVerifiability Shortcut WPVERIFYOR Wikipedias content is determined by previously published information rather than by the personal beliefs or experiences of its editors. Even if youre sure something is true it must be verifiable before you can add it. The policy says that all challenged or likely to be challenged material and all quotations need a reliable source what counts as a reliable source is described at WPVerifiability  Reliable sources. Neutral point of view Main page WikipediaNeutral point of view The prohibition against original research limits the extent to which editors may present their own points of view in articles. By reinforcing the importance of including verifiable research produced by others this policy promotes the inclusion of multiple points of view. Consequently this policy reinforces our neutrality policy. In many cases there are multiple established views of any given topic. In such cases no single position no matter how well researched is authoritative. It is not the responsibility of any individual editor to research all points of view. But when incorporating research into an article editors must provide context for this point of view by indicating how prevalent the position is and whether it is held by a majority or minority. The inclusion of a view that is held by only a tiny minority may constitute original research. Jimbo Wales has said of this If your viewpoint is in the majority then it should be easy to substantiate it with references to commonly accepted reference texts If your viewpoint is held by a significant minority then it should be easy to name prominent adherents If your viewpoint is held by an extremely small minority thenwhether its true or not whether you can prove it or notit doesnt belong in Wikipedia except perhaps in some ancillary article. Wikipedia is not the place for original research.9 See also Wikiversity allows original research Guidelines Citing sources Conflict of interest  Citing yourself No original research examples No original research noticeboarddiscussions of specific article content suspected of being OR Wikipedia is not for things made up one day Templates Original researchused to warn of original research Original research sectionto warn of original research in an article section ORinline tag used to warn of original research Synthesisused to warn of unpublished synthesis AEISused in talknoticeboards to remind that analytic evaluative interpretive or synthetic claims require secondary sources Template messagesDisputeslists other warning templates related to OR among others Supplemental pages Core content policies  History an overview of the origin of this policy Identifying and using independent sources Identifying and using primary sources These are not original research What SYNTH is not When to cite  When a source or citation may not be needed Essays Cherrypicking Dictionaries as sources Identifying and using style guides Identifying and using tertiary sources Party and person POV and OR from editors sources and fields Using maps and similar sources in Wikipedia articles 
1.5  sources You dont need to cite that the sky is blue Research help WikiProject Resource ExchangeResource Request The Wikipedia Library Notes  a b By exist the community means that the reliable source must have been published and still existsomewhere in the world in any language whether or not it is reachable onlineeven if no source is currently named in the article. Articles that currently name zero references of any type may be fully compliant with this policyso long as there is a reasonable expectation that every bit of material is supported by a published reliable source.  A source directly supports a given piece of material if the information is present explicitly in the source so that using this source to support the material is not a violation of this policy against original research. For questions about where and how to place citations see WikipediaCiting sources WikipediaManual of StyleLead section  Citations etc.  The University of Maryland Libraries provides typical examples of primary secondary and tertiary sources.1  Further examples of primary sources include archeological artifacts census results video or transcripts of surveillance public hearings etc. investigative reports triallitigation in any country including material  which relates to either the trial or to any of the parties involved in the trial  publishedauthored by any involved party before during or after the trial editorials opeds columns blogs and other opinion pieces including depending on context reviews and interviews see WikipediaReliable sources  News organizations tabulated results of surveys or questionnaires original philosophical works religious scripture medieval and ancient works even if they cite earlier known or lost writings tomb plaques and gravestones and artistic and fictional works such as poems scripts screenplays novels motion pictures videos and television programs. For definitions of primary sources The University of Nevada Reno Libraries define primary sources as providing an inside view of a particular event. They offer as examples original documents such as autobiographies diaries email interviews letters minutes news film footage official records photographs raw research data and speeches creative works such as art drama films music novels and poetry and relics or artifacts such as buildings clothing DNA furniture jewelry and pottery.2 The University of California Berkeley Libraries offers this definition Primary sources were either created during the time period being studied or were created at a later date by a participant in the events being studied as in the case of memoirs. They reflect the individual viewpoint of a participant or observer. Primary sources enable the researcher to get as close as possible to what actually happened during an historical event or time period.3 Duke University Libraries offers this definition A primary source is a firsthand account of an event. Primary sources may include newspaper articles letters diaries interviews laws reports of government commissions and many other types of documents.4  Any exceptional claim would require exceptional sources.  The University of California Berkeley Libraries defines secondary source as a work that interprets or analyzes an historical event or phenomenon. It is generally at least one step removed from the event.3  The Ithaca College Librarys page on primary and secondary sources compares research articles to review articles.5 Be aware that either type of article can be both a primary and secondary source although research articles tend to be more useful as primary sources and review articles as secondary sources.  Book reviews may be found listed under separate sections within a news source or might be embedded within larger news reports. Having multiple coverages in book reviews is considered one of the notability criteria for books book reviews should be considered as supporting sources in articles about books. Avoid using book reviews as reliable sources for the topics covered in the book. A book review is intended to be an independent review of the book the author and related writing issues not a secondary source for the topics covered within the book. For definitions of book reviews Princetons Wordnet 2011 defines book review as a critical review of a book usually of a recently published book.6 Virginia Tech University Libraries provides the following definition A book review is an article that is published in a newspaper magazine or scholarly work that describes and evaluates a book. ... Reviews differ from literary critiques of books. Critiques explore the style and themes used by an author or genre.7  While it is a tertiary source Wikipedia is not considered a reliable source for Wikipedia articles see WPVerifiability  Wikipedia and sources that mirror or use it and WPReliable sources  Usergenerated content.  Jimmy Wales has said of synthesized historical theories Some who completely understand why Wikipedia ought not create novel theories of physics by citing the results of experiments and so on and synthesizing them into something new may fail to see how the same thing applies to history.8 References  Primary Secondary and Tertiary Sources. University of Maryland Libraries. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013.  What is a Primary Source. University of Nevada Reno Libraries. Archived from the original on 9 February 2007.  a b Finding Historical Primary Sources. University of California Berkeley Libraries. Archived from the original on 2 July 2012.  How to Find Primary Sources. Duke University Libraries. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012.  Primary and secondary sources. Ithaca College Library. Archived from the original on 6 October 2013.  book review. WordNet Search 
3.1 . Princeton University.  Book Reviews. Virginia Tech University Libraries. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013.  Wales Jimmy 6 December 2004. Original research. WikiENl Mailing List. Wikimedia Foundation.  Wales Jimmy 29 September 2003. royqroycehotmail.com A Request RE a WIKIArticle. WikiENl Mailing List. Wikimedia Foundation. Further reading Wales Jimmy. Crackpot articles mailing list July 12 2003. Wales Jimmy. NPOV and new physics mailing list September 26 2003. Wales Jimmy. NPOV and new physics mailing list September 26 2003 followup to above Wales Jimmy. Original research mailing list December 3 2004 External links YouTube video demonstrating the dangers of original research v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines  Five pillars Ignore all rules Content  P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright Copyright violations Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Medicine Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Dont create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct  P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paidcontribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion  P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement  P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing  P Editing policy G Article size Summary style Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broadconcept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories lists and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content  G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF  P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P List of policies G List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaNooriginalresearcholdid1221463132 Categories Wikipedia policies Wikipedia content policies Wikipedia verifiability Hidden categories Wikipedia semiprotected project pages Wikipedia moveprotected project pages This page was last edited on 30 April 2024 at 0223 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width