Sogdianus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background Toggle Background subsection 
1.1 Death of Artaxerxes I 
1.2 Rise and fall 
2 Name 
3 References 
4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Sogdianus 40 languages  Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Cymraeg Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar Malagasy   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska   Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Achaemenid Empire ruler 424 to 423 BC This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources Sogdianus  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR April 2017 Sogdianus Achaemenid Daric possibly under Sogdianus King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 424 BC  423 BC Predecessor Xerxes II Successor Darius II Died Persepolis Persia Dynasty Achaemenid Father Artaxerxes I Mother Alogyne of Babylon Religion Zoroastrianism Sogdianus sdiens or sdiens Greek  Sogdianos was briefly a ruler of the Achaemenid Empire for a period in 424423 BC. His short rulelasting not much more than six monthsand the little recognition of his kingdom are known primarily from the writings of Ctesias who is known to be unreliable. He was reportedly an illegitimate son of Artaxerxes I by his concubine Alogyne of Babylon. Backgroundedit Death of Artaxerxes Iedit The last inscription mentioning Artaxerxes I being alive can be dated to December 24 424 BC. His death resulted in at least three of his sons proclaiming themselves King of Kings. The first was Xerxes II who was reportedly his only legitimate son by Queen Damaspia and was formerly the heir. Xerxes IIs rule was apparently only recognized in the Persian heartlands. The second was Sogdianus himself presumed to have initially been recognized only in Elam. The third was Ochus son of Artaxerxes I by his concubine Cosmartidene of Babylon and satrap of Hyrcania. Ochus was also married to their common halfsister Parysatis daughter of Artaxerxes I and his concubine Andia of Babylon. The first inscription of Ochus as Darius II can be dated to January 10 423 BC. He seems to have been recognized by Medes Babylonia and Egypt. If it is correct that all three declared themselves king at the same time then the Achaemenid Empire had three King of Kings for a brief period.12 Rise and falledit This chaotic state of affairs would prove shortlived. Xerxes II only ruled for fortyfive days. He was reportedly murdered while drunk by the eunuch Pharnacyas and Menostanes conspirators who sided with Sogdianus on his orders. According to Ctesias Pharnacyas had the greatest influence over Xerxes II next to Bagorazus and Menostanes.3 Sogdianus apparently gained the support of his regions and reigned for six months and fifteen days before being captured by his halfbrother Ochus who had rebelled against him feeling dishonoured he was passed up over Sogdianus for the thronesince he outranked the latter. Sogdianus was executed by being suffocated in ash per Ochus promise he would not die by the sword by poison or by hunger. Pharnacyas was condemned to be stoned to death.4 Menostanes was also arrested and condemned but anticipated his fate by suicide..5 Ochus then ascended to the Achaemenid throne as Darius II he was the sole ruler of the Persian Empire until 404 BC.2 Nameedit He is called  by Manetho and Diodorus Siculus and  by Ctesias.6 Referencesedit  Ctesias the Cnidian. Persica. 18.  a b Zawadzki S. 19951996. The Circumstances of Darius IIs Accession. Jaarbericht Ex Oriente Lux. 34 4549.  Ctesias the Cnidian. Persica. 48.  Ctesias the Cnidian. Persica. 52.  Ctesias the Cnidian. Persica. 52.  Felix Jacoby FGrH 
3 C1 pp. 50 468 Sourcesedit Ctesias 48 52 1 Briant Pierre From Cyrus to Alexander A History of the Persian Empire 2002. Translated by Peter T. Daniels. Winona Lake Indiana Eisenbrauns. ISBN 1575060310. Lendering J. Xerxes II and Sogdianus 2 Preceded by Xerxes II King of Kings of Persia 424423 BC Succeeded by Darius II v t e Median and Achaemenid kings Family tree Median 728550 BC Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages Achaemenid 550330 BC Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cyrus II Cambyses II Smerdis Gaumata Darius the Great Darius I Xerxes the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Nothus Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Italics indicate kings not directly attested and so possibly legendary. v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Kings of Babylon List of kings of Babylon Royal titles Period Dynasty Kings foreign ruler vassal king female Old Babylonian Empire 18941595 BC I Sumuabum SumulaEl Sabium ApilSin SinMuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna AbiEshuh AmmiDitana AmmiSaduqa SamsuDitana II Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Unknown king  Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Kassite period 17291157 BC III Gandash Agum I Kashtiliash I Unknown king AbiRattash Kashtiliash II Urzigurumash Agum II HarbaShipak Shiptaulzi Unknown king Burnaburiash I Ulamburiash Kashtiliash III Agum III KadashmanSah Karaindash KadashmanHarbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I BurnaBuriash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Babylonian period 1157732 BC IV Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur V Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi VI Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna VII Marbitiaplausur VIII Nabmukinapli Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabusumaukin II NeoAssyrian period 732626 BC IX Nabumukinzeri TiglathPileser III Shalmaneser V Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon II Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Aurndinumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Sennacherib Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal amaumaukin Ashurbanipal Kandalanu Snumulir Sinsharishkun NeoBabylonian Empire 626539 BC X Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Babylon under foreign rule 539 BC  AD 224 Persian period 539331 BC XI Cyrus II Cambyses II Bardiya Nebuchadnezzar III Darius I Nebuchadnezzar IV Xerxes I Shamasheriba Belshimanni Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV NidinBel  Darius III Hellenistic period 331141 BC XII Alexander III Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antigonus I Monophthalmus XIII Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Seleucus Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III Megas Antiochus Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Timarchus Demetrius I Soter Alexander Balas Demetrius II Nicator Parthian period 141 BC  AD 224 XIV Mithridates I Phraates II Rinnu Antiochus VII Sidetes Phraates II Ubulna Hyspaosines Artabanus I Mithridates II Gotarzes I Asiabatar Orodes I Ispubarza Sinatruces Phraates III Piriustana Teleuniqe Orodes II Phraates IV Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Vonones II Vologases I Pacorus II Artabanus III Osroes I Vologases III Parthamaspates Vologases IV Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV Category Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSogdianusoldid1216036030 Categories 423 BC deaths 
5 thcentury BC Kings of the Achaemenid Empire 
5 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Achaemenid dynasty of Egypt Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt 
5 thcentury BC murdered monarchs Murdered Persian monarchs 
5 thcentury BC Iranian people Deaths from asphyxiation Executed monarchs Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 28 March 2024 at 1714 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width