Artaxerxes I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Succession to the throne 
2 Egyptian revolt 
3 Relations with Greece 
4 Portrayal in the Book of Ezra and Nehemiah 
5 Interpretations of actions 
6 Medical analysis 
7 Children 
8 See also 
9 References 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Artaxerxes I 61 languages  Azrbaycanca    Catal etina Cymraeg Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano    Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Ozbekcha    Polski Portugus Romn   Scots Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Trke   Ting Vit Winaray Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire from 465 to 424 BC Artaxerxes I  King of Kings Great King King of Persia King of Babylon Pharaoh of Egypt King of Countries Relief of Artaxerxes I from his tomb in Naqshe Rustam King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 465424 BC Predecessor Xerxes I Successor Xerxes II Born Unknown Died 424 BC Susa Burial Naqshe Rustam Persepolis Spouse Damaspia Alogyne of Babylon Cosmartidene of Babylon Andia of Babylon Issue Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Arsites Parysatis Dynasty Achaemenid Father Xerxes I Mother Amestris Religion Zoroastrianism nomen or birth name Artaxerxes1 in hieroglyphs Era Late Period 664332 BC Artaxerxes I rtzrksiz Old Persian  Artaxa23 Greek 4 was the fifth King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire from 465 to December 424 BC.56 He was the third son of Xerxes I. In Greek sources he is also surnamed Longhanded Ancient Greek  Makrkheir Latin Longimanus allegedly because his right hand was longer than his left.7 Succession to the throneedit Artaxerxes was probably born in the reign of his grandfather Darius I to the emperors son and heir Xerxes I. In 465 BC Xerxes I was murdered by Hazarapat commander of thousand Artabanus the commander of the royal bodyguard and the most powerful official in the Persian court with the help of a eunuch Aspamitres.8 Greek historians give contradicting accounts of events. According to Ctesias in Persica 20 Artabanus then accused Crown Prince Darius Xerxess eldest son of the murder and persuaded Artaxerxes to avenge the patricide by killing Darius. But according to Aristotle in Politics 
5.1 3
11 b Artabanus killed Darius first and then killed Xerxes. After Artaxerxes discovered the murder he killed Artabanus and his sons.910 Egyptian revoltedit Inarus seized by Artaxerxes I in the Zvenigorodsky seal.11 The ancient Egyptian god AmunMin in front of Artaxerxes cartouche. Artaxerxes had to face a revolt in Egypt in 460454 BC led by Inaros II who was the son of a Libyan prince named Psamtik presumably descended from the Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt. In 460 BC Inaros II revolted against the Persians with the help of his Athenian allies and defeated the Persian army commanded by satrap Akheimenes. The Persians retreated to Memphis and the Athenians were finally defeated in 454 BC by the Persian army led by Megabyzus after a twoyear siege. Inaros was captured and carried away to Susa. Relations with Greeceedit Themistocles stands silently before Artaxerxes After the Achaemenid Empire had been defeated at the Battle of the Eurymedon c. 469 BC military action between Greece and Persia was at a standstill. When Artaxerxes I took power he introduced a new Persian strategy of weakening the Athenians by funding their enemies in Greece. This indirectly caused the Athenians to move the treasury of the Delian League from the island of Delos to the Athenian acropolis. This funding practice inevitably prompted renewed fighting in 450 BC where the Greeks attacked at the Battle of Cyprus. After Cimons failure to attain much in this expedition hostilities ceased. Later sources argue that the purported Peace of Callias was agreed among Athens Argos and Persia in 449 BC however the existence of a formal treaty between the Greek States and Persia is disputed. Artaxerxes I offered asylum to Themistocles who was probably his father Xerxess greatest enemy for his victory at the Battle of Salamis after Themistocles was ostracized from Athens. Also Artaxerxes I gave him Magnesia Myus and Lampsacus to maintain him in bread meat and wine. In addition Artaxerxes I gave him Skepsis to provide him with clothes and he also gave him Percote with bedding for his house.12 Themistocles would go on to learn and adopt Persian customs Persian language and traditions.1314 Portrayal in the Book of Ezra and Nehemiahedit A King Artaxerxes Hebrew   pronounced artaast or  pronounced artaasta is described in the Bible Ezra 7 as having commissioned Ezra a kohen and scribe by means of a letter of decree to take charge of the ecclesiastical and civil affairs of the Jewish nation. Ezra thereby left Babylon in the first month of the seventh year15 of Artaxerxes reign at the head of a company of Jews that included priests and Levites. They arrived in Jerusalem on the first day of the fifth month of the seventh year according to the Hebrew calendar. The text does not specify whether the king in the passage refers to Artaxerxes I 465424 BC or to Artaxerxes II 404359 BC.1617 Most scholars hold that Ezra lived during the rule of Artaxerxes I though some have difficulties with this assumption18 Nehemiah and Ezra seem to have no knowledge of each other their missions do not overlap however in Nehemiah 12 both are leading processions on the wall as part of the wall dedication ceremony. So they clearly were contemporaries working together in Jerusalem at the time the wall and the city of Jerusalem was rebuilt in contrast to the previously stated viewpoint.19 These difficulties have led many scholars to assume that Ezra arrived in the seventh year of the rule of Artaxerxes II i.e. some 50 years after Nehemiah. This assumption would imply that the biblical account is not chronological. The last group of scholars regard the seventh year as a scribal error and hold that the two men were contemporaries.1820 However Ezra appears for the first time in Nehemiah 8 having probably been at the court for twelve years.21 The rebuilding of the Jewish community in Jerusalem had begun under Cyrus the Great who had permitted Jews held captive in Babylon to return to Jerusalem and rebuild Solomons Temple. Consequently a number of Jews returned to Jerusalem in 538 BC and the foundation of this Second Temple was laid in 536 BC in the second year of their return Ezra 38. After a period of strife the temple was finally completed in the sixth year of Darius 516 BC Ezra 615. In Artaxerxes twentieth year Nehemiah the kings cupbearer apparently was also a friend of the king as in that year Artaxerxes inquired after Nehemiahs sadness. Nehemiah related to him the plight of the Jewish people and that the city of Jerusalem was undefended. The king sent Nehemiah to Jerusalem with letters of safe passage to the governors in TransEuphrates and to Asaph keeper of the royal forests to make beams for the citadel by the Temple and to rebuild the city walls.22 Interpretations of actionsedit Tomb of Artaxerxes I at Naqshe Rostam. Ethnicities of the Empire on the tomb of Artaxerxes I at Naqshe Rostam. Roger Williams a 
17 thcentury Christian minister and founder of Rhode Island interpreted several passages in the Old and New Testament to support limiting government interference in religious matters. Williams published The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience arguing for a separation of church and state based on biblical reasoning. Williams believed that Israel was a unique covenant kingdom and not an appropriate model for New Testament Christians who believed that the Old Testament covenant had been fulfilled. Therefore the more informative Old Testament examples of civil government were good noncovenant kings such as Artaxerxes who tolerated the Jews and did not insist that they follow his state religion.23 Medical analysisedit According to a paper published in 201124 the discrepancy in Artaxerxes limb lengths may have arisen as a result of the inherited disease neurofibromatosis. Childrenedit Quadrilingual inscription of Artaxerxes on an Egyptian alabaster vase Old Persian Elamite Babylonian and Egyptian.2526 By queen Damaspia Xerxes II By Alogyne of Babylon Sogdianus By Cosmartidene of Babylon Darius II Arsites By Andia of Babylon Bogapaeus Parysatis wife of Darius II Ochus By another unknown wife An unnamed daughter wife of Hieramenes mother of Autoboesaces and Mitraeus27 By various wives Eleven other children See alsoedit Artoxares List of biblical figures identified in extrabiblical sources Referencesedit  Henri Gauthier Le Livre des rois dgypte IV Cairo 1916 MIFAO 20 p. 152.  Ghias Abadi R. M. 2004. Achaemenid Inscriptions   in Persian 
2 nd ed.. Tehran Shiraz Navid Publications. p. 129. ISBN 9643580156.  Artaxerxes at Encyclopdia Iranica  The Greek form of the name is influenced by Xerxes Artaxerxes at Encyclopdia Iranica  James D. G. Dunn John William Rogerson 19 November 2003. Eerdmans Commentary on the Bible. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 321. ISBN 9780802837110.  Matthew W. Stolper. The Death of Artaxerxes I in Archaeologische Mitteilungen aus Iran N.F. 16 1983. Dietrich Reimer Verlag Berlin. p. 231.  Plutarch Artaxerxes l. 1. c. 1. 11129  cited by Ussher Annals para. 1179  Pirnia IraneBastan book 1 p 873  Dandamayev  Olmstead History of the Persian Empire pp 289290  Ancient Seals of the Near East. 1940. p. Plaque 17.  Plutarch. Themistocles Part II. Archived from the original on 20151001.  Thucydides I 137  Plutarch Themistocles 29  The Book of Daniel. Montex Publish Company By Jim McGuiggan 1978 p. 147.  Porter J.R. 2000. The Illustrated Guide to the Bible. New York Barnes  Noble Books. pp. 11516. ISBN 9780760722787.  Toynbee Arnold 1961. A Study of History. Vol. 12. Oxford University Press. p. 485. Ever since the beginning of the Babilonish Captivity the diaspora has been Jewrys citadel and the Artaxerxes in question is Artaxerxes I imperabat 465424 B.C. or Artaxerxes II imperabat 404359 B.C. So we do not know whether the date of Ezras mission was 458 B.C. or 397 B.C. or whether the date of Nehemias mission was 445 B.C. or 384 B.C. see G.F. Moore Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era vol. i p. 5. Nehemiah may have preceded Ezra  a b Ezra. Encyclopdia Britannica. 2007.  Winn Leith Mary Joan 2001 1998. Israel among the Nations The Persian Period. In Michael David Coogan ed.. The Oxford History of the Biblical World Google Books. Oxford New York Oxford University Press. p. 281. ISBN 9780195139372. LCCN 98016042. OCLC 44650958. Retrieved 13 December 2007.  John Boederman The Cambridge Ancient History 2002 p. 272  Nehemiah 8 Ellicotts Commentary for English Readers.  Nehemiah 219  James P. Byrd The challenges of Roger Williams Religious Liberty Violent Persecution and the Bible Mercer University Press 20021 accessed on Google Books on July 20 2009  Ashrafian Hutan. 2011. Limb gigantism neurofibromatosis and royal heredity in the Ancient World 2500 years ago Achaemenids and Parthians. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 64 4 557. doi
10.1 0
16 j.bjps.20
10.0 
8.0 25. PMID 20832372.  Revue archologique in French. Leleux. 1844. p. 444450.  The vase is now in the Reza Abbasi Museum in Teheran inv. 53. image inscription  Xenophon Hellenica Book II Chapter 1 External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Artaxerxes I. Encyclopedia Iranica ARTAXERXES Encyclopedia Iranica ARTAXERXES I a son of Xerxes I and Amestris Artaxerxes I Achaemenid dynasty Died 424 BC Preceded by Xerxes I King of Kings of Persia 464424 BC Succeeded by Xerxes II Pharaoh of Egypt XXVII Dynasty 465424 BC v t e Median and Achaemenid kings Family tree Median 728550 BC Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages Achaemenid 550330 BC Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cyrus II Cambyses II Smerdis Gaumata Darius the Great Darius I Xerxes the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Nothus Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Italics indicate kings not directly attested and so possibly legendary. v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Persepolis Palace Tachara Gate of All Nations Apadana Other sections Tomb of Artaxerxes III Builders Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Researchers Heidemarie Koch Erich Schmidt Alireza Shapour Shahbazi Related Tangeh Bolaghi 25
00 year celebration of the Persian Empire Sivand Dam Persepolis Administrative Archives Waterskin Achaemenid architecture CategoryPersepolis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Kings of Babylon List of kings of Babylon Royal titles Period Dynasty Kings foreign ruler vassal king female Old Babylonian Empire 18941595 BC I Sumuabum SumulaEl Sabium ApilSin SinMuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna AbiEshuh AmmiDitana AmmiSaduqa SamsuDitana II Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Unknown king  Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Kassite period 17291157 BC III Gandash Agum I Kashtiliash I Unknown king AbiRattash Kashtiliash II Urzigurumash Agum II HarbaShipak Shiptaulzi Unknown king Burnaburiash I Ulamburiash Kashtiliash III Agum III KadashmanSah Karaindash KadashmanHarbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I BurnaBuriash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Babylonian period 1157732 BC IV Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur V Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi VI Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna VII Marbitiaplausur VIII Nabmukinapli Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabusumaukin II NeoAssyrian period 732626 BC IX Nabumukinzeri TiglathPileser III Shalmaneser V Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon II Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Aurndinumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Sennacherib Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal amaumaukin Ashurbanipal Kandalanu Snumulir Sinsharishkun NeoBabylonian Empire 626539 BC X Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Babylon under foreign rule 539 BC  AD 224 Persian period 539331 BC XI Cyrus II Cambyses II Bardiya Nebuchadnezzar III Darius I Nebuchadnezzar IV Xerxes I Shamasheriba Belshimanni Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV NidinBel  Darius III Hellenistic period 331141 BC XII Alexander III Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antigonus I Monophthalmus XIII Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Seleucus Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III Megas Antiochus Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Timarchus Demetrius I Soter Alexander Balas Demetrius II Nicator Parthian period 141 BC  AD 224 XIV Mithridates I Phraates II Rinnu Antiochus VII Sidetes Phraates II Ubulna Hyspaosines Artabanus I Mithridates II Gotarzes I Asiabatar Orodes I Ispubarza Sinatruces Phraates III Piriustana Teleuniqe Orodes II Phraates IV Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Vonones II Vologases I Pacorus II Artabanus III Osroes I Vologases III Parthamaspates Vologases IV Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV Category Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 National Spain Germany Israel United States Latvia Australia Netherlands Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleArtaxerxesIoldid1216035880 Categories 
5 thcentury BC Kings of the Achaemenid Empire 
5 thcentury BC Pharaohs Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Pharaohs of the Achaemenid dynasty of Egypt Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt 424 BC deaths Babylonian captivity Artaxerxes I Kings of the Lands Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Persianlanguage sources fa CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Old Persian ca. 600400 B.C.language text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Latinlanguage text Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text Pages with Hebrew IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 28 March 2024 at 1714 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width