Wikipedia:Citing sources - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Citation types Toggle Citation types subsection 
1.1 Short and full citations 
2 When and why to cite sources Toggle When and why to cite sources subsection 
2.1 Multimedia 
2.2 When not to cite 
2.3 Consecutive cites of the same source 
3 Inline citations Toggle Inline citations subsection 
3.1 How to place an inline citation using ref tags 

3.1.1 Avoiding clutter 

3.1.2 Repeated citations 

3.1.3 Citing multiple pages of the same source 
3.2 What information to include 
3.3 Examples 

3.3.1 Books 

3.3.2 Journal articles 

3.3.3 Newspaper articles 

3.3.4 Web pages 

3.3.5 Sound recordings 

3.3.6 Film television or video recordings 

3.3.7 Wikidata 

3.3.8 Other 
3.4 Identifying parts of a source 

3.4.1 Books and print articles 

3.4.2 Audio and video sources 
3.5 Links and ID numbers 

3.5.1 Linking to pages in PDF files 

3.5.2 Linking to Google Books pages 
3.6 Say where you read it 
3.7 Dates and reprints 
3.8 Seasonal publication dates and differing calendar systems 
3.9 Additional annotation 
4 Notes and references section Toggle Notes and references section subsection 
4.1 General references 
4.2 How to create the list of citations 

4.2.1 Separating citations from explanatory footnotes 

4.2.2 Duplicate citations 
5 Citation style Toggle Citation style subsection 
5.1 Variation in citation methods 

5.1.1 Generally considered helpful 

5.1.2 To be avoided 

5.1.3 Parenthetical referencing 
6 Handling links in citations Toggle Handling links in citations subsection 
6.1 Avoid embedded links 
6.2 Convenience links 
6.3 Indicating availability 
6.4 Links to sources 
6.5 Preventing and repairing dead links 
7 Textsource integrity Toggle Textsource integrity subsection 
7.1 Keeping citations close 
7.2 Citation order 
7.3 Bundling citations 
8 Intext attribution 
9 Dealing with unsourced material 
10 Citation templates and tools Toggle Citation templates and tools subsection 
10.1 Metadata 
10.2 Citation generation tools 
10.3 Duplicate reference finders 
10.4 Programming tools 
10.5 Reference management software 
11 See also 
12 Notes 
13 Further reading 
14 External links Toggle the table of contents WikipediaCiting sources 106 languages Afrikaans           Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina Dansk Davvismegiella Deutsch Eesti   Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego    Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa      Kreyl ayisyen Kurd   Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar      Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau   Mngdngng   Nederlands   Napulitano  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan  Ozbekcha     Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip  Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina lnski Soomaaliga    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara    Trke Trkmene   Ting Vit      Edit links Project page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Wiktionary From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Guideline on how to cite sources For information on referencing citations in Wikipedia articles see HelpFootnotes and WikipediaInline citation. For information about citing Wikipedia articles for use in work outside of Wikipedia see WikipediaCiting Wikipedia. WPCITE and WPREF redirect here. For the Citation Needed information page see WPCITENEED. For the reference desk see WPREFD. This page documents an English Wikipedia content guideline. Editors should generally follow it though exceptions may apply. Substantive edits to this page should reflect consensus. When in doubt discuss first on the talk page. Shortcuts WPCS WPCITE WPREF This page in a nutshell Cite reliable sources. You can add a citation by selecting from the dropdown menu at the top of the editing box. In markup you can add a citation manually using ref tags. More elaborate and useful ways to cite sources are detailed below. Are you new here Welcome There is a simplified version of this page at HelpReferencing for beginners. A citation also called a referencenote 1 uniquely identifies a source of information e.g. Ritter R. M. 2003. The Oxford Style Manual. Oxford University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780198605645. Wikipedias verifiability policy requires inline citations for any material challenged or likely to be challenged and for all quotations anywhere in article space. A citation or reference in an article usually has two parts. In the first part each section of text that is either based on or quoted from an outside source is marked as such with an inline citation. This is usually displayed as a superscript footnote number 1 The second necessary part of the citation or reference is the list of full references which provides complete formatted detail about the source so that anyone reading the article can find it and verify it. This page explains how to place and format both parts of the citation. Each article should use one citation method or style throughout. If an article already has citations preserve consistency by using that method or seek consensus on the talk page before changing it the principle is reviewed at  Variation in citation methods. While you should try to write citations correctly what matters most is that you provide enough information to identify the source. Others will improve the formatting if needed. See HelpReferencing for beginners for a brief introduction on how to put references in Wikipedia articles and cite templates in Visual Editor about a graphical way for citation included in Wikipedia. Wikipedia guidelines Guidelines list Policies list Behavioral Assume good faith Conflict of interest Courtesy vanishing Disruptive editing Dont bite the newcomers Dont disrupt to make a point Etiquette Gaming the system User pages Other behavioral guidelines WMF friendly space policy Discussions Talk page guidelines Signatures Content Citing sources External links Reliable sources medicine Fringe theories Nonfree content Offensive material Dont copy long texts Dont create hoaxes Patent nonsense Other content guidelines Editing Article size Be bold Understandability Other editing guidelines Organization Categories lists templates Categorization Disambiguation Style Manual of Style contents lists tables Deletion Deletion process Speedy keep Deletion guidelines for administrators Project content Project pages WikiProjects Templates User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages Other Naming conventions Notability v t e Citation types Shortcut WPCITETYPE An inline citation means any citation added close to the material it supports for example after the sentence or paragraph normally in the form of a footnote. Intext attribution involves adding the source of a statement to the article text such as Rawls argues that X.5 This is done whenever a writer or speaker should be credited such as with quotations close paraphrasing or statements of opinion or uncertain fact. The intext attribution does not give full details of the source  this is done in a footnote in the normal way. See Intext attribution below. A general reference is a citation that supports content but is not linked to any particular piece of material in the article through an inline citation. General references are usually listed at the end of the article in a References section. They are usually found in underdeveloped articles especially when all article content is supported by a single source. They may also be listed in more developed articles as a supplement to inline citations. Short and full citations Shortcuts WPCITESHORT WPSFN Main page HelpShortened footnotes A full citation fully identifies a reliable source and where applicable the place in that source such as a page number where the information in question can be found. For example Rawls John. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press 1971 p. 1. This type of citation is usually given as a footnote and is the most commonly used citation method in Wikipedia articles. A short citation is an inline citation that identifies the place in a source where specific information can be found but without giving full details of the source. Some Wikipedia articles use it giving summary information about the source together with a page number. For example refRawls 1971 p. 1.ref which renders as Rawls 1971 p. 1.. These are used together with full citations which are listed in a separate References section or provided in an earlier footnote. Forms of short citations used include authordate referencing APA style Harvard style or Chicago style and authortitle or authorpage referencing MLA style or Chicago style. As before the list of footnotes is automatically generated in a Notes or Footnotes section which immediately precedes the References section containing the full citations to the source. Short citations can be written manually or by using either the sfn or harvnb templates or the r referencing template. Note that templates should not be added without consensus to an article that already uses a consistent referencing style. The short citations and full citations may be linked so that the reader can click on the short note to find full information about the source. See the template documentation for details and solutions to common problems. For variations with and without templates see wikilinks to full references. For a set of realistic examples see these. This is how short citations look in the edit box The Sun is pretty bigrefMiller 2005 p. 23.ref but the Moon is not so big.refBrown 2006 p. 46.ref The Sun is also quite hot.refMiller 2005 p. 34.ref Notes reflist References  Brown Rebecca 2006. Size of the Moon Scientific American 51 78. Miller Edward 2005. The Sun. Academic Press. This is how they look in the article The Sun is pretty big1 but the Moon is not so big.2 The Sun is also quite hot.3 Notes  Miller 2005 p. 23.  Brown 2006 p. 46.  Miller 2005 p. 34. References Brown Rebecca 2006. Size of the Moon Scientific American 51 78. Miller Edward 2005. The Sun. Academic Press. Shortened notes using titles rather than publication dates would look like this in the article Notes  Miller The Sun p. 23.  Brown Size of the Moon p. 46.  Miller The Sun p. 34. When using manual links it is easy to introduce errors such as duplicate anchors and unused references. The script UserTrappist the monkHarvErrors will show many related errors. Duplicate anchors may be found by using the W
3 C Markup Validation Service. When and why to cite sources Shortcut WPWHYCITE Further information WikipediaWhen to cite By citing sources for Wikipedia content you enable users to verify that the cited information is supported by reliable sources  improving the credibility of Wikipedia while showing that the content is not original research. You also help users find additional information on the subject and by giving attribution you avoid plagiarising the source of your words or ideas. In particular sources are needed for material that is challenged or likely to be challenged. If reliable sources cannot be found for challenged material it is likely to be removed from the article. Sources are also required when quoting someone with or without quotation marks or closely paraphrasing a source. But the need to cite sources is not limited to those situations editors are always encouraged to add or improve citations for any information in an article. Citations are especially desirable for statements about living persons particularly when the statements are contentious or potentially defamatory. In accordance with the biography of living persons policy unsourced information of this type is likely to be removed on sight. Multimedia For an image or other media file details of its origin and copyright status should appear on its file page. Image captions should be referenced as appropriate just like any other part of the article. A citation is not needed for descriptions such as alt text that are verifiable directly from the image itself or for text that merely identifies a source e.g. the caption Belshazzars Feast 1635 for FileRembrandtBelsazar.jpg. When not to cite Shortcut WPWHENNOTCITE Further information WikipediaWhen to cite  When a source or citation may not be needed Citations are not used on disambiguation pages sourcing for the information given there should be done in the target articles. Citations are often omitted from the lead section of an article insofar as the lead summarizes information for which sources are given later in the article although quotations and controversial statements particularly if about living persons should be supported by citations even in the lead. See WPLEADCITE for more information. Per WPPAIC citations should be placed at the end of the passage that they support. If one source alone supports consecutive sentences in the same paragraph one citation of it at the end of the final sentence is sufficient. It is not necessary to include a citation for each individual consecutive sentence as this is overkill. This does not apply to lists or tables nor does it apply when multiple sources support different parts of a paragraph or passage. Citation requirements for WPDYK may require a citation to be inserted for the duration of the DYK listing even within a passage completely cited to the same sources.a Consecutive cites of the same source Shortcuts WPREPEATCITE WPCONSECUTIVECITE Material that is repeated multiple times in a paragraph does not require an inline citation for every mention. If you say an elephant is a mammal more than once provide one only at the first instance. Avoid cluttering text with redundant citations like this Elephants are large1 land2 mammals3 ... Elephants teeth4 are very different4 from those of most other mammals.34 Unlike most mammals3 which grow baby teeth5 and then replace them with a permanent set of adult teeth4 elephants have cycles of tooth5 rotation throughout their entire6 lives.4 Inline citations Shortcuts WPINCITE WPINLINECITE Further information WikipediaInline citation Inline citations allow the reader to associate a given piece of material in an article with the specific reliable sources that support it. Inline citations are added using footnotes long or short. How to place an inline citation using ref tags Shortcut WPCITEFOOT Further information Footnotes the basics To create a footnote use the ref...ref syntax at the appropriate place in the article text for example Justice is a human invention.refRawls John. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press 1971 p. 1.ref It ... which will be displayed as something like Justice is a human invention.1 It ... It will also be necessary to generate the list of footnotes where the citation text is actually displayed for this see the previous section. As in the above example citation markers are normally placed after adjacent punctuation such as periods full stops and commas. For exceptions see the WPManual of Style  Punctuation and footnotes. Note also that no space is added before the citation marker. Citations should not be placed within or on the same line as section headings. The citation should be added close to the material it supports offering textsource integrity. If a word or phrase is particularly contentious an inline citation may be added next to that word or phrase within the sentence but it is usually sufficient to add the citation to the end of the clause sentence or paragraph so long as its clear which source supports which part of the text. Avoiding clutter Shortcuts WPILCLUTTER WPINLINECLUTTER WPINLINECITECLUTTER Inline references can significantly bloat the wikitext in the edit window and can become confusing and difficult to manage. There are two main methods to avoid clutter in the edit window Using listdefined references by collecting the full citation code within the reference list template reflist and then inserting them in the text with a shortened reference tag for example ref nameSmith 2001 p99 . Inserting short citations see below that then refer to a full list of source texts As with other citation formats articles should not undergo largescale conversion between formats without consensus to do so. Note however that references defined in the reference list template can no longer be edited with the VisualEditor. Repeated citations Further information Footnotes using a source more than once For multiple use of the same inline citation or footnote you can use the named references feature choosing a name to identify the inline citation and typing ref namenametext of the citationref. Thereafter the same named reference may be reused any number of times either before or after the defining use by typing the previous reference name like this ref namename . The use of the slash before the  means that the tag is selfclosing and the ref used to close other references must not be used in addition. The text of the name can be almost anythingapart from being completely numeric. If spaces are used in the text of the name the text must be placed within double quotes. Placing all named references within double quotes may be helpful to future editors who do not know that rule. To help with page maintenance it is recommended that the text of the name have a connection to the inline citation or footnote for example author year page ref nameSmith 2005 p
94 text of the citationref. Use straight quotation marks  to enclose the reference name. Do not use curly quotation marks . Curly marks are treated as another character not as delimiters. The page will display an error if one style of quotation marks is used when first naming the reference and the other style is used in a repeated reference or if a mix of styles is used in the repeated references. Citing multiple pages of the same source Shortcuts WPIBID WPOPCIT Further information HelpReferences and page numbers When an article cites many different pages from the same source to avoid the redundancy of many big nearly identical full citations most Wikipedia editors use one of these options Named references in conjunction with a combined list of page numbers using the pages parameter of the cite templates most commonly used but can become confusing for large number of pages Named references in conjunction with the rp or r templates to specify the page Short citations The use of ibid. id. or similar abbreviations is discouraged as they may become broken as new references are added op. cit. is less problematic in that it should refer explicitly to a citation contained in the article however not all readers are familiar with the meaning of the terms. If the use of ibid is extensive tag the article using the ibid template. What information to include Shortcuts WPCITEHOW WPHOWCITE Listed below is the information that a typical inline citation or general reference will provide though other details may be added as necessary. This information is included in order to identify the source assist readers in finding it and in the case of inline citations indicate the place in the source where the information is to be found. If an article uses short citations then the inline citations will refer to this information in abbreviated form as described in the relevant sections above. In general the citation information should be cited as it appears in the original source. For example the album notes from Hurts 
2 B Human should not be cited as being from the album Hurts to be Human or an X formerly Twitter user named idogs should not be cited as ilovedogs. Retain the original special glyphs and spelling. Use details in citing. Citations 13 are good while citations 46 should be improved. Examples Books See also the template cite book. Citations for books typically include name of authors title of book volume when appropriate name of publisher place of publication date of publication of the edition chapter or page numbers cited if appropriate edition if not the first edition ISBN optional Citations for individually authored chapters in books typically include name of authors title of the chapter name of books editor name of book and other details as above chapter number or page numbers for the chapter optional In some instances the verso of a books title page may record Reprinted with corrections XXXX or similar where XXXX is a year. This is a different version of a book in the same way that different editions are different versions. Note this in your citation. See  Dates and reprints for how to further information. Journal articles See also the template cite journal. Citations for journal articles typically include name of the authors year and sometimes month of publication title of the article name of the journal volume number issue number and page numbers article numbers in some electronic journals DOI andor other identifiers are optional and can often be used in place of a less stable URL although URLs may also be listed in a journal citation Newspaper articles See also the template cite news. Citations for newspaper articles typically include byline authors name if any title of the article name of the newspaper in italics city of publication if not included in name of newspaper date of publication page numbers are optional and may be substituted with negative numbers on microfilm reels Web pages Shortcut WPCITEWEB See also the template cite web. Citations for World Wide Web pages typically include URL of the specific web page where the referenced content can be found name of the authors title of the article title or domain name of the website publisher if known date of publication page numbers if applicable the date you retrieved or accessed the web page required if the publication date is unknown Sound recordings Further information HelpReferences and page numbers  Other insource locations Citations for sound recordings typically include name of the composers songwriters script writers or the like name of the performers title of the song or individual track title of the album if applicable name of the record label year of release medium for example LP audio cassette CD MP3 file approximate time at which event or point of interest occurs where appropriate Do not cite an entire body of work by one performer. Instead make one citation for each work your text relies on. Film television or video recordings See also the template cite AV media. Citations for films TV episodes or video recordings typically include name of the director name of the producer if relevant names of major performers the title of a TV episode title of the film or TV series name of the studio year of release medium for example film videocassette DVD approximate time at which event or point of interest occurs where appropriate Wikidata See also the template cite Q. Wikidata is largely usergenerated and articles should not directly cite Wikidata as a source just as it would be inappropriate to cite other Wikipedias articles as sources. But Wikidatas statements can be directly transcluded into articles this is usually done to provide external links or infobox data. For example more than two million external links from Wikidata are shown through the Authority control template. There has been controversy over the use of Wikidata in the English Wikipedia due to vandalism and its own sourcing. While there is no consensus on whether information from Wikidata should be used at all there is general agreement that any Wikidata statements that are transcluded need to be just as  or more  reliable compared to Wikipedia content. As such ModuleWikidataIB and some related modules and templates filter Wikidata statements not supported by a reference by default however other modules and templates such as ModuleWikidata do not. To transclude an item from Wikidata the QID Q number of an item in Wikidata needs to be known. QID can by found by searching for an item by the name or DOI in Wikidata. A book a journal article a musical recording sheet music or any other item can be represented by a structured item in Wikidata. The Cite Q template can be used to cite works whose metadata is held in Wikidata provided the cited work meets Wikipedias standards. As of December 2020 Cite Q does not support last first or Vancouverstyle author name lists so it should not be used in articles in which last first or Vancouverstyle author names are the dominant citation style. Other See also cite album notes cite comic cite conference for conference reports or papers cite court for court cases or legal decisions cite act for a law or legal act cite encyclopedia cite episode for TV or radio series cite mailing list cite map cite newsgroup cite patent for patents cite press release cite report cite thesis cite video game Identifying parts of a source Shortcut WPPAGENUM Further information HelpReferences and page numbers When citing lengthy sources you should identify which part of a source is being cited. Books and print articles Specify the page number or range of page numbers. Page numbers are not required for a reference to the book or article as a whole. When you specify a page number it is helpful to specify the version date and edition for books of the source because the layout pagination length etc. can change between editions. If there are no page numbers whether in ebooks or print materials then you can use other means of identifying the relevant section of a lengthy work such as the chapter number or the section title. In some works such as plays and ancient works there are standard methods of referring to sections such as Act 1 scene 2 for plays and Bekker numbers for Aristotles works. Use these methods whenever appropriate. Audio and video sources Specify the time at which the event or other point of interest occurs. Be as precise as possible about the version of the source that you are citing for example movies are often released in different editions or cuts. Due to variations between formats and playback equipment precision may not be accurate in some cases. However many government agencies do not publish minutes and transcripts but do post video of official meetings online generally the subcontractors who handle audiovisual are quite precise. Links and ID numbers A citation ideally includes a link or ID number to help editors locate the source. If you have a URL web page link you can add it to the title part of the citation so that when you add the citation to Wikipedia the URL becomes hidden and the title becomes clickable. To do this enclose the URL and the title in square bracketsthe URL first then a space then the title. For example httpsmonographs.iarc.frENGMonographsvol
66 mono667.pdf IARC Monographs On The Evaluation Of Carcinogenic Risks To Humans  Doxefazepam. International Agency For Research On Cancer IARC. 66 97104. 1320 February 1996. For webonly sources with no publication date the Retrieved date or the date you accessed the web page should be included in case the web page changes in the future. For example Retrieved 15 July 2011 or you can use the accessdate parameter in the automatic WikipediarefToolbar 
2.0  editing window feature. You can also add an ID number to the end of a citation. The ID number might be an ISBN for a book a DOI digital object identifier for an article or some ebooks or any of several ID numbers that are specific to particular article databases such as a PMID number for articles on PubMed. It may be possible to format these so that they are automatically activated and become clickable when added to Wikipedia for example by typing ISBN or PMID followed by a space and the ID number. If your source is not available online it should be available in reputable libraries archives or collections. If a citation without an external link is challenged as unavailable any of the following is sufficient to show the material to be reasonably available though not necessarily reliable providing an ISBN or OCLC number linking to an established Wikipedia article about the source the work its author or its publisher or directly quoting the material on the talk page briefly and in context. Linking to pages in PDF files Shortcuts WPPAGELINKS WPBOOKLINKS Links to long PDF documents can be made more convenient by taking readers to a specific page with the addition of pagen to the document URL where n is the page number. For example using httpswww.domain.comdocument.pdfpage5 as the citation URL displays page five of the document in any PDF viewer that supports this feature. If the viewer or browser does not support it it will display the first page instead. Linking to Google Books pages Shortcut WPGBOOKS Further information WikipediaGoogle Books and Wikipedia Google Books sometimes allows numbered book pages to be linked to directly. Page links should only be added when the book is available for preview they will not work with snippet view. Keep in mind that availability varies by location. No editor is required to add page links but if another editor adds them they should not be removed without cause see the October 2010 RfC for further information. These can be added in several ways with and without citation templates Rawls John. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press 1971 p. 18. Or with a template Rawls John 1971. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press. p. 18. Rawls 1971 p. 18. Rawls 1971 p. 18. Rawls 1971 p. 18. Rawls 1971 18. In edit mode the URL for p. 18 of A Theory of Justice can be entered like this using the Cite book template cite book lastRawls firstJohn date1971 titleA Theory of Justice urlhttpsbooks.google.combooksidkvpby
7 HtAe
0 CpgPA18 publisherHarvard University Press page18 or like this in the first of the above examples formatted manually Rawls John. httpsbooks.google.combooksidkvpby
7 HtAe
0 CpgPA18 A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press 1971 p. 18. When the page number is a Roman numeral commonly seen at the beginning of books the URL looks like this for page xvii Roman numeral 17 of the same book httpsbooks.google.combooksidkvpby
7 HtAe
0 CpgPR17 The pgPR17 indicates page Roman 17 in contrast to the pgPA18 page Arabic 18 the URL given earlier. You can also link to a tippedin page such as an unnumbered page of images between two regular pages. If the page contains an image that is protected by copyright it will be replaced by a tiny notice saying copyrighted image. The URL for eleventh tippedin page inserted after page 304 of The Selected Papers of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony looks like this httpsbooks.google.combooksiddBs
4 CO
1 DsF
4 CpgPA3
04 IA11 The pgPA3
04 IA11 can be interpreted as page Arabic 304 inserted after 11. Note that some templates properly support links only in parameters specifically designed to hold URLs like url and archiveurl and that placing links in other parameters may not link properly or will cause mangled COinS metadata output. However the page and pages parameters of all Citation Style 
1 Citation Style 2 citation templates the family of sfn and harvstyle templates as well as r rp and ran are designed to be safe in this regard as well. Citer may be helpful. Users may also link the quotation on Google Books to individual titles via a short permalink which ends with their related ISBN OCLC or LCCN numerical code e.g. httpsbooks.google.combooksvidISBN0521349931 a permalink to the Google book with the ISBN code 0521349931. For further details you may see Howto explanation on support.google.com. Say where you read it Shortcuts WPSAYWHEREYOUREADIT WPSAYWHEREYOUGOTIT WPSWYRT WPSWYGT WPSAYWHERE Say where you read it follows the practice in academic writing of citing sources directly only if you have read the source yourself. If your knowledge of the source is secondhandthat is if you have read Jones 2010 who cited Smith 2009 and you want to use what Smith 2009 saidmake clear that your knowledge of Smith is based on your reading of Jones. When citing the source write the following this formatting is just an example John Smith 2009. Name of Book I Havent Seen Cambridge University Press p. 99 cited in Paul Jones 2010. Name of Encyclopedia I Have Seen Oxford University Press p. 29. Or if you are using short citations Smith 2009 p. 99 cited in Jones 2010 p. 29. The same principle applies when indicating the source of images and other media files in an article. Note The advice to say where you read it does not mean that you have to give credit to any search engines websites libraries library catalogs archives subscription services bibliographies or other sources that led you to Smiths book. If you have read a book or article yourself thats all you have to cite. You do not have to specify how you obtained and read it. So long as you are confident that you read a true and accurate copy it does not matter whether you read the material using an online service like Google Books using preview options at a booksellers website like Amazon through your library via online paid databases of scanned publications such as JSTOR using reading machines on an ereader except to the extent that this affects page numbering or any other method. Dates and reprints Date a book that is identically reprinted or printedondemand to the first date in which the edition became available. For example if an edition of a book was first released in 2005 with an identical reprinting in 2007 date it to 2005. If substantive changes were made in a reprint sometimes marked on the verso with Reprinted with corrections note the edition and append the corrected reprint year to it e.g. 
1 st ed. reprinted with corrections 2005. Editors should be aware that older sources especially those in the public domain are sometimes republished with modern publication dates treat these as new publications. When this occurs and the citation style being used requires it cite both the new and original publication dates e.g. Darwin Charles 1964 1859. On the Origin of Species facsimile of 
1 st ed.. Harvard University Press. This is done automatically in the citation and cite book templates when you use the origdate parameter. Alternately information about the reprint can be appended as a textual note Boole George 1854. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which Are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities. Macmillan. Reprinted with corrections Dover Publications New York NY 1958. Seasonal publication dates and differing calendar systems Publication dates for both older and recent sources should be written with the goal of helping the reader find the publication and once found confirm that the correct publication has been located. For example if the publication date bears a date in the Julian calendar it should not be converted to the Gregorian calendar. If the publication date was given as a season or holiday such as Winter or Christmas of a particular year or twoyear span it should not be converted to a month or date such as JulyAugust or December 25. If a publication provided both seasonal and specific dates prefer the specific one. Additional annotation Shortcuts WPANNOTATION WPFOOTQUOTE WPFQ In most cases it is sufficient for a citation footnote simply to identify the source as described in the sections above readers can then consult the source to see how it supports the information in the article. Sometimes however it is useful to include additional annotation in the footnote for example to indicate precisely which information the source is supporting particularly when a single footnote lists more than one source  see  Bundling citations and  Textsource integrity below. A footnote may also contain a relevant exact quotation from the source. This is especially helpful when the cited text is long or dense. A quotation allows readers to immediately identify the applicable portion of the reference. Quotes are also useful if the source is not easily accessible. However these should be used sparingly to avoid copyright violations. In the case of nonEnglish sources it may be helpful to quote from the original text and then give an English translation. If the article itself contains a translation of a quote from such a source without the original then the original should be included in the footnote. See the WPVerifiability  NonEnglish sources policy for more information. Notes and references section Main page WPManual of StyleLayout  Notes and references See also HelpFootnotes and WPManual of StyleLayout  Standard appendices and footers This section describes how to add footnotes and also describes how to create a list of full bibliography citations to support shortened footnotes. The first editor to add footnotes to an article must create a dedicated citations section where they are to appear. Any reasonable name may be chosen.b The most frequent choice is References. Other options in diminishing order of popularity are Notes Footnotes or Works cited although these are more often used to distinguish between multiple endmatter sections or subsections. For an example of headings of a notes section see the article Tezcatlipoca. General references Shortcut WPGENREF A general reference is a citation to a reliable source that supports content but is not linked to any particular text in the article through an inline citation. General references are usually listed at the end of the article in a References section and are usually sorted by the last name of the author or the editor. General reference sections are most likely to be found in underdeveloped articles especially when all article content is supported by a single source. The disadvantage of general references is that textsource integrity is lost unless the article is very short. They are frequently reworked by later editors into inline citations. The appearance of a general references section is the same as those given above in the sections on short citations and parenthetical references. If both cited and uncited references exist their distinction can be highlighted with separate section names e.g. References and General references. How to create the list of citations Shortcut WPREFLIST With some exceptions discussed below citations appear in a single section containing only the references  tag or the Reflist template. For example  References Reflist or  References references  The footnotes will then automatically be listed under that section heading. Each numbered footnote marker in the text is a clickable link to the corresponding footnote and each footnote contains a caret that links back to the corresponding point in the text. Shortcut WPASL Scrolling lists or lists of citations appearing within a scroll box should never be used. This is because of issues with readability browser compatibility accessibility printing and site mirroring.note 2 If an article contains a list of general references this is usually placed in a separate section titled for example References. This usually comes immediately after the sections listing footnotes if any. If the general references section is called References then the citations section is usually called Notes. Separating citations from explanatory footnotes See also WikipediaManual of StyleLayout  Notes and references and HelpExplanatory notes Shortcut WPEXPLNOTESECT If an article contains both footnoted citations and other explanatory footnotes then it is possible but not necessary to divide them into two separate lists using footnotes groups. The explanatory footnotes and the citations are then placed in separate sections called for example Notes and References respectively. Another method of separating explanatory footnotes from footnoted references is using efn for the explanatory footnotes. The advantage of this system is that the content of an explanatory footnote can in this case be referenced with a footnoted citation. When explanatory footnotes and footnoted references are not in separate lists refn can be used for explanatory footnotes containing footnoted citations. Duplicate citations Shortcuts WPDUPCITES WPDUPREF Combine precisely duplicated full citations in keeping with the existing citation style if any. In this context precisely duplicated means having the same content not necessarily identical strings The New York Times is the same as NY Times different accessdates are not significant. Do not discourage editors particularly inexperienced ones from adding duplicate citations when the use of the source is appropriate because a duplicate is better than no citation. But any editor should feel free to combine them and doing so is the best practice on Wikipedia. Citations to different pages or parts of the same source can also be combined preserving the distinct parts of the citations as described in HelpReferences and page numbers. Any method that is consistent with the existing citation style if any may be used or consensus can be sought to change the existing style. Some tools are linked below. Citation style Shortcut WPCITESTYLE While citations should aim to provide the information listed above Wikipedia does not have a single house style though citations within any given article should follow a consistent style. A number of citation styles exist including those described in the Wikipedia articles for Citation APA style ASA style MLA style The Chicago Manual of Style Authordate referencing the Vancouver system and Bluebook. Although nearly any consistent style may be used avoid allnumeric date formats other than YYYYMMDD because of the ambiguity concerning which number is the month and which the day. For example 20020611 may be used but not 11062002. The YYYYMMDD format should in any case be limited to Gregorian calendar dates where the year is after 1582. Because it could easily be confused with a range of years the format YYYYMM for example 200206 is not used. For more information on the capitalization of cited works see WikipediaManual of StyleCapital letters  All caps and small caps. Variation in citation methods Shortcuts WPCITEVAR WPWHENINROME Editors should not attempt to change an articles established citation style merely on the grounds of personal preference or to make it match other articles without first seeking consensus for the change.note 3 As with spelling differences it is normal practice to defer to the style used by the first major contributor or adopted by the consensus of editors already working on the page unless a change in consensus has been achieved. If the article you are editing is already using a particular citation style you should follow it if you believe it is inappropriate for the needs of the article seek consensus for a change on the talk page. If you are the first contributor to add citations to an article you may choose whichever style you think best for the article. However since 5 September 2020 inline parenthetical referencing is a deprecated citation style on Englishlanguage Wikipedia. If all or most of the citations in an article consist of bare URLs or otherwise fail to provide needed bibliographic data  such as the name of the source the title of the article or web page consulted the author if known the publication date if known and the page numbers where relevant  then that would not count as a consistent citation style and can be changed freely to insert such data. The data provided should be sufficient to uniquely identify the source allow readers to find it and allow readers to initially evaluate a source without retrieving it. Generally considered helpful The following are standard practice improving existing citations by adding missing information such as by replacing bare URLs with full bibliographic citations an improvement because it aids verifiability and fights link rot replacing some or all general references with inline citations an improvement because it provides more verifiable information to the reader and helps maintain textsource integrity imposing one style on an article with inconsistent citation styles e.g. some of the citations in footnotes and others as parenthetical references an improvement because it makes the citations easier to understand and edit fixing errors in citation coding including incorrectly used template parameters and ref markup problems an improvement because it helps the citations to be parsed correctly combining duplicate citations see  Duplicate citations above converting parenthetical referencing to an acceptable referencing style replacing opaque namedreference names with conventional ones such as Einstein1905 instead of 27 and making citations added by other editors match the existing style if any. Do not revert someone elses contribution merely because the citation style doesnt match. If you know how to fix it then fix it. To be avoided When an article is already consistent avoid switching between major citation styles or replacing the preferred style of one academic discipline with anothers  except when moving away from deprecated styles such as parenthetical referencing adding citation templates to an article that already uses a consistent system without templates or removing citation templates from an article that uses them consistently changing where the references are defined e.g. moving reference definitions in the reflist to the prose or moving reference definitions from the prose into the reflist. Parenthetical referencing WPPARENTHETICAL redirects here. For guidelines on the use of parentheses round brackets see WPManual of Style  Brackets and parentheses. Shortcut WPPAREN Since September 2020 inline parenthetical referencing has been deprecated on Wikipedia. This includes short citations in parentheses placed within the article text itself such as Smith 2010 p. 1. This does not affect short citations that use ref tags which are not inline parenthetical references see the section on short citations above for that method. As part of the deprecation process in existing articles discussion of how best to convert inline parenthetical citations into currently accepted formats should be held if there is objection to a particular method. This should no longer be used and should be replaced with footnotes if encountered N The Sun is pretty big Miller 2005 p. 1 but the Moon is not so big Brown 2006 p. 2. The Sun is also quite hot Miller 2005 p. 3. References Brown R. 2006. Size of the Moon Scientific American 51 78. Miller E. 2005. The Sun Academic Press. Handling links in citations As noted above under What information to include it is helpful to include hyperlinks to source material when available. Here we note some issues concerning these links. Avoid embedded links Shortcut WPCSEMBED Embedded links to external websites should not be used as a form of inline citation because they are highly susceptible to linkrot. Wikipedia allowed this in its early yearsfor example by adding a link after a sentence like this httpsmedia.guardian.co.uksitestory014173160185800.html which is rendered as 1. This is no longer recommended. Raw links are not recommended in lieu of properly written out citations even if placed between ref tags like this refhttpsmedia.guardian.co.uksitestory014173160185800.htmlref. Since any citation that accurately identifies the source is better than none do not revert the goodfaith addition of partial citations. They should be considered temporary and replaced with more complete properly formatted citations as soon as possible. Embedded links should never be used to place external links in the content of an article like this Example Inc. announced their latest product .... Convenience links Further information WikipediaCopyrights  Linking to copyrighted works and HelpCitation Style 1  Online sources Shortcut WPCONLINK A convenience link is a link to a copy of your source on a web page provided by someone other than the original publisher or author. For example a copy of a newspaper article no longer available on the newspapers website may be hosted elsewhere. When offering convenience links it is important to be reasonably certain that the convenience copy is a true copy of the original without any changes or inappropriate commentary and that it does not infringe the original rightsholders copyrights. Accuracy can be assumed when the hosting website appears reliable. For academic sources the convenience link is typically a reprint provided by an openaccess repository such as the authors universitys library or institutional repository. Such green open access links are generally preferable to paywalled or otherwise commercial and unfree sources. Where several sites host a copy of the material the site selected as the convenience link should be the one whose general content appears most in line with WikipediaNeutral point of view and WikipediaVerifiability. Indicating availability Shortcut WPINDICATEAVAIL If your source is not available online it should be available in libraries archives or collections. If a citation without an external link is challenged as unavailable any of the following is sufficient to show the material to be reasonably available though not necessarily reliable providing an ISBN or OCLC number linking to an established Wikipedia article about the source the work its author or its publisher or directly quoting the material on the talk page briefly and in context. Links to sources Shortcut WPSOURCELINKS For a source available in hardcopy microform andor online omit in most cases which one you read. While it is useful to cite author title edition 
1 st 
2 nd etc. and similar information it generally is not important to cite a database such as ProQuest EBSCOhost or JSTOR see the list of academic databases and search engines or to link to such a database requiring a subscription or a third partys login. The basic bibliographic information you provide should be enough to search for the source in any of these databases that have the source. Dont add a URL that has a part of a password embedded in the URL. However you may provide the DOI ISBN or another uniform identifier if available. If the publisher offers a link to the source or its abstract that does not require a payment or a third partys login for access you may provide the URL for that link. If the source only exists online give the link even if access is restricted see WPPAYWALL. Preventing and repairing dead links See also WikipediaLink rot and HelpArchiving a source Shortcut WPDEADREF To help prevent dead links persistent identifiers are available for some sources. Some journal articles have a digital object identifier DOI some online newspapers and blogs and also Wikipedia have permalinks that are stable. When permanent links arent available consider making an archived copy of the cited document when writing the article ondemand web archiving services such as the Wayback Machine httpsweb.archive.orgsave or archive.today httpsarchive.today are fairly easy to use see preemptive archiving. Do not delete a citation merely because the URL is not working. Dead links should be repaired or replaced if possible. If you encounter a dead URL being used as a reliable source to support article content follow these steps prior to deleting it Confirm status First check the link to confirm that it is dead and not temporarily down. Search the website to see whether it has been rearranged. The online service Is it down right now can help to determine if a site is down and any information known. Check for a changed URL on the same Web site Pages are frequently moved to different locations on the same site as they become archive content rather than news. The sites error page may have a Search box alternatively in both the Google and DuckDuckGo search engines  among others  the keyterm site can be used. For instance sitenytimes.com the goose is loose. Check for web archives Many web archiving services exist for a full list see WikipediaList of web archives on Wikipedia link to their archive of the URLs content if available. Examples Internet Archive has billions of archived web pages. See WikipediaUsing the Wayback Machine. archive.today See WikipediaUsing archive.today The UK Government Web Archive httpswww.nationalarchives.gov.ukwebarchive preserves 1500 UK central government websites. The Mementos interface allows you to search multiple archiving services with a single request using the Memento protocol. Unfortunately the Mementos web page interface removes any parameters which are passed with the URL. If the URL contains a  it is unlikely to work properly. When entering the URL into the Mementos interface manually the most common change needed is to change  to 
3 F. While making only this change will not be sufficient in all cases it will work most of the time. The bookmarklet in the table below will properly encode URLs such that searches will work. If multiple archive dates are available try to use one that is most likely to be the contents of the page seen by the editor who entered the reference on the accessdate. If that parameter is not specified a search of the articles revision history can be performed to determine when the link was added to the article. For most citation templates archive locations are entered using the archiveurl archivedate and urlstatus parameters. The primary link is switched to the archive link when urlstatusdead. This retains the original link location for reference. If the web page now leads to a completely different website set urlstatususurped to hide the original website link in the citation. Note Some archives currently operate with a delay of 18 months before a link is made public. As a result editors should wait 24 months after the link is first tagged as dead before declaring that no web archive exists. Dead URLs to reliable sources should normally be tagged with dead linkdateMay 2024 so that you can estimate how long the link has been dead. Bookmarklets to check common archive sites for archives of the current page Archive.org javascriptvoidwindow.openhttpsweb.archive.orgweblocation.href archive.today  archive.is javascriptvoidwindow.openhttpsarchive.todaylocation.href Mementos interface javascriptvoidwindow.openhttpswww.webarchive.org.ukmementossearchencodeURIComponentlocation.hrefreferrerencodeURIComponentdocument.referrer Remove convenience links If the material was published on paper e.g. academic journal newspaper article magazine book then the dead URL is not necessary. Simply remove the dead URL leaving the remainder of the reference intact. Find a replacement source Search the web for quoted text the article title and parts of the URL. Consider contacting the websiteperson that originally published the reference and asking them to republish it. Ask other editors for help finding the reference somewhere else including the user who added the reference. Find a different source that says essentially the same thing as the reference in question. Remove hopelesslylost webonly sources If the source material does not exist offline and if there is no archived version of the web page be sure to wait 24 months and if you cannot find another copy of the material then the dead citation should be removed and the material it supports should be regarded as unverified if there is no other supporting citation. If it is material that is specifically required by policy to have an inline citation then please consider tagging it with citation needed. It may be appropriate for you to move the citation to the talk page with an explanation and notify the editor who added the nowdead link. Textsource integrity Shortcuts WPTSI WPINTEGRITY WPINTEGRITY redirects here. For WikiProject Integrity see WPWPINTEGRITY. When using inline citations it is important to maintain textsource integrity. The point of an inline citation is to allow readers and other editors to see which part of the material is supported by the citation that point is lost if the citation is not clearly placed. The distance between material and its source is a matter of editorial judgment but adding text without clearly placing its source may lead to allegations of original research of violations of the sourcing policy and even of plagiarism. Keeping citations close Editors should exercise caution when rearranging or inserting material to ensure that textsource relationships are maintained. References should not be moved if doing so might break the textsource relationship. If a sentence or paragraph is footnoted with a source adding new material that is not supported by the existing source to the sentenceparagraph without a source for the new text is highly misleading if placed to appear that the cited source supports it. When new text is inserted into a paragraph make sure it is supported by the existing or a new source. For example when editing text originally reading The sun is pretty big.1 Notes  Miller Edward. The Sun. Academic Press 2005 p. 1. an edit that does not imply that the new material is supported by the same reference is The sun is pretty big.1 The sun is also quite hot.2 Notes  Miller Edward. The Sun. Academic Press 2005 p. 1.  Smith John. The Suns Heat. Academic Press 2005 p. 2. Do not add other facts or assertions into a fully cited paragraph or sentence N The sun is pretty big but the moon is not so big.1 The sun is also quite hot.2 Notes  Miller Edward. The Sun. Academic Press 2005 p. 1.  Smith John. The Suns Heat. Academic Press 2005 p. 2. Include a source to support the new information. There are several ways to write this including Y The sun is pretty big1 but the moon is not so big.2 The sun is also quite hot.3 Notes  Miller Edward. The Sun. Academic Press 2005 p. 1.  Brown Rebecca. Size of the Moon Scientific American 51 78 46.  Smith John. The Suns Heat. Academic Press 2005 p. 2. Citation order WikipediaREFORDER redirects here. For the RfC see WikipediaVillage pump proposalsArchive 136  RfC AWB bot ref reordering. Shortcut WPCITEORDER There is no consensus for a specific ordering of citations and editors should not editwar over it nor make mass changes of ordering to suit personal preferences. In particular references need not be moved solely to maintain the numerical order of footnotes as they appear in the article. Bundling citations Shortcuts WPCITEBUNDLE WPBUNDLING Main page HelpCitation merging See also HelpShortened footnotes  Bundling citations and WikipediaCitation overkill Sometimes the article is more readable if multiple citations are bundled into a single footnote. For example when there are multiple sources for a given sentence and each source applies to the entire sentence the sources can be placed at the end of the sentence like this4567 Or they can be bundled into one footnote at the end of the sentence or paragraph like this4 Bundling is also useful if the sources each support a different portion of the preceding text or if the sources all support the same text. Bundling has several advantages It helps readers and other editors see at a glance which source supports which point maintaining textsource integrity It avoids the visual clutter of multiple clickable footnotes inside a sentence or paragraph It avoids the confusion of having multiple sources listed separately after sentences with no indication of which source to check for each part of the text such as this.1234 It makes it less likely that inline citations will be moved inadvertently when text is rearranged because the footnote states clearly which source supports which point. To concatenate multiple citations for the same content into a single footnote there are several layouts available as illustrated below The sun is pretty big but the moon is not so big. The sun is also quite hot.1 Notes Use Unbulleted list citebundle  For the suns size see Miller Edward. The Sun. Academic Press 2005 p. 1. For the moons size see Brown Rebecca. Size of the Moon Scientific American 2007 51 78 46. For the suns heat see Smith John. The Suns Heat. Academic Press 2005 p. 2. Use an inline paragraph  For the suns size see Miller Edward. The Sun. Academic Press 2005 p. 1. For the moons size see Brown Rebecca. Size of the Moon Scientific American 2007 51 78 46. For the suns heat see Smith John. The Suns Heat. Academic Press 2005 p. 2. Use a bullet list  Multiple sources For the suns size see Miller Edward. The Sun. Academic Press 2005 p. 1. For the moons size see Brown Rebecca. Size of the Moon Scientific American 2007 51 78 46. For the suns heat see Smith John. The Suns Heat. Academic Press 2005 p. 2. This last approach needs an introductory line like Multiple sources to prevent an unwanted linebreak after the footnote number. Simply using line breaks to separate list items breaches MOSAccessibility  Nobreaks br  line breaks ... should not be used. Unbulleted list citebundle a.k.a. Multiref was made specifically for this purpose. Some other templates in the same vein are listed at the disambiguation page TemplateMultiple references. Within a given article only a single layout should generally be used except that inline may always be appropriate for shortened references often all for the same statement  For the suns size see Miller 2005 p. 1 Brown 2007 p. 46 Smith 2005 p. 2. Intext attribution Shortcut WPINTEXT Further information WikipediaNeutral point of view  Attributing and specifying biased statements and WikipediaManual of Style  Point of view Intext attribution is the attribution inside a sentence of material to its source in addition to an inline citation after the sentence. Intext attribution may need to be used with direct speech a sources words between quotation marks or as a block quotation indirect speech a sources words modified without quotation marks and close paraphrasing. It may also be used when loosely summarizing a sources position in your own words and it should always be used for biased statements of opinion. For certain frequently discussed sources intext attribution is always recommended. It avoids inadvertent plagiarism and helps the reader see where a position is coming from. An inline citation should follow the attribution usually at the end of the sentence or paragraph in question. For example N To reach fair decisions parties must consider matters as if behind a veil of ignorance.2 Y John Rawls argues that to reach fair decisions parties must consider matters as if behind a veil of ignorance.2 Y John Rawls argues that to reach fair decisions parties must consider matters as if situated behind a veil of ignorance.2 When using intext attribution make sure it doesnt lead to an inadvertent neutrality violation. For example the following implies parity between the sources without making clear that the position of Darwin is the majority view N Charles Darwin says that human beings evolved through natural selection but John Smith writes that we arrived here in pods from Mars. Y Humans evolved through natural selection as first explained in Charles Darwins The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. Neutrality issues apart there are other ways intext attribution can mislead. The sentence below suggests The New York Times has alone made this important discovery N According to The New York Times the sun will set in the west this evening. Y The sun sets in the west each evening. It is preferable not to clutter articles with information best left to the references. Interested readers can click on the ref to find out the publishing journal N In an article published in The Lancet in 2012 researchers announced the discovery of the new tissue type.3 Y The discovery of the new tissue type was first published by researchers in 20
12.3  Simple facts such as this can have inline citations to reliable sources as an aid to the reader but normally the text itself is best left as a plain statement without intext attribution Y By mass oxygen is the third most abundant element in the universe after hydrogen and helium.4 Dealing with unsourced material Shortcuts WPNOCITE WPBLPCITE If an article has no references at all then If the entire article is patent nonsense tag it for speedy deletion using criterion G1. If the article is a biography of a living person it can be tagged with substprod blp to propose deletion. If its a biography of a living person and is an attack page then it should be tagged for speedy deletion using criterion G10 which will blank the page. If the article doesnt fit into the above two categories then consider finding references yourself or commenting on the article talk page or the talk page of the article creator. You may also tag the article with the unreferenced template and consider nominating it for deletion. For individual claims in an article not supported by a reference If the article is a biography of a living person then any contentious material must be removed immediately see Biographies of living persons. If the material lacking reference is seriously inappropriate it may need to be hidden from general view in which case request admin assistance. If the material added appears to be false or an expression of opinion remove it and inform the editor who added the unsourced material. The uwunsourced1 template may be placed on their talk page. In any other case consider finding references yourself or commenting on the article talk page or the talk page of the editor who added the unsourced material. You may place a citation needed or dubious tag against the added text. Citation templates and tools Shortcut WPCITECONSENSUS Further information WikipediaCitation templates and HelpCitation tools For a comparison of citations using templates with citations written freehand see WikipediaCiting sourcesExample edits for different methods  Footnotes. Citation templates can be used to format citations in a consistent way. The use of citation templates is neither encouraged nor discouraged an article should not be switched between templated and nontemplated citations without good reason and consensus  see Variation in citation methods above. If citation templates are used in an article the parameters should be accurate. It is inappropriate to set parameters to false values to cause the template to render as if it were written in some style other than the style normally produced by the template e.g. MLA style. Metadata Citations may be accompanied by metadata though it is not mandatory. Most citation templates on Wikipedia use the COinS standard. Metadata such as this allow browser plugins and other automated software to make citation data accessible to the user for instance by providing links to their librarys online copies of the cited works. In articles that format citations manually metadata may be added manually in a span according to the COinS specification. Citation generation tools See also HelpCitation tools Shortcut WPCITEGENERATORS The Wikipedia Visual Editor now helps users format insert and edit sources by simply providing a DOI URL ISBN etc. see WPREFVISUAL. The citation generation tool of the Visual Editor WPREFVISUAL can also be used when editing the article source for users who have enabled the 2017 wikitext editor in their preferences. Citer is an allpurpose tool that generates complete scientific citations UserArk
25 RefScript a JavaScript bookmarklet  creates references in one click works for many newspapers UserV1
11 PjsWebRef a script or bookmarklet automating the filling of the cite web template. You use the script on the page you want to cite. UserBadgettrg Biomedical citation maker. uses Pubmed ID PMID or DOI or PMCID or NCT. Adds links to ACP Journal Club and EvidenceBased Medicine comments if present. WPReFill  adds titles to bare url references and other cleanup TemplateRef info which can aid evaluating what kind of citation style was used to write the article Based on Citoid Cite templates in Visual Editor UserSalix albaCitoid a client for the mwcitoid server which generates Citation Style 1 templates from urls. Hosted on tools.wmflabs.org WikipediarefToolbar 
2.0  used in the Source Editor Citation bot Yadkard A webbased tool for generating shortened footnotes and citation using Google Books URLs DOI or ISBN. Also supports some news websites. Wikipedia template filling  generates Vancouver style citations from PMIDs PubMed IDs. Duplicate reference finders Finding duplicate references by examining reference lists is difficult. There are some tools that can help AutoWikiBrowser AWB will identify and usually correct exact duplicates between ref...ref tags. See the documentation. URL Extractor For Web Pages and Text can identify Web citations with the exact same URL but otherwise possibly different. Most differences are not significant but sometimes different page numbers from the same URL are cited. Occasionally references to the same Web page might be followed by different nonsignificant tracking parameters utm ... ixzz... and will not be listed as duplicates. Step 1 click Enter URL enter paste the URL of the Wikipedia article and click Load Step 2 tick Only Display duplicate URL addresses which unticks Remove duplicate addresses Optional Tick the radio button Do not show tick the box at the beginning of its line and enter paste into the box web.archive.orgwikipediawikimediawikiquotewikidataworldcat Step 3 Click Extract. Then the duplicates will be listed and must be manually merged. There will often be false positives web.archive.org URLs in particular are a nuisance as they contain the original URLs which show as duplicates. The optional part of Step 2 eliminates the archive URLs but unfortunately the list of duplicates includes the archived pages. The wiki URLs are less of a problem as they can just be ignored. Programming tools See also HelpCitation tools  Tools Wikicite is a free program that helps editors to create citations for their Wikipedia contributions using citation templates. It is written in Visual Basic .NET making it suitable only for users with the .NET Framework installed on Windows or for other platforms the Mono alternative framework. Wikicite and its source code is freely available see the developers page for further details. UserRichiez has tools to automatically handle citations for a whole article at a time. Converts occurrences of pmidXXXXXXXX PubMed or isbnXXXXXXXXXX to properly formatted footnote or Harvardstyle references. Written in Ruby and requires a working installation with basic libraries. pubmed
2 wikipedia.xsl an XSL stylesheet transforming the XML output of PubMed to Wikipedia refs. Reference management software Reference management software can output formatted citations in several styles including BibTeX RIS or Wikipedia citation template styles. Comparison of reference management software  sidebyside comparison of various reference management software WikipediaCiting sources with Zotero  essay on using Zotero to quickly add citations to articles. Zotero by Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media license Affero GPL is opensource software with local reference database which can be synchronized between several computers over the online database up to 300 MB without payment. EndNote by Thomson Reuters license proprietary Mendeley by Elsevier license proprietary Paperpile by Paperpile LLC license proprietary Papers by Springer license proprietary See also How to cite WikipediaReferences dos and donts  a concise summary of some of the most important guidance on this page HelpReferencing for beginners  a simple practical guide to getting started HelpHow to mine a source  case study on getting maximum information from cited material WikipediaVerification methods  listing examples of the most common ways that citations are used in Wikipedia articles WikipediaImproving referencing efforts  essay on why references are important WikipediaCitation templates  a full listing of various styles for citing all sorts of materials WikipediaCiting sourcesExample edits for different methods  showing comparative edit mode representations for different citation methods and techniques WikipediaCiting sourcesFurther considerations  additional considerations for citing sources WikipediaInline citation  more information on inline citations WikipediaNesting footnotes  howto guide on nesting footnotes WikipediaManual of StyleLayout  Further reading  for information about the Further reading section WikipediaExternal links  for information about the External links section WikipediaPlagiarism  Publicdomain sources  guideline covering the inclusion of material in the public domain WikipediaScientific citation guidelines  guidelines for dealing with scientific and mathematical articles WikipediaWikiProject Resource ExchangeShared Resources  project guide on finding resources MediaWikiExtensionCite  details of the software which support the ref parser hooks Citation problems TemplateIrrelevant citation  inline template to note source simply is not relevant to the material TemplateMore citations needed  template to add to article or section where citations are insufficient TemplateTextsource  template to add to article or section where textsource integrity is questioned WikipediaCitation needed  explanation of template to tag statements that need a citation WikipediaCitation overkill  why too many citations on one fact can be a bad thing WikipediaCopyright problems  in case of text that has been copied verbatim inappropriately WikipediaLink rot  guide to preventing link rot WikipediaMore seasoning doesnt mean more flavor  an essay about how less detail doesnt always mean less info WikipediaYou dont need to cite that the sky is blue  an essay advising do not cite already obvious information WikipediaYou do need to cite that the sky is blue  an essay advising just because something appears obvious to you does not mean it is obvious to everyone WikipediaVideo links  an essay discussing the use of citations linking to YouTube and other usersubmitted video sites WikipediaWikiProject Citation cleanup  a group of people devoted to cleaning up citations WikipediaReference database  essayproposal Changing citation style formats WPCITEVAR Notes  Words like citation and reference are used interchangeably on the English Wikipedia. On talk pages where the language can be more informal or in edit summaries or templates where space is a consideration reference is often abbreviated ref with the plural refs. Footnote may refer specifically to citations using ref tag formatting or to explanatory text endnotes specifically refers to citations placed at the end of the page. See also WikipediaGlossary.  See this July 2007 discussion for more detail on why scrolling reference lists should not be used.  The arbitration committee ruled in 2006 Wikipedia does not mandate styles in many different areas these include but are not limited to American vs. British spelling date formats and citation style. Where Wikipedia does not mandate a specific style editors should not attempt to convert Wikipedia to their own preferred style nor should they edit articles for the sole purpose of converting them to their preferred style or removing examples of or references to styles which they dislike.  See discussion.  One reason this guideline does not standardize section headings for citations and explanatory notes is that Wikipedia draws editors from many disciplines history English science etc. each with its own note and reference sectionnaming convention or conventions. For more see WikipediaPerennial proposals  Changes to standard appendices  Establish a house citation style and TemplateCnote
2 example. Further reading Online Style Guide. New Oxford Style Manual. Oxford UK Oxford University Press. 2016. ISBN 9780198767251. The Chicago Manual of Style 
17 th ed.. Chicago University of Chicago Press. 2017. ISBN 9780226287058. Academic Writing Citing Sources. Writers Workshop. University of Illinois. Citation Style Guides  Management Tools. Library Guides. LIU Post. Citing Help  howto. Concordia University Library. Citation Help. Subject Guides. University of Iowa. Guide to Citation Style Guides. Journalism Resources. University of Iowa. Library Citing Sources  Citation Generators. Capital Community College. Research and Citation Resources. Online Writing Lab. Purdue University. The Writers Handbook Documentation. Writing Center. University of WisconsinMadison. ACS Style Guide. Research Guides. University of WisconsinMadison. Samples of Formatted References for Authors of Journal Articles. MEDLINE and PubMed The Resources Guide. United States National Library of Medicine. 26 April 2018. External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Citation needed. reFill. Toolforge. WPReFill.  tool that expands bare references semiautomatically Wikipedia editing basics Citing sources part 1 YouTube. Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia editing basics Citing sources part 2 YouTube. Wikimedia Foundation. v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines  Five pillars Ignore all rules Content  P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright Copyright violations Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Medicine Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Dont create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct  P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paidcontribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion  P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement  P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing  P Editing policy G Article size Summary style Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broadconcept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories lists and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content  G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF  P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P List of policies G List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Referencetags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and donts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation Edit refs Refref Refref2 Refstart Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Citation Style 1 General templates Cite book books Cite conference conference papers Cite document short standalone offline documents Cite encyclopedia edited collections Cite interview interviews Cite journal academic journals Cite magazine magazines Cite mailing list public mailing lists Cite map maps Cite news news articles Cite newsgroup online newsgroups Cite press release press releases Cite report unpublished reports Cite sign signs plaques Cite speech speeches Cite tech report technical reports Cite thesis theses Cite web web sources Preprint templates Cite arXiv Cite bioRxiv Cite CiteSeerX Cite medRxiv Cite SSRN Audiovisualrelated Cite AV media Cite AV media notes Cite episode Cite podcast Cite serial Categories Citation Style 1 templates Citation Style 1 specificsource templates Documentation Citation Style documentation Citation Style 1 noticeboard Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaCitingsourcesoldid1221128882 Categories Wikipedia content guidelines Wikipedia howto Wikipedia style guidelines Wikipedia verifiability Hidden categories Wikipedia semiprotected project pages Wikipedia moveprotected project pages Wikipedia citation administration This page was last edited on 28 April 2024 at 0149 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width