File:Statue Achoris Petrie 01.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStatue Achoris Petrie 01.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Size of this preview 400  600 pixels. Other resolutions 160  240 pixels  466  699 pixels. Original file 466  699 pixels file size 46 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStatue Achoris Petrie 01.jpg English Upper half of statue of pharaoh Achoris. Reign of Achoris 
29 th Dynasty Late Period. Now in Cairo. Date 1905 Source A History of Egypt III p. 376 Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1905 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1857 6 January 2016 466  699 46 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Hakor List of pharaohs Twentyninth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on arz.wikipedia.org       Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Dinastia XXIX dEgipte Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Hakor Usage on el.wikipedia.org    Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Akoris Usage on fa.wikipedia.org      Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Hakor Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Achris Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 29 Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Achoris Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on si.wikipedia.org       Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Hakor Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Hakor Usage on ta.wikipedia.org     Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Hakor Phc bch ti chu Phi Usage on www.wikidata.org Q360012 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileStatueAchorisPetrie01.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width