Sparta - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Names 
2 Geography 
3 Mythology 
4 Archaeology of the classical period Toggle Archaeology of the classical period subsection 
4.1 Menelaion 
5 History Toggle History subsection 
5.1 Prehistory dark age and archaic period 
5.2 Classical Sparta 
5.3 Hellenistic and Roman Sparta 
5.4 Postclassical and modern Sparta 
6 Structure of Classical Spartan society Toggle Structure of Classical Spartan society subsection 
6.1 Constitution 
6.2 Citizenship 
6.3 Non citizens 

6.3.1 Helots 

6.3.2 Perioikoi 
6.4 Economy 
7 Life in Classical Sparta Toggle Life in Classical Sparta subsection 
7.1 Birth and death 
7.2 Education 
7.3 Military life 
7.4 Agriculture food and diet 
7.5 Marriage 
8 Role of women Toggle Role of women subsection 
8.1 Political social and economic equality 
8.2 Historic women 
9 Laconophilia 
10 Notable ancient Spartans 
11 See also 
12 Notes 
13 References 
14 Sources 
15 Further reading 
16 External links Toggle the table of contents Sparta 98 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg     Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  Cebuano etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Estremeu Euskara  Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano  Jawa    Kurd Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Magyar    Bahasa Melayu   Nederlands    Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha      Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Tarandne  Trke Trkmene   Vneto Ting Vit  Winaray   emaitka  Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Coordinates 374
55 N 2225
25 E  
37.0 81
94 N 
22.4 23
61 E  
37.0 8194 
22.4 2361 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Citystate in ancient Greece This article is about the ancient citystate. For modernday Sparta see Sparta Laconia. For other uses see Sparta disambiguation. Spartan redirects here. For other uses see Spartan disambiguation. For the mythical people associated with Ares see Spartoi. Lacedaemon redirects here. For the king see Lacedaemon mythology. Lacedaemon  Ancient Greek 9
00 s192 BC Territory of ancient Sparta before 371 BC with Perioecic cities in blue Capital Sparta 374
55 N 2225
25 E  
37.0 81
94 N 
22.4 23
61 E  
37.0 8194 
22.4 2361 Common languages Doric Greek Religion Greek polytheism Government Diarchy King  c.930900 BC Agis I  207192 BC Nabis Legislature Ephors Gerousia Historical era Classical antiquity  Foundation 9
00 s BC  Messenian War 685668 BC  Battle of Thermopylae 480 BC  Peloponnesian War 431404 BC  Battle of Mantinea 362 BC  Annexed by Achaea 192 BC Preceded by Succeeded by Greek Dark Ages Achaean League This article contains special characters. Without proper rendering support you may see question marks boxes or other symbols. Hollow Lacedaemon. Site of the Menelaion the ancient shrine to Helen and Menelaus constructed in the Bronze Age city that stood on the hill of Therapne on the left bank of the Eurotas River overlooking the future site of Dorian Sparta. Across the valley the successive ridges of Mount Taygetus are in evidence. Sparta1 was a prominent citystate in Laconia in ancient Greece. In antiquity the citystate was known as Lacedaemon  Lakedamn while the name Sparta referred to its main settlement on the banks of the Eurotas River in the Eurotas valley of Laconia in southeastern Peloponnese.2 Around 650 BC it rose to become the dominant military landpower in ancient Greece. Given its military preeminence Sparta was recognized as the leading force of the unified Greek military during the GrecoPersian Wars in rivalry with the rising naval power of Athens.3 Sparta was the principal enemy of Athens during the Peloponnesian War 431404 BC4 from which it emerged victorious after the Battle of Aegospotami. The decisive Battle of Leuctra against Thebes in 371 BC ended the Spartan hegemony although the citystate maintained its political independence until its forced integration into the Achaean League in 192 BC. The city nevertheless recovered much autonomy after the Roman conquest of Greece in 146 BC and prospered during the Roman Empire as its antiquarian customs attracted many Roman tourists. However Sparta was sacked in 396 AD by the Visigothic king Alaric and underwent a long period of decline especially in the Middle Ages when many of its citizens moved to Mystras. Modern Sparta is the capital of the southern Greek region of Laconia and a center for processing citrus and olives. Sparta was unique in ancient Greece for its social system and constitution which were supposedly introduced by the semimythical legislator Lycurgus. His laws configured the Spartan society to maximize military proficiency at all costs focusing all social institutions on military training and physical development. The inhabitants of Sparta were stratified as Spartiates citizens with full rights mothakes free nonSpartiate people descended from Spartans perioikoi free nonSpartiates and helots stateowned enslaved nonSpartan locals. Spartiate men underwent the rigorous agoge training regimen and Spartan phalanx brigades were widely considered to be among the best in battle. Spartan women enjoyed considerably more rights than elsewhere in classical antiquity. Sparta was frequently a subject of fascination in its own day as well as in Western culture following the revival of classical learning. The admiration of Sparta is known as Laconophilia. Bertrand Russell wrote Sparta had a double effect on Greek thought through the reality and through the myth.... The reality enabled the Spartans to defeat Athens in war the myth influenced Platos political theory and that of countless subsequent writers.... The ideals that it favors had a great part in framing the doctrines of Rousseau Nietzsche and National Socialism.5 Names Eurotas River The ancient Greeks used one of three words to refer to the Spartan citystate and its location. First Sparta refers primarily to the main cluster of settlements in the valley of the Eurotas River.6 The second word Lacedaemon 7 was often used as an adjective and is the name referenced in the works of Homer and the historians Herodotus and Thucydides. The third term Laconice  referred to the immediate area around the town of Sparta the plateau east of the Taygetos mountains8 and sometimes to all the regions under direct Spartan control including Messenia. The earliest attested term referring to Lacedaemon is the Mycenaean Greek  rakedaminijo Lakedaimonian written in Linear B syllabic script
9 n 1 the equivalent of the later Greek  Lakedaimonios Latin Lacedaemonius.1516 Herodotus seems to use Lacedaemon for the Mycenaean Greek citadel at Therapne in contrast to the lower town of Sparta. This term could be used synonymously with Sparta but typically it denoted the terrain in which the city was located.17 In Homer it is typically combined with epithets of the countryside wide lovely shining and most often hollow and broken full of ravines18 suggesting the Eurotas Valley. Sparta on the other hand is described as the country of lovely women an epithet for people. The residents of Sparta were often called Lacedaemonians. This epithet utilized the plural of the adjective Lacedaemonius Greek  Latin Lacedaemonii but also Lacedaemones. The ancients sometimes used a backformation referring to the land of Lacedaemon as Lacedaemonian country. As most words for country were feminine the adjective was in the feminine Lacedaemonia  Lakedaimonia. Eventually the adjective came to be used alone. Lacedaemonia was not in general use during the classical period and before. It does occur in Greek as an equivalent of Laconia and Messenia during the Roman and early Byzantine periods mostly in ethnographers and lexica of place names. For example Hesychius of Alexandrias Lexicon 
5 th century AD defines Agiadae as a place in Lacedaemonia named after Agis.19 The actual transition may be captured by Isidore of Sevilles Etymologiae 
7 th century AD an etymological dictionary. Isidore relied heavily on Orosius Historiarum Adversum Paganos 
5 th century AD and Eusebius of Caesareas Chronicon early 
5 th century AD as did Orosius. The latter defines Sparta to be Lacedaemonia Civitas20 but Isidore defines Lacedaemonia as founded by Lacedaemon son of Semele which is consistent with Eusebius explanation.21 There is a rare use perhaps the earliest of Lacedaemonia in Diodorus Siculus The Library of History22 but probably with  chra country suppressed. Lakedaimona was until 2006 the name of a province in the modern Greek prefecture of Laconia. Geography Antique Map of Classical City of Sparta based on ancient sources and not archaeology. Sparta is located in the region of Laconia in the southeastern Peloponnese. Ancient Sparta was built on the banks of the Eurotas the largest river of Laconia which provided it with a source of fresh water. The Eurotas valley was a natural fortress bounded to the west by Mt. Taygetus 2407 m and to the east by Mt. Parnon 1935 m. To the north Laconia is separated from Arcadia by hilly uplands reaching 1000 m in altitude. These natural defenses worked to Spartas advantage and protected it from sacking and invasion. Though landlocked Sparta had a vassal harbor Gytheio on the Laconian Gulf. Mythology Lacedaemon Greek  was a mythical king of Laconia.23 The son of Zeus by the nymph Taygete he married Sparta the daughter of Eurotas by whom he became the father of Amyclas Eurydice and Asine. As king he named his country after himself and the city after his wife.23 He was believed to have built the sanctuary of the Charites which stood between Sparta and Amyclae and to have given to those divinities the names of Cleta and Phaenna. A shrine was erected to him in the neighborhood of Therapne. Tyrtaeus an archaic era Spartan writer is the earliest source to connect the origin myth of the Spartans to the lineage of the hero Heracles later authors such as Diodorus Siculus Herodotus and Apollodorus also made mention of Spartans understanding themselves to be descendants of Heracles.24252627 Archaeology of the classical period The theater of ancient Sparta with Mt. Taygetus in the background. Thucydides wrote Suppose the city of Sparta to be deserted and nothing left but the temples and the groundplan distant ages would be very unwilling to believe that the power of the Lacedaemonians was at all equal to their fame. Their city is not built continuously and has no splendid temples or other edifices it rather resembles a group of villages like the ancient towns of Hellas and would therefore make a poor show.2829 Until the early 
20 th century the chief ancient buildings at Sparta were the theatre of which however little showed above ground except portions of the retaining walls the socalled Tomb of Leonidas a quadrangular building perhaps a temple constructed of immense blocks of stone and containing two chambers the foundation of an ancient bridge over the Eurotas the ruins of a circular structure some remains of late Roman fortifications several brick buildings and mosaic pavements.28 The remaining archaeological wealth consisted of inscriptions sculptures and other objects collected in the local museum founded by Stamatakis in 1872 and enlarged in 1907. Partial excavation of the round building was undertaken in 1892 and 1893 by the American School at Athens. The structure has been since found to be a semicircular retaining wall of Hellenic origin that was partly restored during the Roman period.28 Ruins of the Temple of Artemis Orthia In 1904 the British School at Athens began a thorough exploration of Laconia and in the following year excavations were made at Thalamae Geronthrae and Angelona near Monemvasia. In 1906 excavations began in Sparta itself.28 A small circus as described by Leake proved to be a theatrelike building constructed soon after 200 AD around the altar and in front of the Temple of Artemis Orthia. It is believed that musical and gymnastic contests took place here as well as the famous flogging ordeal administered to Spartan boys diamastigosis. The temple which can be dated to the 
2 nd century BC rests on the foundation of an older temple of the 
6 th century and close beside it were found the remains of a yet earlier temple dating from the 
9 th or even the 
10 th century. The votive offerings in clay amber bronze ivory and lead dating from the 
9 th to the 
4 th centuries BC which were found in great profusion within the precinct range supply invaluable information about early Spartan art.28 Remaining section of wall that surrounded ancient Sparta In 1907 the location of the sanctuary of Athena of the Brazen House  Chalkioikos was determined to be on the acropolis immediately above the theatre. Though the actual temple is almost completely destroyed the site has produced the longest extant archaic inscription in Laconia numerous bronze nails and plates and a considerable number of votive offerings. The citywall built in successive stages from the 
4 th to the 
2 nd century was traced for a great part of its circuit which measured 48 stades or nearly 10 km 6 miles Polyb. 
1 X. 21. The late Roman wall enclosing the acropolis part of which probably dates from the years following the Gothic raid of 262 AD was also investigated. Besides the actual buildings discovered a number of points were situated and mapped in a general study of Spartan topography based upon the description of Pausanias.28 In terms of domestic archaeology little is known about Spartan houses and villages before the Archaic period but the best evidence comes from excavations at Nichoria in Messenia where postholes have been found. These villages were open and consisted of small and simple houses built with stone foundations and clay walls.30 Menelaion Main article Menelaion The Menelaion The Menelaion is a shrine associated with Menelaus located east of Sparta by the river Eurotas on the hill Profitis Ilias Coordinates 3703
57 N 2227
13 E  
37.0 6
59 N 
22.4 5
36 E  
37.0 659 
22.4 536. Built around the early 
8 th century BC the Spartans believed it had been the former residence of Menelaus. In 1970 the British School in Athens started excavations around the Menelaion in an attempt to locate Mycenaean remains in the area. Among other findings they uncovered the remains of two Mycenaean mansions and found the first offerings dedicated to Helen and Menelaus. These mansions were destroyed by earthquake and fire and archaeologists consider them the possible palace of Menelaus himself.
31 better source needed Excavations made from the early 19
90 s to the present suggest that the area around the Menelaion in the southern part of the Eurotas valley seems to have been the center of Mycenaean Laconia.32 The Mycenaean settlement was roughly triangular in shape with its apex pointed towards the north. Its area was approximately equal to that of the newer Sparta but denudation has wreaked havoc with its buildings and nothing is left of its original structures save for ruined foundations and broken potsherds.28 History Main article History of Sparta Prehistory dark age and archaic period The prehistory of Sparta is difficult to reconstruct because the literary evidence was written far later than the events it describes and is distorted by oral tradition.33 The earliest certain evidence of human settlement in the region of Sparta consists of pottery dating from the Middle Neolithic period found in the vicinity of Kouphovouno some two kilometres 
1.2  miles southsouthwest of Sparta.34 This civilization seems to have fallen into decline by the late Bronze Age when according to Herodotus Macedonian tribes from the north called Dorians by those they conquered marched into the Peloponnese and subjugating the local tribes settled there.33 The Dorians seem to have set about expanding the frontiers of Spartan territory almost before they had established their own state.35 They fought against the Argive Dorians to the east and southeast and also the Arcadian Achaeans to the northwest. The evidence suggests that Sparta relatively inaccessible because of the topography of the Taygetan plain was secure from early on it was never fortified.35 Lycurgus Nothing distinctive in the archaeology of the Eurotas River Valley identifies the Dorians or the Dorian Spartan state. The prehistory of the Neolithic the Bronze Age and the Dark Age the Early Iron Age at this moment must be treated apart from the stream of Dorian Spartan history.citation needed The legendary period of Spartan history is believed to fall into the Dark Age. It treats the mythic heroes such as the Heraclids and the Perseids offering a view of the occupation of the Peloponnesus that contains both fantastic and possibly historical elements. The subsequent protohistoric period combining both legend and historical fragments offers the first credible history. Between the 
8 th and 
7 th centuries BC the Spartans experienced a period of lawlessness and civil strife later attested by both Herodotus and Thucydides.36 As a result they carried out a series of political and social reforms of their own society which they later attributed to a semimythical lawgiver Lycurgus.37 Several writers throughout antiquity including Herodotus Xenophon and Plutarch have attempted to explain Spartan exceptionalism as a result of the socalled Lycurgan Reforms.Xenophon Constitution of the Lacedaimonians chapter 1383940 Classical Sparta In the Second Messenian War Sparta established itself as a local power in the Peloponnesus and the rest of Greece. During the following centuries Spartas reputation as a landfighting force was unequalled.41 At its peak around 500 BC Sparta had some 2000035000 citizens plus numerous helots and perioikoi. The likely total of 4000050000 made Sparta one of the larger Greek citystates4243 however according to Thucydides the population of Athens in 431 BC was 360000610000 making it much larger.n 2 In 480 BC a small force led by King Leonidas about 300 full Spartiates 700 Thespians and 400 Thebans although these numbers were lessened by earlier casualties45 made a legendary last stand at the Battle of Thermopylae against the massive Persian army led by Xerxes.46 The Spartans received advance warning of the Persian invasion from their deposed king Demaratus which prompted them to consult the Delphic oracle. According to Herodotus the Pythia proclaimed that either one of the kings of Sparta had to die or Sparta would be destroyed.47 This prophecy was fulfilled after king Leonidas died in the battle. The superior weaponry strategy and bronze armour of the Greek hoplites and their phalanx fighting formation again proved their worth one year later when Sparta assembled its full strength and led a Greek alliance against the Persians at the Battle of Plataea in 479 BC. Ancient Sparta. The decisive Greek victory at Plataea put an end to the GrecoPersian War along with Persian ambitions to expand into Europe. Even though this war was won by a panGreek army credit was given to Sparta who besides providing the leading forces at Thermopylae and Plataea had been the de facto leader of the entire Greek expedition.48 In 464 BC a violent earthquake occurred along the Sparta faultline destroying much of what was Sparta and many other citystates in ancient Greece. This earthquake is marked by scholars as one of the key events that led to the First Peloponnesian War. In later Classical times Sparta along with Athens Thebes and Persia were the main powers fighting for supremacy in the northeastern Mediterranean. In the course of the Peloponnesian War Sparta a traditional land power acquired a navy which managed to overpower the previously dominant flotilla of Athens ending the Athenian Empire. At the peak of its power in the early 
4 th century BC Sparta had subdued many of the main Greek states and even invaded the Persian provinces in Anatolia modern day Turkey a period known as the Spartan hegemony. During the Corinthian War Sparta faced a coalition of the leading Greek states Thebes Athens Corinth and Argos. The alliance was initially backed by Persia which feared further Spartan expansion into Asia.49 Sparta achieved a series of land victories but many of her ships were destroyed at the Battle of Cnidus by a GreekPhoenician mercenary fleet that Persia had provided to Athens. The event severely damaged Spartas naval power but did not end its aspirations of invading further into Persia until Conon the Athenian ravaged the Spartan coastline and provoked the old Spartan fear of a helot revolt.50 After a few more years of fighting in 387 BC the Peace of Antalcidas was established according to which all Greek cities of Ionia would return to Persian control and Persias Asian border would be free of the Spartan threat.50 The effects of the war were to reaffirm Persias ability to interfere successfully in Greek politics and to affirm Spartas weakened hegemonic position in the Greek political system.51 Sparta entered its longterm decline after a severe military defeat to Epaminondas of Thebes at the Battle of Leuctra. This was the first time that a full strength Spartan army lost a land battle. As Spartan citizenship was inherited by blood Sparta increasingly faced a helot population that vastly outnumbered its citizens. The alarming decline of Spartan citizens was commented on by Aristotle. Hellenistic and Roman Sparta Medieval depiction of Sparta from the Nuremberg Chronicle 1493 Sparta never fully recovered from its losses at Leuctra in 371 BC and the subsequent helot revolts. In 338 Philip II invaded and devastated much of Laconia turning the Spartans out though he did not seize Sparta itself.52 Even during its decline Sparta never forgot its claim to be the defender of Hellenism and its Laconic wit. An anecdote has it that when Philip II sent a message to Sparta saying If I invade Laconia I shall turn you out.53 the Spartans responded with the single terse reply  if.545556 When Philip created the League of Corinth on the pretext of unifying Greece against Persia the Spartans chose not to join since they had no interest in joining a panGreek expedition unless it were under Spartan leadership. Thus upon defeating the Persians at the Battle of the Granicus Alexander the Great sent to Athens 300 suits of Persian armour with the following inscription Alexander son of Philip and all the Greeks except the Spartans give these offerings taken from the foreigners who live in Asia. Sparta continued to be one of the Peloponesian powers until its eventual loss of independence in 192 BC. During Alexanders campaigns in the east the Spartan king Agis III sent a force to Crete in 333 BC to secure the island for the Persian interest.5758 Agis next took command of allied Greek forces against Macedon gaining early successes before laying siege to Megalopolis in 331 BC. A large Macedonian army under general Antipater marched to its relief and defeated the Spartanled force in a pitched battle.59 More than 5300 of the Spartans and their allies were killed in battle and 3500 of Antipaters troops.60 Agis now wounded and unable to stand ordered his men to leave him behind to face the advancing Macedonian army so that he could buy them time to retreat. On his knees the Spartan king slew several enemy soldiers before being finally killed by a javelin.61 Alexander was merciful and he only forced the Spartans to join the League of Corinth which they had previously refused.62 During the Punic Wars Sparta was an ally of the Roman Republic. Spartan political independence was put to an end when it was eventually forced into the Achaean League after its defeat in the decisive Laconian War by a coalition of other Greek citystates and Rome and the resultant overthrow of its final king Nabis in 192 BC. Sparta played no active part in the Achaean War in 146 BC when the Achaean League was defeated by the Roman general Lucius Mummius. Subsequently Sparta became a free city under Roman rule some of the institutions of Lycurgus were restored63 and the city became a tourist attraction for the Roman elite who came to observe exotic Spartan customs.n 3 In 214 AD Roman emperor Caracalla in his preparation for his campaign against Parthia recruited a 5
00 man Spartan cohort lokhos. Herodian described this unit as a phalanx implying it fought like the old Spartans as hoplites or even as a Macedonian phalanx. Despite this a gravestone of a fallen legionary named Marcus Aurelius Alexys shows him lightly armed with a piloslike cap and a wooden club. The unit was presumably discharged in 217 after Caracalla was assassinated.68 An exchange of letters in the deuterocanonical First Book of Maccabees expresses a Jewish claim to kinship with the Spartans Areus king of the Lacedemonians to Onias the high priest greeting It is found in writing that the Lacedemonians and Jews are brethren and that they are of the stock of Abraham Now therefore since this is come to our knowledge ye shall do well to write unto us of your prosperity. We do write back again to you that your cattle and goods are ours and ours are yours. Authorized King James Version 1 Maccabees 
12.2 0 The letters are reproduced in a variant form by Josephus.69 Jewish historian Uriel Rappaport notes that the relationship between the Jews and the Spartans expressed in this correspondence has intrigued many scholars and various explanations have been suggested for the problems raised ... including the historicity of the Jewish leader and high priest Jonathans letter to the Spartans the authenticity of the letter of Arius to Onias cited in Jonathans letter and the supposed brotherhood of the Jews and the Spartans. Rappaport is clear that the authenticity of the reply letter of Arius is based on even less firm foundations than the letter of Jonathan.70 Spartans long spurned the idea of building a defensive wall around their city believing they made the citys men soft in terms of their warrior abilities. A wall was finally erected after 184 BCE after the peak of the citystates power had come and gone.71 Postclassical and modern Sparta In 396 AD Sparta was sacked by Visigoths under Alaric I.7273 According to Byzantine sources some parts of the Laconian region remained pagan until well into the 
10 th century. The Tsakonian language still spoken in Tsakonia is the only surviving descendant of the ancient Doric language. 74 In the Middle Ages the political and cultural center of Laconia shifted to the nearby settlement of Mystras and Sparta fell further in even local importance. Modern Sparta was refounded in 1834 by a decree of King Otto of Greece. Structure of Classical Spartan society Constitution Main article Spartan Constitution Structure of the Spartan Constitution Sparta was an oligarchy. The state was ruled by two hereditary kings of the Agiad and Eurypontid families75 both supposedly descendants of Heracles and equal in authority so that one could not act against the power and political enactments of his colleague.28 The duties of the kings were primarily religious judicial and military. As chief priests of the state they maintained communication with the Delphian sanctuary whose pronouncements exercised great authority in Spartan politics. In the time of Herodotus c. 450 BC their judicial functions had been restricted to cases dealing with heiresses epikleroi adoptions and the public roads the meaning of the last term is unclear in Herodotus text and has been interpreted in a number of ways. Aristotle describes the kingship at Sparta as a kind of unlimited and perpetual generalship Pol. iii. 12
85 a while Isocrates refers to the Spartans as subject to an oligarchy at home to a kingship on campaign iii. 
24.2 8 Civil and criminal cases were decided by a group of officials known as the ephors as well as a council of elders known as the Gerousia. The Gerousia consisted of 28 elders over the age of 60 elected for life and usually part of the royal households and the two kings.76 High state decisions were discussed by this council who could then propose policies to the damos the collective body of Spartan citizenry who would select one of the alternatives by vote.7778 Royal prerogatives were curtailed over time. From the period of the Persian wars the king lost the right to declare war and was accompanied in the field by two ephors. He was supplanted by the ephors also in the control of foreign policy. Over time the kings became mere figureheads except in their capacity as generals. Political power was transferred to the ephors and Gerousia.28 An assembly of citizens called the Ekklesia was responsible for electing men to the Gerousia for life. Citizenship Main article Spartiate The Spartan education process known as the agoge was essential for full citizenship. However usually the only boys eligible for the agoge were Spartiates those who could trace their ancestry to the original inhabitants of the city. There were two exceptions. trophimoi or foster sons were foreign students invited to study. The Athenian general Xenophon for example sent his two sons to Sparta as trophimoi. Also the son of a helot could be enrolled as a syntrophos79 if a Spartiate formally adopted him and paid his way if he did exceptionally well in training he might be sponsored to become a Spartiate.80 Spartans who could not afford to pay the expenses of the agoge could lose their citizenship. These laws meant that Sparta could not readily replace citizens lost in battle or otherwise which eventually proved near fatal as citizens became greatly outnumbered by noncitizens and even more dangerously by helots. Non citizens The other classes were the perioikoi free inhabitants who were noncitizens and the helots81 stateowned serfs. Descendants of nonSpartan citizens were forbidden the agoge. Helots Main article Helots The Spartans were a minority of the Lakonian population. The largest class of inhabitants were the helots in Classical Greek   Heltes.8283 The helots were originally free Greeks from the areas of Messenia and Lakonia whom the Spartans had defeated in battle and subsequently enslaved.84 In contrast to populations conquered by other Greek cities e.g. the Athenian treatment of Melos the male population was not exterminated and the women and children turned into chattel slaves. Instead the helots were given a subordinate position in society more comparable to serfs in medieval Europe than chattel slaves in the rest of Greece.citation needed The Spartan helots were not only agricultural workers but were also household servants both male and female would be assigned domestic duties such as woolworking.85 However the helots were not the private property of individual Spartan citizens regardless of their household duties and were instead owned by the state through the kleros system.86 Helots did not have voting or political rights. The Spartan poet Tyrtaios refers to Helots being allowed to marry and retaining 50 of the fruits of their labor.87 They also seem to have been allowed to practice religious rites and according to Thucydides own a limited amount of personal property.88 Initially helots couldnt be freed but during the middle Hellenistic period some 6000 helots accumulated enough wealth to buy their freedom for example in 227 BC. In other Greek citystates free citizens were parttime soldiers who when not at war carried on other trades. Since Spartan men were fulltime soldiers they were not available to carry out manual labour.89 The helots were used as unskilled serfs tilling Spartan land. Helot women were often used as wet nurses. Helots also travelled with the Spartan army as noncombatant serfs. At the last stand of the Battle of Thermopylae the Greek dead included not just the legendary three hundred Spartan soldiers but also several hundred Thespian and Theban troops and a number of helots.90 There was at least one helot revolt c. 465460 BC that led to prolonged conflict. By the tenth year of this war the Spartans and Messenians had reached an agreement in which Messenian rebels were allowed to leave the Peloponnese.91 They were given safe passage under the terms that they would be reenslaved if they tried to return. This agreement ended the most serious incursion into Spartan territory since their expansion in the seventh and eighth centuries BC.92 Thucydides remarked that Spartan policy is always mainly governed by the necessity of taking precautions against the helots.9394 On the other hand the Spartans trusted their helots enough in 479 BC to take a force of 35000 with them to Plataea something they could not have risked if they feared the helots would attack them or run away. Slave revolts occurred elsewhere in the Greek world and in 413 BC 20000 Athenian slaves ran away to join the Spartan forces occupying Attica.95 What made Spartas relations with her slave population unique was that the helots precisely because they enjoyed privileges such as family and property retained their identity as a conquered people the Messenians and also had effective kinship groups that could be used to organize rebellion.citation needed As the Spartiate population declined and the helot population continued to grow the imbalance of power caused increasing tension. According to Myron of Priene96 of the middle 
3 rd century BC They assign to the Helots every shameful task leading to disgrace. For they ordained that each one of them must wear a dogskin cap   kun and wrap himself in skins   diphthra and receive a stipulated number of beatings every year regardless of any wrongdoing so that they would never forget they were slaves. Moreover if any exceeded the vigour proper to a slaves condition they made death the penalty and they allotted a punishment to those controlling them if they failed to rebuke those who were growing fat.97 Plutarch also states that Spartans treated the helots harshly and cruelly they compelled them to drink pure wine which was considered dangerous  wine usually being cut with water ...and to lead them in that condition into their public halls that the children might see what a sight a drunken man is they made them to dance low dances and sing ridiculous songs... during syssitia obligatory banquets.98 Each year when the Ephors took office they ritually declared war on the helots allowing Spartans to kill them without risk of ritual pollution.99 This fight seems to have been carried out by kryptai sing.  krypts graduates of the agoge who took part in the mysterious institution known as the Krypteia.100 Thucydides states The helots were invited by a proclamation to pick out those of their number who claimed to have most distinguished themselves against the enemy in order that they might receive their freedom the object being to test them as it was thought that the first to claim their freedom would be the most high spirited and the most apt to rebel. As many as two thousand were selected accordingly who crowned themselves and went round the temples rejoicing in their new freedom. The Spartans however soon afterwards did away with them and no one ever knew how each of them perished.101102 Perioikoi Main article Perioeci The Perioikoi came from similar origins as the helots but occupied a significantly different position in Spartan society. Although they did not enjoy full citizenrights they were free and not subjected to the same restrictions as the helots. The exact nature of their subjection to the Spartans is not clear but they seem to have served partly as a kind of military reserve partly as skilled craftsmen and partly as agents of foreign trade.103 Perioikoic hoplites served increasingly with the Spartan army explicitly at the Battle of Plataea and although they may also have fulfilled functions such as the manufacture and repair of armour and weapons104 they were increasingly integrated into the combat units of the Spartan army as the Spartiate population declined.105 Economy Name vase of the Spartan artist known as the Rider Painter Laconian blackfigured kylix c. 550530 BC Full citizen Spartiates were barred by law from trade or manufacture which consequently rested in the hands of the Perioikoi.28 This lucrative monopoly in a fertile territory with a good harbors ensured the loyalty of the perioikoi.106 Despite the prohibition on menial labor or trade there is evidence of Spartan sculptors107 and Spartans were certainly poets magistrates ambassadors and governors as well as soldiers. Allegedly Spartans were prohibited from possessing gold and silver coins and according to legend Spartan currency consisted of iron bars to discourage hoarding.108109 It was not until the 2
60 s or 2
50 s BC that Sparta began to mint its own coins.110 Though the conspicuous display of wealth appears to have been discouraged this did not preclude the production of very fine decorated bronze ivory and wooden works of art as well as exquisite jewellery attested in archaeology.111 Allegedly as part of the Lycurgan Reforms in the mid
8 th century BC a massive land reform had divided property into 9000 equal portions. Each citizen received one estate a kleros which was expected to provide his living.112 The land was worked by helots who retained half the yield. From the other half the Spartiate was expected to pay his mess syssitia fees and the agoge fees for his children. However nothing is known of matters of wealth such as how land was bought sold and inherited or whether daughters received dowries.113 However from early on there were marked differences of wealth within the state and these became more serious after the law of Epitadeus some time after the Peloponnesian War which removed the legal prohibition on the gift or bequest of land.28114 By the mid
5 th century land had become concentrated in the hands of a tiny elite and the notion that all Spartan citizens were equals had become an empty pretence. By Aristotles day 384322 BC citizenship had been reduced from 9000 to less than 1000 then further decreased to 700 at the accession of Agis IV in 244 BC. Attempts were made to remedy this by imposing legal penalties upon bachelors28 but this could not reverse the trend. Life in Classical Sparta JeanPierre SaintOurs The Selection of Children in Sparta 1785. A Neoclassical imaging of what Plutarch describes. Birth and death Sparta was above all a militarist state and emphasis on military fitness began virtually at birth. According to Plutarch after birth a mother would bathe her child in wine to see whether the child was strong. If the child survived it was brought before the Gerousia by the childs father. The Gerousia then decided whether it was to be reared or not.28 It is commonly stated that if they considered it puny and deformed the baby was thrown into a chasm on Mount Taygetos known euphemistically as the Apothetae Gr.  Deposits.115116 This was in effect a primitive form of eugenics.115 Plutarch is the sole historical source for the Spartan practice of systemic infanticide motivated by eugenics.117 Sparta is often viewed as being unique in this regard however anthropologist Laila Williamson notes Infanticide has been practiced on every continent and by people on every level of cultural complexity from hunter gatherers to high civilizations. Rather than being an exception then it has been the rule.118 There is controversy about the matter in Sparta since excavations in the chasm only uncovered adult remains likely belonging to criminals119 and Greek sources contemporary to Sparta does not mention systemic infanticide motivated solely by eugenics.120 Spartan burial customs changed over time. The Archaic Spartan poet Tyrtaeus spoke of the Spartan wardead as follows Never do his the wardeads name and good fame perish But even though he is beneath the earth he is immortal Young and old alike mourn him All the city is distressed by the painful loss and his tomb and children are pointed out among the people and his childrens children and his line after them. 121 When Spartans died marked headstones would only be granted to soldiers who died in combat during a victorious campaign or women who died either in service of a divine office or in childbirth.122 These headstones likely acted as memorials rather than as grave markers. Evidence of Spartan burials is provided by the Tomb of the Lacedaimonians in Athens.citation needed Excavations at the cemetery of classical Sparta uncovered ritually pierced kantharoidlike ceramic vessels the ritual slaughter of horses and specific burial enclosures alongside individual plots. Some of the graves were reused over time.123124 In the Hellenistic Period grander twostorey monumental tombs are found at Sparta. Ten of these have been found for this period.124 Education Main article Agoge Bronze appliqu of Spartan manufacture possibly depicting Orestes 550525 BC Getty Villa When male Spartans began military training at age seven they would enter the agoge system. The agoge was designed to encourage discipline and physical toughness and to emphasize the importance of the Spartan state. Boys lived in communal messes and according to Xenophon whose sons attended the agoge the boys were fed just the right amount for them never to become sluggish through being too full while also giving them a taste of what it is not to have enough.125 In addition they were trained to survive in times of privation even if it meant stealing.126 Besides physical and weapons training boys studied reading writing music and dancing. Special punishments were imposed if boys failed to answer questions sufficiently laconically i.e. briefly and wittily.127 Spartan boys were expected to take an older male mentor usually an unmarried young man. According to some sources the older man was expected to function as a kind of substitute father and role model to his junior partner however others believe it was reasonably certain that they had sexual relations the exact nature of Spartan pederasty is not entirely clear. Xenophon an admirer of the Spartan educational system whose sons attended the agoge explicitly denies the sexual nature of the relationship.128125 Some Spartan youth apparently became members of an irregular unit known as the Krypteia. The immediate objective of this unit was to seek out and kill vulnerable helot Laconians as part of the larger program of terrorising and intimidating the helot population.129 Less information is available about the education of Spartan girls but they seem to have gone through a fairly extensive formal educational cycle broadly similar to that of the boys but with less emphasis on military training. Spartan girls received an education known as mousik. This included music dancing singing and poetry. Choral dancing was taught so Spartan girls could participate in ritual activities including the cults of Helen and Artemis.130 In this respect classical Sparta was unique in ancient Greece. In no other citystate did women receive any kind of formal education.131 Military life Main articles Spartan army and Spartiate The socalled Leonidas sculpture 
5 th century BC Archaeological Museum of Sparta Greece At age 20 the Spartan citizen began his membership in one of the syssitia dining messes or clubs composed of about fifteen members each of which every citizen was required to be a member.28 Here each group learned how to bond and rely on one another. The Spartans were not eligible for election for public office until the age of 30. Only native Spartans were considered full citizens and were obliged to undergo the training as prescribed by law as well as participate in and contribute financially to one of the syssitia.132 Sparta is thought to be the first city to practice athletic nudity and some scholars claim that it was also the first to formalize pederasty.133 According to these sources the Spartans believed that the love of an older accomplished aristocrat for an adolescent was essential to his formation as a free citizen. The agoge the education of the ruling class was they claim founded on pederastic relationships required of each citizen134 with the lover responsible for the boys training. However other scholars question this interpretation. Xenophon explicitly denies it125 but not Plutarch.135 Spartan men remained in the active reserve until age 60. Men were encouraged to marry at age 20 but could not live with their families until they left their active military service at age 30. They called themselves homoioi equals pointing to their common lifestyle and the discipline of the phalanx which demanded that no soldier be superior to his comrades.136 Insofar as hoplite warfare could be perfected the Spartans did so.137 Thucydides reports that when a Spartan man went to war his wife or another woman of some significance would customarily present him with his aspis shield and say With this or upon this      i tn i p ts meaning that true Spartans could only return to Sparta either victorious with their shield in hand or dead carried upon it.138 This is almost certainly propaganda. Spartans buried their battle dead on or near the battle field corpses were not brought back on their shield.139 Nevertheless it is fair to say that it was less of a disgrace for a soldier to lose his helmet breastplate or greaves than his shield since the former were designed to protect one man whereas the shield also protected the man on his left. Thus the shield was symbolic of the individual soldiers subordination to his unit his integral part in its success and his solemn responsibility to his comrades in arms  messmates and friends often close blood relations. According to Aristotle the Spartan military culture was actually shortsighted and ineffective. He observed It is the standards of civilized men not of beasts that must be kept in mind for it is good men not beasts who are capable of real courage. Those like the Spartans who concentrate on the one and ignore the other in their education turn men into machines and in devoting themselves to one single aspect of citys life end up making them inferior even in that.140 One of the most persistent myths about Sparta that has no basis in fact is the notion that Spartan mothers were without feelings toward their offspring and helped enforce a militaristic lifestyle on their sons and husbands.141142 The myth can be traced back to Plutarch who includes no less than 17 sayings of Spartan women all of which paraphrase or elaborate on the theme that Spartan mothers rejected their own offspring if they showed any kind of cowardice. In some of these sayings mothers revile their sons in insulting language merely for surviving a battle. These sayings purporting to be from Spartan women were far more likely to be of Athenian origin and designed to portray Spartan women as unnatural and so undeserving of pity.139 Agriculture food and diet Spartas agriculture consisted mainly of barley wine cheese grain and figs. These items were grown locally on each Spartan citizens kleros and were tended to by helots. Spartan citizens were required to donate a certain amount of what they yielded from their kleros to their syssitia or mess. These donations to the syssitia were a requirement for every Spartan citizen. All the donated food was then redistributed to feed the Spartan population of that syssitia.143 The helots who tended to the lands were fed using a portion of what they harvested.144 Marriage Plutarch reports the peculiar customs associated with the Spartan wedding night The custom was to capture women for marriage... The socalled bridesmaid took charge of the captured girl. She first shaved her head to the scalp then dressed her in a mans cloak and sandals and laid her down alone on a mattress in the dark. The bridegroom  who was not drunk and thus not impotent but was sober as always  first had dinner in the messes then would slip in undo her belt lift her and carry her to the bed.145 The husband continued to visit his wife in secret for some time after the marriage. These customs unique to the Spartans have been interpreted in various ways. One of them decidedly supports the need to disguise the bride as a man in order to help the bridegroom consummate the marriage so unaccustomed were men to womens looks at the time of their first intercourse. The abduction may have served to ward off the evil eye and the cutting of the wifes hair was perhaps part of a rite of passage that signaled her entrance into a new life.146 Role of women Main article Women in ancient Sparta Political social and economic equality Spartan women of the citizenry class enjoyed a status power and respect that was unknown in the rest of the classical world. The higher status of females in Spartan society started at birth unlike Athens Spartan girls were fed the same food as their brothers.147 Nor were they confined to their fathers house and prevented from exercising or getting fresh air as in Athens but exercised and even competed in sports.147 Most important rather than being married off at the age of 12 or 13 Spartan law forbade the marriage of a girl until she was in her late teens or early 
20 s. The reasons for delaying marriage were to ensure the birth of healthy children but the effect was to spare Spartan women the hazards and lasting health damage associated with pregnancy among adolescents. Spartan women better fed from childhood and fit from exercise stood a far better chance of reaching old age than their sisters in other Greek cities where the median age for death was 
34.6  years or roughly 10 years below that of men.148 Unlike Athenian women who wore heavy concealing clothes and were rarely seen outside the house Spartan women wore dresses peplos slit up the side to allow freer movement and moved freely about the city either walking or driving chariots. Girls as well as boys exercised possibly in the nude and young women as well as young men may have participated in the Gymnopaedia Festival of Nude Youths.149150 Another practice that was mentioned by many visitors to Sparta was the practice of wifesharing. In accordance with the Spartan belief that breeding should be between the most physically fit parents many older men allowed younger more fit men to impregnate their wives. Other unmarried or childless men might even request another mans wife to bear his children if she had previously been a strong child bearer.151 For this reason many considered Spartan women polygamous or polyandrous.152 This practice was encouraged in order that women bear as many strongbodied children as they could. The Spartan population was hard to maintain due to the constant absence and loss of the men in battle and the intense physical inspection of newborns.153 Spartan women were also literate and numerate a rarity in the ancient world. Furthermore as a result of their education and the fact that they moved freely in society engaging with their fellow male citizens they were notorious for speaking their minds even in public.154 Plato in the middle of the fourth century described womens curriculum in Sparta as consisting of gymnastics and mousike music and arts. Plato praised Spartan womens ability when it came to philosophical discussion.155 Most importantly Spartan women had economic power because they controlled their own properties and those of their husbands. It is estimated that in later Classical Sparta when the male population was in serious decline women were the sole owners of at least 35 of all land and property in Sparta.156 The laws regarding a divorce were the same for both men and women. Unlike women in Athens if a Spartan woman became the heiress of her father because she had no living brothers to inherit an epikleros the woman was not required to divorce her current spouse in order to marry her nearest paternal relative.156 Historic women Many women played a significant role in the history of Sparta.157 Queen Gorgo heiress to the throne and the wife of Leonidas I was an influential and welldocumented figure. Herodotus records that as a small girl she advised her father Cleomenes to resist a bribe. She was later said to be responsible for decoding a warning that the Persian forces were about to invade Greece after Spartan generals could not decode a wooden tablet covered in wax she ordered them to clear the wax revealing the warning.158 Plutarchs Moralia contains a collection of Sayings of Spartan Women including a laconic quip attributed to Gorgo when asked by a woman from Attica why Spartan women were the only women in the world who could rule men she replied Because we are the only women who are mothers of men.159 In 396 Cynisca sister of the Eurypontid king Agesilaos II became the first woman in Greece to win an Olympic chariot race. She won again in 392 and dedicated two monuments to commemorate her victory these being an inscription in Sparta and a set of bronze equestrian statues at the Olympic temple of Zeus.160161 Laconophilia Main article Laconophilia Laconophilia is love or admiration of Sparta and its culture or constitution. Sparta was subject of considerable admiration in its day even in rival Athens. In ancient times Many of the noblest and best of the Athenians always considered the Spartan state nearly as an ideal theory realised in practice.162 Many Greek philosophers especially Platonists would often describe Sparta as an ideal state strong brave and free from the corruptions of commerce and money. The French classicist Franois Ollier in his 1933 book Le mirage spartiate The Spartan Mirage warned that a major scholarly problem is that all surviving accounts of Sparta were by nonSpartans who often excessively idealized their subject.163 No accounts survive by the Spartans themselves if such were ever written. Young Spartans Exercising by Edgar Degas 18341917 With the revival of classical learning in Renaissance Europe Laconophilia reappeared for example in the writings of Machiavelli. The Elizabethan English constitutionalist John Aylmer compared the mixed government of Tudor England to the Spartan republic stating that Lacedemonia was the noblest and best city governed that ever was. He commended it as a model for England. The philosopher JeanJacques Rousseau contrasted Sparta favourably with Athens in his Discourse on the Arts and Sciences arguing that its austere constitution was preferable to the more sophisticated Athenian life. Sparta was also used as a model of austere purity by Revolutionary and Napoleonic France.164 A German racist strain of Laconophilia was initiated by Karl Otfried Mller who linked Spartan ideals to the supposed racial superiority of the Dorians the ethnic subgroup of the Greeks to which the Spartans belonged. In the 
20 th century this developed into Fascist admiration of Spartan ideals. Adolf Hitler praised the Spartans recommending in 1928 that Germany should imitate them by limiting the number allowed to live. He added that The Spartans were once capable of such a wise measure... The subjugation of 350000 Helots by 6000 Spartans was only possible because of the racial superiority of the Spartans. The Spartans had created the first racialist state.165 Following the invasion of the USSR Hitler viewed citizens of the USSR as like the helots under the Spartans They the Spartans came as conquerors and they took everything and so should the Germans. A Nazi officer specified that the Germans would have to assume the position of the Spartiates while... the Russians were the Helots.165 Certain early Zionists and particularly the founders of Kibbutz movement in Israel were influenced by Spartan ideals particularly in education. Tabenkin a founding father of the Kibbutz movement and the Palmach strikeforce prescribed that education for warfare should begin from the nursery that children should from kindergarten be taken to spend nights in the mountains and valleys.166167 In modern times the adjective Spartan means simple frugal avoiding luxury and comfort.168 The term laconic phrase describes the very terse and direct speech characteristic of the Spartans. Sparta also features prominently in modern popular culture most famously the Battle of Thermopylae see Battle of Thermopylae in popular culture. Notable ancient Spartans Agesilaus II  king Agis I  king Agis II  king Chilon  philosopher Chionis 
7 th century BC  athlete Clearchus of Sparta  mercenary in the army of the Ten Thousand. Cleomenes I  king Cleomenes III  king and reformer Cynisca 
4 th century BC  princess and athlete Gorgo  queen and politician Helen  princess in the Trojan War Leonidas I c. 520480 BC  king commander at the Battle of Thermopylae Lycurgus 
10 th century BC  lawgiver Lysander 
5 th
4 th century BC  general Menelaus  king during the Trojan War Nabis  king Xanthippus of Carthage  Spartan mercenary in the First Punic War See also List of ancient Greek cities Notes  Found on the following tablets TH Fq 229 TH Fq 258 TH Fq 275 TH Fq 253 TH Fq 284 TH Fq 325 TH Fq 339 TH Fq 3
82.1 0 There are also words like  rakedamonijoujo  found on the TH Gp 227 tablet10  that could perhaps mean son of the Spartan.1112 Moreover the attested words   rakedano and  rakedanore could possibly be Linear B forms of Lacedaemon itself the latter found on the MY Ge 604 tablet is considered to be the dative case form of the former which is found on the MY Ge 603 tablet. It is considered much more probable though that rakedano and rakedanore correspond to the anthroponym  Lakedanor though the latter is thought to be related etymologically to Lacedaemon.101314  According to Thucydides the Athenian citizens at the beginning of the Peloponnesian War 
5 th century BC numbered 40000 making a total of 140000 people when including their families. The metics i.e. those who did not have citizen rights and paid for the right to reside in Athens numbered a further 70000 whilst slaves were estimated at between 150000 to 4000
00.4 4  Especially the Diamastigosis at the Sanctuary of Artemis Orthia Limnai outside Sparta. There an amphitheatre was built in the 
3 rd century AD to observe the ritual whipping of Spartan youths.6465 Visiting Romans came to see Sparta as having degraded to a disgusting cult of fetish brutality.6667 References  Doric Greek  romanized Sprt Attic Greek  romanized Sprt  Cartledge 2002 p. 91.  Cartledge 2002 p. 174.  Cartledge 2002 p. 192.  Russell Bertrand 27 August 2015. Chapter XII The Influence of Sparta. History of western philosophy. Routledge. ISBN 9781138127043. OCLC 931802632.  Liddell  Scott 1940. .  Liddell  Scott 1940. .  Cartledge 2002 p. 4.  The Linear B word rakedaminijo. Palaeolexicon. Word study tool of Ancient languages.  a b c TH 229 Fq 305. TH Fq 258 305. TH 275 Fq 305. TH 253 Fq 305. TH 284 Fq 305. TH 325 Fq 305. TH 339 Fq 305. TH 382 Fq 305. TH 227 Gp 306. MY 603 Ge  frr. 
58 a. MY 604 Ge 
58 a. DMOS Database of Mycenaean at Oslo. University of Oslo.  Thompson Rupert 2010. Mycenaean Greek. In Bakker Egbert J. ed.. A Companion to the Ancient Greek Language. Blackwell Companions to the Ancient World. WileyBlackwell. p. 223. ISBN 9781405153263.  Beekes R.S.P. 2010. s.v. . Etymological Dictionary of Greek. Vol. 2. With the assistance of Lucien van Beek. Leiden Boston Brill. p. 1528. ISBN 9789004174184.  Raymoure K.A. rakedano. Minoan Linear A  Mycenaean Linear B. Deaditerranean. Archived from the original on 20131012. Retrieved 20140323.  Jasanoff Jay H. Nussbaum Alan 1996. Lefkowitz Mary R. Rogers Maclean Guy eds.. Black Athena Revisited. The University of North Carolina Press. p. 193. ISBN 0807845558.  Liddell  Scott 1940.  s.v. .  Lacedaemonius s.v. Lacedaemon. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short. A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project.  MacBean Alexander Johnson Samuel 1773. Lacedaemon. A Dictionary of Ancient Geography etc. London G. Robinson etc..  Autenrieth 1891 .  Schmidt Maurice ed. 1863. s.v. . Hesychii Alexandrini Lexicon in Greek. Jena Frederick Mauk.. At the Internet Archive  Orosius 
1.2 
1.1 2.  Wiener Leo 1920. Contributions toward a History of ArabicoGothic Culture. Vol. III Tacitus Germania  Other Forgeries. Philadelphia Innes  Sones. p. 20.  Diodorus Siculus Library 
19.7 
0.2 .  a b Pausanias 1918 Description of Greece .
1.2 .  Diodorus Siculus 
4.5 78  Apollodorus 

2.8.2 4  Kennel Nigel. Spartans A New History  Wiley. Wiley.com. pp. 3739. Retrieved 20210203.  Hdt. 
9.2 
6.2   a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Tod Marcus Niebuhr 1911. Sparta. In Chisholm Hugh ed.. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 25 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 60914.  Thucydides i. 10  Cavanagh William 2018. An Archaeology of Ancient Sparta with Reference to Laconia and Messenia. A COMPANION TO SPARTA. Vol. 1. Hoboken USA Wiley Blackwell. p. 62.  The British School at Athens Home.  The Mycenaean presence in the southeastern Eurotas valley Vouno Panagias and Ayios Georgios by Emilia Banou.  a b Herodot Book I 
56.3   Cartledge 2002 p. 28.  a b Ehrenberg 2002 p. 31.  Ehrenberg 2002 p. 36.  Ehrenberg 2002 p. 33.  Xenophon Constitution of the Lacedaemonians 1  Herodotus 
1.6 566  Plutarch Life of Lycurgus 
6.1 2  A Historical Commentary on Thucydides. David Cartwright p. 176  Morris Ian December 2005 The growth of Greek cities in the first millennium BC. v.1 PDF PrincetonStanford Working Papers in Classics archived PDF from the original on 20221009  Nielsen Thomas Heine 29 December 2017. Once Again Studies in the Ancient Greek Polis. Franz Steiner Verlag. ISBN 9783515084383  via Google Books.  Wilson Nigel Guy ed. 2006. Encyclopedia Of Ancient Greece. Routledge UK. pp. 21415. ISBN 0415973341.  Herodotus 
7.2 02 
7.2 28  Green 1998 p. 10.  Herodotus 
7.2 2
07.2 25  Britannica ed. 2006 Sparta  Dictionary of Ancient  Medieval Warfare. Matthew Bennett p. 86  a b The Oxford Illustrated History of Greece and the Hellenistic World p. 141 John Boardman Jasper Griffin Oswyn Murray  Fine The Ancient Greeks 55659  Cartledge 2002 p. 273 Philip laid Lakonia waste as far south as Gytheion and formally deprived Sparta of Dentheliatis and apparently the territory on the Messenian Gulf as far as the Little Pamisos river Belminatis the territory of Karyai and the east Parnon foreland.  Plutarch W.C.Helmbold. De Garrulitate. Perseus Digital Library. Tufts University. Retrieved 20210505.          Davies 1997 p. 133.  Plutarch 1874 De garrulitate 17.  Plutarch 1891 De garrulitate 17 in Greek.  Agis III  Livius. www.livius.org. Archived from the original on 20130508. Retrieved 20200326.  Cartledge Paul Spawforth Antony 2002. Hellenistic and Roman Sparta  a tale of two cities 
2 nd ed.. London Routledge. p. 21. ISBN 0415262771.  Badian E. 29 December 1967. Agis III. Hermes. 95 2 17092. JSTOR 4475455.  Diodorus World History  Diodorus World History 
17.6 
2.1 
63.4  tr. C.B. Welles  Alexander the Great and his time. By Agnes Savill. p. 44 ISBN 0880295910  Cartledge  Spawforth 2001 p. 82.  Cicero 1918. II.34. In Pohlenz M. ed.. Tusculanae Disputationes in Latin. Leipzig Teubner. At the Perseus Project.  Michell Humfrey 1964. Sparta. Cambridge University Press. p. 175.  Thomas J. Figueira Population Patterns in Late Archaic and Classical Sparta Transactions of the American Philological Association 19742014 Vol. 116 1986 The Johns Hopkins University Press pp. 165213  Myke Cole Legion versus Phalanx The Epic Struggle for Infantry Supremacy in the Ancient World Osprey Publishing 2018  Cartledge  Spawforth 2001 p. 108.  Erich S. Gruen Heritage and Hellenism The Reinvention of Jewish Tradition 1998 p. 254 ISBN 0520235061 2002  Rappaport U. 47. 1 Maccabees in Barton J. and Muddiman J. 2001 The Oxford Bible Commentary Archived 20171122 at the Wayback Machine p. 729  What were the Spartans like Note to Lego Masters they didnt build city walls  Alexander Gillespie 7 October 2011. A History of the Laws of War Volume 2 The Customs and Laws of War with ... Bloomsbury. ISBN 9781847318626  via Google Ksiki.  Howatson M. C. 22 August 2013. The Oxford Companion to Classical Literature. OUP Oxford. ISBN 9780199548552  via Google Ksiki.  Liosis Nikos. Tsakonian Studies The StateoftheArt. researchgate. Institute of Modern Greek Studies. Retrieved 20220704.  Cartledge 2002 p. 89.  The Greeks at War By Philip De Souza Waldemar Heckel Lloyd LlewellynJones Victor Davis Hanson  The Politics By Aristotle Thomas Alan Sinclair Trevor J. Saunders  A companion to Greek studies By Leonard Whibley  Liddell  Scott 1940. .  Powel Anton 1987. The Greek World. Routledge.  Ancient Greece By Sarah B. Pomeroy Stanley M. Burstein Walter Donlan Jennifer Tolbert Roberts  Herodotus IX 2829  Xenophon Hellenica III 3 5  Sparta. HISTORY. Retrieved 20210803.  Kennell Nigel M. Helots and Perioeci Sparta A New History. WileyBlackwell pp. 136. 2010  Figueira Thomas Helotage and the Spartan Economy p. 566574. In A Companion to Sparta edited by Anton Powell 565589. Vol. 1 of A Companion to Sparta. Hoboken NJ Wiley Balckwell 2018.  West 1999 p. 24.  Cartledge 2002 p. 141.  Cartledge 2002 p. 140.  Ehrenberg 2002 p. 159.  Thucydides Mynott Jeremy 2013 Third year of the war 42928 II 71103 Thucydides Cambridge Cambridge University Press pp. 135161 doi
10.1 0
17 cbo97811390503
71.0 14 ISBN 9781139050371 retrieved 20210224  Kennell Nigel M. 2010. Spartans A New History. WileyBlackwell. p. 122.  Thucydides IV 80 the Greek is ambiguous  Cartledge 2002 p. 211.  Thucydides VII 27  Talbert p. 26.  Apud Athenaeus 14 6
47 d  FGH 106 F 2. Trans. by Cartledge p. 305.  Plutarch Life of Lycurgus 28 810. See also Life of Demetrios 1 5 Constitution of the Lacedemonians 30 De Cohibenda Ira 6 De Commmunibus Notitiis 19.  Plutarch Life of Lycurgus 28 7.  Powell 2001 p. 254.  Thucydides Book IV 
80.4 .  Classical historian Anton Powell has recorded a similar story from 19
80 s El Salvador. Cf. Powell 2001 p. 256  Cartledge 2002 pp. 153155.  Cartledge 2002 pp. 158 178.  Population Patterns in Late Archaic and Classical Sparta by Thomas Figueira Transactions of the American Philological Association 116 1986 pp. 165213  Paul Cartledge Sparta and Lakonia Routledge London 1979 pp. 15459  Conrad Stibbe Das Andere Sparta Verlag Philipp von Zabern Mainz 1996 pp. 11127  Excel HSC Ancient History By Peter Roberts ISBN 1741251788 9781741251784  Greene Robert 2000 The 48 Laws of Power Penguin Books p. 420 ISBN 0140280197  Hodkinson Stephen 2000 Property and Wealth in Classical Sparta p. 154  Conrad Stibbe Das Andere Sparta Verlag Philipp von Zabern Mainz 1996  A.H.M. Jones Sparta Basel Blackwell and Mott Ltd.1967 pp. 4043  Stephen Hodkinson Property and Wealth in Classical Sparta The Classical Press of Wales Swansea 2000. See also Paul Cartledges discussion of property in Sparta in Sparta and Lakonia pp. 14244.  Social Conflict in Ancient Greece By Alexander Fuks ISBN 9652234664 9789652234667  a b Cartledge 2001 p. 84.  Plutarch 2005 p. 20.  Bayliss Andrew J. 26 May 2022. 4. Raising a Spartan. The Spartans A Very Short Introduction 5976. doi
10.1 0
93 actrade97801987876
00.0 
03.0 004. ISBN 9780198787600.  Williamson Laila 1978. Infanticide an anthropological analysis. In Kohl Marvin ed.. Infanticide and the Value of Life. NY Prometheus Books. pp. 6175 61.  Theodoros K. Pitsios 2010. Ancient Sparta  Research Program of Keadas Cavern PDF. Bulletin der Schweizerischen Gesellschaft fr Anthropologie. 16 12 1322. Archived from the original PDF on 20131002.  Sneed 2021. Disability and Infanticide in Ancient Greece. Hesperia The Journal of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens. 90 4 747. doi
10.2 9
72 hesperia.

90.4.0 747. S
2 CID 245045967.  Tyrtaeus fr.12 lines 2732  Plutarch Life of Lycurgus 
27.2 3. However this may be conflating later practice with that of the classical period. See Not the Classical Ideal Athens and the Construction of the Other in Greek Art ed. Beth Cohen p. 263 note 33 2000 Brill.  Tsouli M. 2016. Testimonia on Funerary Banquets in Ancient Sparta. In Draycott C. M. Stamatopoulou M.  Peeters U. eds. Dining and Death Interdisciplinary Perspectives on the Funerary Banquet in Ancient Art Burial and Belief Peeters 353383.  a b Christesen P. 2018. The typology and topography of Spartan burials from the Protogeometric to the Hellenistic period rethinking Spartan exceptionalism and the ostensible cessation of adult intramural burials in the Greek world. Annual of the British School at Athens 113 307363.  a b c Xenophon Spartan Society 2  Kagan Donald Ozment Steven Frank Turner Frank Alison 2013. The Rise of Greek Civilization. Western Heritage. Pearson. pp. 44 Spartan Society.  Cartledge 2001 p. 85.  Cartledge 2001 pp. 91105.  Cartledge 2001 p. 88.  Millender Ellen G. 2018. Powell Anton ed.. A Companion to Sparta. WileyBlackwell. p. 504.  Cartledge 2001 pp. 8384.  David E. 1984. Aristophanes and Athenian Society of the Early Fourth Century B.C. Brill Archive. ISBN 9004070621.  Scanlon Thomas F. 2005. The Dispersion of Pederasty and the Athletic Revolution in SixthCentury BC Greece. J Homosex. 49 34 6385. doi
10.1 3
00 j0
82 v
49 n0303. PMID 16338890. S
2 CID 19140503. SameSex Desire and Love in GrecoRoman Antiquity and in the Classical Tradition of the West pp. 6470.  Erich Bethe Die Dorische Knabenliebe ihre Ethik und ihre Ideen The Doric pederasty their ethics and their ideas Sauerlnder 1907 441 444. ISBN 9783921495773  Plutarch Life of Lycurgus 18.  Readers Companion Military Hist p. 438. Cowley  Adcock 1957 pp. 89.  Plutarch 2004 p. 465.  a b Helena P. Schrader 2011. Sons and Mothers. PARTA Journal of Ancient Spartan and Greek History. 7 4. Markoulakis Publications. ISSN 17510007. Retrieved 20130914. subscription required  Forrest 1968 p. 53.  Pomeroy 2002 p. page needed.  The Greeks H. D. F. Kitto ISBN 0202309
10 X 9780202309101  LangridgeNoti Elizabeth 2015. Unchanging Tastes First Steps Towards Correlation of the Evidence for Food Preparation and Consumption in Ancient Laconia. In Spataro Michela Villing Alexandra eds.. Ceramics Cuisine and Culture. United Kingdom Oxbow Books. pp. 14855. ISBN 9781782979470.  Figueira Thomas 1984. Mess Contributions and Subsistence at Sparta. Transactions of the American Philological Association. 114 87109. doi
10.2 307284141. JSTOR 284141.  Plutarch The Life of Lycurgus  Pomeroy 2002 p. 42.  a b Xenophon Spartan Society 1  Blundell 1999 p. page needed.  Guttentag and Secord 1983 Finley 1982 Pomeroy 1975  Pomeroy 2002 p. 34.  Powell 2001 p. 248.  Blundell 1999 p. 154.  Powell 2001 p. 246.  Maria Dettenhofer Die Frauen von Sparta Reine Mnner Sache Munich Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag 1994 p. 25.  Pomeroy 2002 p. 9.  a b Pomeroy Sarah B. Goddess Whores Wives and Slaves Women in Classical Antiquity. New York Schocken Books 1995 pp. 6062  Gorgo and Spartan Women. 27 October 2009. Archived from the original on 20091027. Retrieved 20110810.  Helena Schrader 11 July 2010. Sparta ReconsideredSpartan Women. Elysiumgates.com. Retrieved 20110810.  Plutarch 2004 p. 457.  Pausanias 

6.1.6   Millender Ellen G. Spartan Women p. 500525. In A Companion to Sparta edited by Anton Powell Vol. 1 of A Companion to Sparta. Hoboken NJ Wiley Blackwell 2018.  Mueller Dorians II 192  Hodkinson Stephen The Imaginary Spartan Politeria pp. 2281 from The Imaginary Polis Symposium January 710 2004 edited by Mogens Herman Hansen Copenhagen Danske Videnskabernes Selskab 2005 p. 222.  iek Slavoj. The True Hollywood Left. www.lacan.com.  a b Kiernan Ben. Hitler Pol Pot and Hutu Power Distinguishing Themes of Genocidal Ideology PDF. p. 19. Archived PDF from the original on 20221009. Retrieved 20210428.  The Making of Israeli Militarism By Uri BenEliezer Indiana University Press 1998 p. 63  Land and Power The Zionist Resort to Force 18811948 By Anita Shapira Stanford University Press 1999 300  Spartan. MerriamWebster.com Dictionary. MerriamWebster. Retrieved 20211005. Sources Davies Norman 1997 1996. Europe A History. Random House. ISBN 0712666338. Adcock F. E. 1957 The Greek and Macedonian Art of War Berkeley University of California Press ISBN 0520000056 Autenrieth Georg 1891. A Homeric Dictionary for Schools and Colleges. New York Harper and Brothers. Blundell Sue 1999. Women in Ancient Greece. London British Museum Press. ISBN 9780714122199. Cartledge Paul 2002 Sparta and Lakonia A Regional History 1300 to 362 BC 
2 nd ed. Oxford Routledge ISBN 0415262763 Cartledge Paul 2001 Spartan Reflections London Duckworth ISBN 0715629662 Cartledge Paul Spawforth Antony 2001 Hellenistic and Roman Sparta 
2 nd ed. Oxford Routledge ISBN 0415262771 Ehrenberg Victor 2002 1973 From Solon to Socrates Greek History and Civilisation between the 
6 th and 
5 th centuries BC 
2 nd ed. London Routledge ISBN 9780415040242 Forrest W. G. 1968 A History of Sparta 950192 B.C. New York W. W. Norton  Co. Green Peter 1998 The GrecoPersian Wars 
2 nd ed. Berkeley University of California Press ISBN 0520203135 Liddell Henry George Scott Robert 1940. Jones Henry Stuart ed.. A GreekEnglish Lexicon. Oxford Clarendon Press. Pomeroy Sarah B. 2002 Spartan Women Oxford Oxford University Press ISBN 9780195130676 Powell Anton 2001 Athens and Sparta Constructing Greek Political and Social History from 478 BC 
2 nd ed. London Routledge ISBN 0415262801 Pausanias 1918. Description of Greece. with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones Litt.D. and H.A. Ormerod M.A. in 4 Volumes. ISBN 9780674992078. Plutarch 1874 Plutarchs Morals Translated from the Greek by several hands. Corrected and revised by. William W. Goodwin PH. D. Boston Cambridgecitation CS1 maint location missing publisher link Plutarch 1891 Bernardakis Gregorius N. ed. Moralia Plutarch in Greek Leipzig Teubner Plutarch 2005 Richard J.A. Talbert ed. On Sparta 
2 nd ed. London Penguin Books ISBN 0140449434 Plutarch 2004 Frank Cole Babbitt ed. Moralia Vol. III Loeb Classical Library Cambridge Harvard University Press ISBN 0674992709 West M. L. 1999 Greek Lyric Poetry Oxford Oxford University Press ISBN 9780199540396 Further reading Bradford Ernle 2004 Thermopylae The Battle for the West New York Da Capo Press ISBN 0306813602 Buxton Richard 1999 From Myth to Reason Studies in the Development of Greek Thought Oxford Clarendon Press ISBN 0753451107 Cartledge Paul 2004 What have the Spartans Done for us Spartas Contribution to Western Civilization Greece  Rome vol. 51 no. 2 pp. 164179 David Ephraim. 1989. Dress in Spartan Society. Ancient World 19313. Flower Michael A. 2009. Spartan Religion and Greek Religion. In Sparta Comparative Approaches. Edited by Stephen Hodkinson 193229. Swansea UK Classical Press of Wales. Hodkinson Stephen Gallou Chrysanthi eds. 2021. Luxury and wealth in Sparta and the Peloponnese. Swansea Classical Press of Wales. ISBN 9781910589830. Hodkinson Stephen and Ian MacGregor Morris eds. 2010. Sparta in Modern Thought. Swansea UK Classical Press of Wales. Low Polly. 2006. Commemorating the Spartan WarDead. In Sparta and War. Edited by Stephen Hodkinson and Anton Powell 85109. Swansea UK Classical Press of Wales. Morris Ian 1992 DeathRitual and Social Structure in Classical Antiquity Cambridge Cambridge University Press ISBN 0521376114 Pavlides Nicolette A. 2023. The hero cults of Sparta local religion in a Greek city. London Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 9781788313001. Rabinowitz Adam. 2009. Drinking from the Same Cup Sparta and Late Archaic Commensality. In Sparta Comparative Approaches. Edited by Stephen Hodkinson 113191. Swansea UK Classical Press of Wales. Thompson F. Hugh 2002 The Archaeology of Greek and Roman Slavery London Duckworth ISBN 0715631950 Thucydides 1974 M.I. Finley Rex Warner ed. History of the Peloponnesian War London Penguin Books ISBN 0140440399 External links Library resources about Sparta Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Sparta. Media related to Sparta at Wikimedia Commons Sparta on In Our Time at the BBC PapakyriakouAnagnostou Ellen 20002011. History of Sparta. Ancient Greek Cities. Archived from the original on 20010305. Retrieved 20071204. v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus Crete Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus GrecoBactrian Kingdom IndoGreek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations Confederations Doric Hexapolis c.1100  c.560 BC Italiote League c.800389 BC Ionian League c. 650404 BC Peloponnesian League c.550366 BC Amphictyonic League c.595279 BC Acarnanian League c. 50031 BC Hellenic League 499449 BC Delian League 478404 BC Chalcidian League 430348 BC Boeotian League c. 4
24 c. 395 BC Aetolian League c. 400188 BC Second Athenian League 378355 BC Thessalian League 374196 BC Arcadian League 3
70 c. 230 BC Epirote League 370168 BC League of Corinth 338322 BC Euboean League c. 300 BCc. 300 AD Achaean League 280146 BC Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists  scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre GrecoBuddhist art Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology mythological figures Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld GrecoBuddhism GrecoBuddhist monasticism Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus Olympia Language ProtoGreek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Las Locri Medma Metapontion Nepolis Pandosia Lucania Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia LiparaMeligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassa Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene Apollonia Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheuss Limin Illicitanus LiminPortus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oine Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Spain France BnF data Germany Israel United States Japan Czech Republic Vatican Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSpartaoldid1219102174 Categories Sparta Diarchies Former populated places in Greece Greek citystates Hellenistic states Locations in Greek mythology Populated places in Laconia States and territories disestablished in the 
2 nd century BC States and territories established in the 
11 th century BC Hidden categories Articles containing Mycenaean Greeklanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Doric Greeklanguage text Articles containing Attic Greeklanguage text CS1 Greeklanguage sources el Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica CS1 Latinlanguage sources la Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscriptiononly content Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2013 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semiprotected pages Wikipedia indefinitely moveprotected pages Use dmy dates from October 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 CS1 maint location missing publisher Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with Pleiades identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 15 April 2024 at 1919 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width