Help:Maintenance template removal - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Overview 
2 Addressing the flagged problem Toggle Addressing the flagged problem subsection 
2.1 An example 
3 When to remove 
4 When not to remove 
5 Removal 
6 Changing a template 
7 Specific template guidance Toggle Specific template guidance subsection 
7.1 Researching the tagged issue 
8 Still need help 
9 See also Toggle the table of contents HelpMaintenance template removal 21 languages Afrikaans   Dansk Eesti  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Ozbekcha   Portugus  Simple English     srpski   Trke   Edit links Help page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Howtoguide on addressing and removing maintenance templates Further information WikipediaResponsible tagging and WikipediaTag bombing This help page is a howto guide. It details processes or procedures of some aspects of Wikipedias norms and practices. It is not one of Wikipedias policies or guidelines and may reflect varying levels of consensus and vetting. Shortcuts WPMTR HMTR This page in a nutshell If you have the ability please boldly assist Wikipedia by fixing the issues flagged by maintenance templates All problems on Wikipedia are resolved through the efforts of volunteers like you. If you understand the problem that the template highlights such as by reading the explanatory links it contains or have found guidance through this page  and have reasonably fixed the issues  you may simply remove the maintenance template it will not be removed automatically. Legitimate Wikipedia editors will never offer to remove maintenance templates in exchange for money. See the paid editing scam warning for more information. Many Wikipedia pages display maintenance templates that identify problems. You may have arrived at this help page after clicking a link on a maintenance template saying Learn how and when to remove this template message. Maintenance templates are added and removed by volunteers. This help page explains the process for examining and removing such templates. Overview Maintenance templates or tags are not removed automatically. Even if you fix the issues described in a maintenance template the tag will remain in the article until you or someone else manually removes it. The mechanics of removal are usually as simple as clicking Edit at the top of the page or in the section involved if youre not already in edit mode removing the code that produces the display of the template leaving an edit summary and saving the page. It is not okay to remove maintenance templates until the issue flagged by the template is remedied firstthat is until the maintenance tag is no longer validunless it truly did not belong in the first place. Wikipedia works because of the efforts of volunteers just like you making bold edits to help build this encyclopedia. Fixing problems and then removing maintenance templates when you are done is important in that effort. Addressing the flagged problem Shortcuts WPTEMPREMOVE HTEMPREMOVE We dont know which maintenance tag brought you to this page and thus what specific problem needs attention. However every maintenance template contains links to help pages policies guidelines or other relevant pages that provide information on the problem the template was placed to flag. You will also find guidance on some of the more common templates below. Many common templates address problems with article citations and references or their lack  because reliable sourcing is the lifeblood of Wikipedia articles and at the core of all of Wikipedias content policies and guidelines such as notability verifiability neutral point of view and no original research. But a host of other issues may be flagged including tone and style of writing structure and formatting lack of links to or from other articles compliance with Wikipedias manual of style and the lack of a lead section. Please make sure the issue has been resolved before removing the template. That does require some effort on your partto understand both the problem and how to solve it. An example If the issue flagged by the maintenance template is that the article contains no references a citation needed template used might be Unreferenced  typically placed by the code you would see when wikitext source editing UnreferenceddateMay 2024. It is important to understand that what you see when reading an article and what you see when editing it are different unless youre in Visual editing mode. Thus the above code only seen when doing source editing results in the display of the called template below Example This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Maintenance template removal  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message This template contains several links indicated by the words and phrases in blue. Three of these links are to pages that when explored provide context and resources for you to understand why the template was placed on the page and how to address the issue of the article being unreferenced cite which links to the content guideline WikipediaCiting sources sources which links to the policy WikipediaVerifiability and adding citations to reliable sources which links to a help page providing a howto guide to the basics of citing references. Whatever maintenance tag brought you to this help page should likewise contain relevant explanatory links addressed to whatever its issue is. Read these explanatory and contextual pages to learn about the problem and what it is you need to do to take care of it. Again some of the more common maintenance templates seen are addressed in the specific template guidance section below. When to remove Shortcut WPWTRMT Maintenance templates are not meant to be in articles permanently. Any user without a conflict of interest may remove a maintenance template in any of the following circumstances When the issue has been adequately addressed Upon determining that the issue has been resolved perhaps by someone else If it reasonably appears that the template did not belong when placed or was added in error. Consider first discussing the matter with the original placer of the template unless this user is no longer active on Wikipedia. In any case if the issue appears contentious seek consensus on the talk page When an article talk page discussion has not been initiated for templates requesting it When there is consensus on the talk page or elsewhere as to how to address the flagged issue and you are reasonably implementing those changes. It is good practice to note the location of the consensus in the edit summary accompanying your removal ideally with a link to the location When it can reasonably be concluded that the template is no longer relevant such as a Current template appearing in an article that no longer documents a current event If the maintenance template is of a type that requires support but is not fully supported. For example neutralityrelated templates such as COI associated with the conflict of interest guideline or POV associated with the neutral point of view policy strongly recommend that the tagging editor initiate a discussion generally on the articles talk page to support the placement of the tag. If the tagging editor failed to do so or the discussion is dormant and there is no other support for the template it can be removed You may remove a template when according to your best judgment the lack of edits andor talk page discussion should be interpreted as the issue not worth fixing as a form of silent consensus. Please note there is currently no consensus for general agerelated removal of maintenance templates  that is removing a template purely or chiefly because it is old is not considered a sufficient argument. Exception removing POVrelated templates whose discussions have gone dormant is encouraged as addressed in the bullet point immediately above Lastly there are times when a person attempting to address a maintenance template that flags some fundamental matter may find that the issue cannot actually be addressed. For example if an article is flagged as lacking citations to reliable secondary sources written by thirdparties to the topic and a user seeing the maintenance templates discovers that such sources appear not to exist that usually means the article should be deleted. In such cases it is not so much that the template does not belong and should be removed but rather that flagging the page for maintenance will never address the more critical issue that the page itself does not belong on Wikipedia at all. When not to remove Shortcuts WPWNTRMT WPMAINTENANCEDISAGREEMENT You should not remove maintenance templates if any of the following apply You do not understand the issues raised by the template The issue has not yet been resolved There is ongoing activity or discussion related to the template issue The problem that the maintenance template flags is plainly and unambiguously required for a proper article under Wikipedias policies and guidelines You have been paid to edit the article or have some other conflict of interest exceptions apply see individual template documentation. Removal Have you carefully read the help pages and thoroughly fixed the problem Or have you made a considered decision that the template is not or is no longer applicable Great Now to remove the maintenance template Either click on edit or edit source at the top of the page or if the maintenance template is not at the top but somewhere in the body of the article you might instead use a section edit link If you are editing wikitext source editing Delete the template code. The template code you see in this edit mode will usually be in the following form as in the example above Name of templatedateMonth Year. If you are editing using VisualEditor Click on the template tag which will then turn blue. Press the Delete or backspace key on your keyboard. Leave a descriptive edit summary e.g. Removed insert the name of template because I have fixed the issue Click Publish changes. Thats it. Thank you Changing a template Problems flagged by some templates may imply secondary problems that will still exist after you take care of the main issue. In such cases it may be more appropriate to switch the template to another applicable one following your edits rather than just removing it. The reasoning behind the change in templates should be addressed in the edit summary. A case in point is the Unreferenced template example used above. It is placed on pages with no references. Thus adding just one suitable reference renders that maintenance template inapplicable. However that change does not take care of the overarching issue of poor sourcing. In this example a change to a different template may be appropriate depending on the type quality depth and manner of sourcing added to fix the issue such as refimprove No footnotes Primary sources or one of the many others listed at WikipediaTemplate messagesSources of articles. Conversely some templates flag highly discrete issues where there is no need to consider a switch to another template. For example if an article is orphaned  no other articles in the main article namespace link to it  then once that is taken care of by the addition of links to it from other articles the issue is gone entirely and the tags removal is unambiguous. When a flagged issue has been addressed in parts of an article but remains in discrete sections clarity may be served by replacing the template with a section variant or by use of inline cleanup tags if such versions of the template exist. In some cases it may be helpful to request a review of a maintenance templates removal or proposed removal with the editor who initially added it to the article at issue. Specific template guidance This section guides you on how to address some of the more common specific templates that may have brought you to this help page. More detailed information about the templates can be found by following the links to the templates themselves. Click show at the right to display the instructions. Multiple issues Some articles will be flagged for multiple discrete problems using a single template Multiple issues. If you take care of one or more problems that it flags but not all do not remove the template entirely but just those parameters in it that you have fixed. The example below shows three different issues flagged by this template Multiple issuesOrphandateJanuary 20
08 POVdateJune 20
09 One sourcedateMarch 2011 If you address the orphaning issue but not the other two remove just the line that flagged the orphan issue and leave the others intact. Thus your removal would leave the template in this state. Multiple issuesPOVdateJune 20
09 One sourcedateMarch 2011 See the sections below for how to address some of the more common problems flagged by templates that may be wrapped into this template. Unreferenced All of Wikipedias core content policies and guidelines have as a common denominator the need for reliable sourcing. For example the content of Wikipedia articles must be verifiable in reliable sources the notability of a topic demonstrated through such reliable sources that are secondary in nature which are independent of the topic and treat the subject in substantive detail not just mere mentions and to establish that the content is not original research the sources cited must directly support the material being presented without analysis or synthesis to reach or imply a conclusion that is not stated in the sources. Unreferenced typically placed by the code UnreferenceddateMay 2024 having redirects such as Unsourced Unverified No references No sources and Unref and displaying when reading as This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Maintenance template removal  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags the issue of an article containing no references at all. This template no longer applies once a single reference appears in the article whether placed through the preferred method of inline citations ones appearing in a general references section or even through such a poor method as including an embedded raw link. To address the issue add citations to reliable sources. Because of their importance Wikipedia contains numerous instruction pages on aspects of referencing. We suggest starting with HelpReferencing for beginners and HelpIntroduction to referencing1 and then seeing WikipediaCiting sources for a more involved treatment noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages guides and tutorials. A visual guide to placing inline citations through ref ... ref tags may also help and appears below. Visual inline citation guide Formatting references using inline citations All information in Wikipedia articles should be verified by citations to reliable sources. Our preferred method of citation is using the cite.php form of inline citations using the refref elements. Using this method each time a particular source is mined for information dont copy wordforword a footnote is placed in the text inline that takes one to the detail of the source when clicked set forth in a references section after the text of the article. In brief anywhere you want a footnote to appear in a piece of text you place an opening ref tag followed by the text of the citation which you want to appear at the bottom of the article and close with a ref tag. Note the closing slash . For multiple use of a single reference the opening ref tag is given a name like so ref namename followed by the citation text and a closing ref tag. Each time you want to use that footnote again you simply use the first element with a slash like so ref namename . For these references to appear you must tell the software where to display them using either the code references or most commonly the template Reflist which can be modified to display the references in columns using Reflistcolwidth
30 em. Per our style guidelines the references should be displayed in a separate section denominated References located after the body of the article. Inline citation code what you type in edit mode What it produces when you save Two separate citations.refCitation text.refrefCitation text2.ref Multipleref namemultipleCitation text3.refcitationref namemultiple  use.ref namemultiple   References  Reflist Two separate citations.12 Multiple3 citation3 use.3 References  Citation text.  Citation text2.  a b c Citation text3. Templates that can be used between refref tags to format references Citation  Cite web  Cite book  Cite news  Cite journal  Others  Examples As noted higher on this page unless you thoroughly source a page in response to this template it may more appropriate to switch this template with a more specific one rather than simply removing it. Depending on the type quality depth and manner of sourcing added to fix the issue you might replace it with refimprove No footnotes Primary sources or a host of others listed at WikipediaTemplate messagesSources of articles. Refimprove All of Wikipedias core content policies and guidelines have as a common denominator the need for reliable sourcing. For example the content of Wikipedia articles must be verifiable in reliable sources the notability of a topic demonstrated through such reliable sources that are secondary in nature which are independent of the topic and treat the subject in substantive detail not just mere mentions and to establish that the content is not original research the sources cited must directly support the material being presented without analysis or synthesis to reach or imply a conclusion that is not stated in the sources. Refimprove typically placed by the code RefimprovedateMay 2024 having redirects such as Improve references Verify More sources and Citations needed and displaying when reading as This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Maintenance template removal  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags the issue of an article that has some but insufficient inline citations to support the material currently in the article. It should not be used for articles with no sources at all unreferenced should be used instead nor for articles without inline citations but which contain some sources No footnotes should be used instead nor for an article on living persons BLP sources should be used instead. This template no longer applies once an article has been made fairly wellsourced. To address the issue add additional inline citations to reliable sources for all significant statements in the article. Whether or not an article has been rendered fairly well sourced may involve a judgment call but in any event the sources used must be reliable ones and articles should not rely predominantly on primary sources but rather on secondary sources. Note the minimum all quotations material whose verifiability has been challenged or is likely to be challenged and contentious material whether negative positive or neutral about living persons must include an inline citation that directly supports the material. No footnotes All of Wikipedias core content policies and guidelines have a common denominator the need for reliable sourcing. For example the content of Wikipedia articles must be verifiable in reliable sources the notability of a topic demonstrated through such reliable sources that are secondary in nature which are independent of the topic and treat the subject in substantive detail not just mere mentions and to establish that the content is not original research the sources cited must directly support the material being presented without analysis or synthesis to reach or imply a conclusion that is not stated in the sources. No footnotes typically placed by the code No footnotesdateMay 2024 and having redirects such as Citations No citations Inline citations and No inline citations and displaying when reading as This article includes a list of references related reading or external links but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations. May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags the issue of an article that contains some form of sourcing but lacks the precision of inline citations to associate given portions of material with a specific reliable sources that support that material. Inline citations make verifiability accessible. In short in the absence of an inline citation that associates specific material to a specific source it becomes very difficult for a reader to check what sources given in only some general manner verify what items of content. To address the issue add inline citations to reliable sources ideally for all significant statements in the article. Note that at a minimum all quotations material whose verifiability has been challenged or is likely to be challenged and contentious material whether negative positive or neutral about living persons must include an inline citation that directly supports the material. There are many instruction pages that directly and indirectly give guidance on adding inline citations. We suggest starting with HelpReferencing for beginners and HelpIntroduction to referencing1 and then seeing WikipediaCiting sources for a more involved treatment noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages guides and tutorials. A visual guide to placing inline citations through ref ... ref tags may also help and appears below. Visual inline citation guide Formatting references using inline citations All information in Wikipedia articles should be verified by citations to reliable sources. Our preferred method of citation is using the cite.php form of inline citations using the refref elements. Using this method each time a particular source is mined for information dont copy wordforword a footnote is placed in the text inline that takes one to the detail of the source when clicked set forth in a references section after the text of the article. In brief anywhere you want a footnote to appear in a piece of text you place an opening ref tag followed by the text of the citation which you want to appear at the bottom of the article and close with a ref tag. Note the closing slash . For multiple use of a single reference the opening ref tag is given a name like so ref namename followed by the citation text and a closing ref tag. Each time you want to use that footnote again you simply use the first element with a slash like so ref namename . For these references to appear you must tell the software where to display them using either the code references or most commonly the template Reflist which can be modified to display the references in columns using Reflistcolwidth
30 em. Per our style guidelines the references should be displayed in a separate section denominated References located after the body of the article. Inline citation code what you type in edit mode What it produces when you save Two separate citations.refCitation text.refrefCitation text2.ref Multipleref namemultipleCitation text3.refcitationref namemultiple  use.ref namemultiple   References  Reflist Two separate citations.12 Multiple3 citation3 use.3 References  Citation text.  Citation text2.  a b c Citation text3. Templates that can be used between refref tags to format references Citation  Cite web  Cite book  Cite news  Cite journal  Others  Examples Primary sources Primary sources typically placed by the code Primary sourcesdateMay 2024 having among other redirects Primary and displaying when reading as This article relies excessively on references to primary sources. Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Find sources Maintenance template removal  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags the issue of an article that too heavily relies on primary sources  original materials that are close to an event often accounts written by people who are directly involved  as opposed to secondary and to some extent tertiary sources. Primary sources have their place but they must be used carefully and are easy to misuse. Typically they should only be used for straightforward descriptive statements of facts that can be verified by any educated person with access to the primary source but without further specialized knowledge. They should not be used to support content that presents interpretation analysis evaluation or synthesis and should not be the predominant form of sourcing in an article. Moreover primary sources are generally not useful to demonstrate a topics notability. To address the issue add citations predominantly to secondary sources. Often this involves replacing some of the primary sources with secondary sources and not just adding them alongside existing onesespecially where the primary source is being used for an invalid purpose such as interpretive claims and synthesis. Finding secondary sources is a large topic but make use of Google Books News and Scholar find local newspaper archives go to a library if you have access use paysubscription services like JSTOR Newspaperarchive.com Ancestry.com etc. see our guide on free English newspaper sources and others listed here request access to payprescription sources at WPRX. If insufficient reliable secondary and independent sources exist treating a topic in substantive detail then Wikipedia should not have an article on the topic. Remember that no amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. Notability Wikipedia is an encyclopedia a specific type of reference work properly containing articles on topics of knowledge. Wikipedia employs the concept of notability to avoid indiscriminate inclusion of topics by attempting to ensure that the subjects of articles are worthy of notice  by only including articles on topics that the world has taken note of by substantively treating them in reliable sources unconnected with the topic. The general notability standard thus presumes that topics are notable if they have received significant coverage in reliable sources that are independent of the subject. Notability typically placed by the code NotabilitydateMay 2024 having redirects such as Notable Nonnotable Nn and Significance and displaying when reading as The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedias general notability guideline. Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown the article is likely to be merged redirected or deleted. Find sources Maintenance template removal  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message or some variation linking to one of the subjectspecific notability guidelines questions whether a topic is notable. As stated in the template addressing the issue requires adding citations to reliable secondary sources. There are several common mistakes seen in addressing this issue Adding citations but to unreliable sources We are looking for treatment in sources like mainstream newspaper articles nonvanity books magazines scholarly journals television and radio documentaries etc.  sources with editorial oversight and a reputation for factchecking and accuracy. This means generally not random personal websites blogs forum posts Facebook LinkedIn Twitter selfpublished sources like open wikis including other Wikipedia articles etc. In short read and understand WikipediaIdentifying reliable sources. Adding citations to connected nonindependent sources While primary sources may be useful to verify certain facts they must be used with caution and do nothing to establish notability. In short we are looking for secondary sources written by third parties to a topic. Adding citations to sources that merely mention the topic You can cite numerous reliable secondary independent sources and it will not help establish notability if they do not treat the topic substantively  think generally two paragraphs of text focused on the topic at issue. Remember it is much better to cite two good sources that treat a topic in detail than twenty that just mention it in passing. Moreover citation overkill to sources containing mere passing mentions of the topic is a badge of a nonnotable topic and if good sources are present in the mix they will be hidden among these others from those seeking to assess a topics demonstration of notability. If insufficient reliable secondary and independent sources exist treating a topic in substantive detail then Wikipedia should not have an article on the topic. Remember that no amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. Advert Advert typically placed by the code AdvertdateMay 2024 and having redirects such as Advertisement Advertising Ad and Puff and displaying when reading as This article contains content that is written like an advertisement. Please help improve it by removing promotional content and inappropriate external links and by adding encyclopedic content written from a neutral point of view. May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags the issue of an article that reads like an advertisement. For example such articles may tell users to buy a companys product provide price lists give links to online sellers use unencyclopedic or meaningless buzzwords be filled with peacock language and read like the website of the articles topic or a press release touting its virtues rather than that of a neutrallywritten encyclopedia article about the topic. Advertisements are by no means limited to commercial topics and indeed are often seen for all manner of others such as noble causes religiousspiritual leaders sports teams gaming clans and so forth. If the articles main problem is not advertising per se then you can change the tag to something more appropriate such as COI or Peacock or POV check. Pages that are exclusively promotional and would need to be fundamentally rewritten to become encyclopedic may be tagged for speedy deletion under section G11 of the criteria using dbg11 or dbspam. To address the issue rewrite the article from a neutral point of view  which is not just about the wording and tone but also what the article covers and what it does not cover. Wikipedia articles should represent fairly proportionately and as far as possible without editorial bias all of the significant views that have been published by reliable sources on a topic. Removing all promotional language is a good start but depending on what is left may only be a surface treatment. See what you can salvage but often editors strip out all but the most basic content leaving it in a stub state. If you want to build a solid article explore the existence of independent sources for the topic and build it from the ground up. POV POV typically placed by the code POVdateMay 2024 and having redirects such as NPOV POV dispute Neutrality Neutral and Not neutral and displaying when reading as The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags the issue of an article that has been identified as having a serious issue of balance the lack of a neutral point of view and the tagger wishes to attract editors with different viewpoints to the article. An unbalanced or nonneutral article does not fairly represent the balance of perspectives of highquality reliable secondary sources. This tag is meant to be accompanied by an explanation on the articles talk page about why it was added identifying specific issues that are actionable within Wikipedias content policies. This template is not meant to be a permanent resident on any article. You may remove this template whenever any one of the following is true There is consensus on the talkpage or the NPOV Noticeboard that the issue has been resolved It is not clear what the neutrality issue is and no satisfactory explanation has been given In the absence of any discussion or if the discussion has become dormant. Lead missing Lead missing typically placed by the code Lead missingdateMay 2024 and having redirects such as No lead Nointro No lead section Lead absent and Intro needed and displaying when reading as This article has no lead section. Please improve this article by adding one in your own words. May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags the issue of an article that fails to follow Wikipedias standard article layout guidelines by introducing the reader to the topic in a lead section containing a summary of the most important article contents. The lead should stand on its own as a concise overview of the articles topic. A good lead section cultivates the readers interest in reading more of the article but not by teasing the reader or hinting at content that follows. It should identify the topic establish context explain why the topic is notable and summarize the most important points including any prominent controversies. To address the issue write a lead section. The size of an appropriate lead will depend on the breadth of the article but it should be no more than four wellcomposed paragraphs and should generally not contain content that is not already present in the body of the article. Current Current typically placed by the code CurrentdateMay 2024 and displaying when reading as This article documents a current event. Information may change rapidly as the event progresses and initial news reports may be unreliable. The latest updates to this article may not reflect the most current information. Feel free to improve this article or discuss changes on the talk page but please note that updates without valid and reliable references will be removed. May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message or a subjectspecific variation listed on WikipediaCurrent event templates warns editors and readers about an article that is the subject of a current event such as a breaking news story that is accordingly experiencing a great flux of edits and is in a fastchanging state. Wikipedia attracts numerous editors who want to update articles in real time immediately after such current events are published. However sources for breaking news reports often contain serious inaccuracies so these templates can also draw attention to the need to add improved sources as soon as they become available. The template should generally be removed when the event described is no longer receiving massive editing attention. It is not meant to be a general disclaimer indicating that an articles contents may not be accurate or to mark an article that merely has recent news articles about the topic if it were hundreds of thousands of articles would have the Current template with no informational consequence. If the article continues to have sourcing or cleanup issues a more appropriate maintenance template should be used instead. Linkrot Linkrot typically placed by the code LinkrotdateMay 2024 and displaying when reading as This article uses bare URLs which are uninformative and vulnerable to link rot. Please consider converting them to full citations to ensure the article remains verifiable and maintains a consistent citation style. Several templates and tools are available to assist in formatting such as reFill documentation and Citation bot documentation. May 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message flags an article as having bare URLs URLs that are used as references or external links without contextual information. These bare URLs are particularly vulnerable to link rot as the record of the reference depends on the hosting website maintaining the current site structure which is not guaranteed. A change in the underlying URL could make the reference unusable. The full citation format on the other hand preserves information such as title and author that can be used to restore a version of the reference that is still accessible. In addition bare URLs can be less visually pleasing if the underlying URL is long. To address this issue convert all bare URLs used as references to the appropriate citation template format. For bare URLs which are not used as references use the following format bareURL Descriptive text. Depending on the specific URL it may be necessary to use an archiving service to restore an URL. More information is available at Repairing a dead link. Researching the tagged issue As noted previously most templates contain links to guidance pages. Additionally many templates have documentation that provides more information about the templates flagged issue which is displayed when you visit the template page itself. To access the template and thereby see its documentation type into the search field Template followed by the name of the template seen when you view its placement in the Edit interface typically found in the first lines of the article. The first parameter is the name of the template. For example if you found this in the Edit interface UnreferenceddateMay 2024 then you would visit the template itself by searching for TemplateUnreferenced. The accompanying documentation for all maintenance templates if it exists can be located in this way. Still need help If youve read through this page and are still confused about what needs to be done to fix an issue on a page and remove a maintenance template try asking at the Teahouse a page designed for new users to ask questions. Alternatively you could try the more general Help desk or seek live assistance at the IRC channel wikipediaenhelp. See also WikipediaTemplate messages HelpTemplate WikipediaTagging pages for problems WPTAGGING WikipediaTemplate messagesDisputes Bare URL inline  produces an inline tag rather than banner for individual bare URLs v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion Speedy Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices Stringhandling Sup and subrelated Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Help pages Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates Template help Quick guide Template namespace Related topics WikiProject Templates Index Category Search Category Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHelpMaintenancetemplateremovaloldid1217170334 Categories Wikipedia howto Wikipedia template administration Hidden categories Wikipedia semiprotected project pages Wikipedia help This page was last edited on 4 April 2024 at 0725 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width