Arses of Persia - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Biography 
3 Coinage 
4 References 
5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 
5.1 Ancient works 
5.2 Modern works Toggle the table of contents Arses of Persia 45 languages  Azrbaycanca   Catal etina Cymraeg Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska    Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Artaxerxes IV Arses King of the Achaemenid Empire from 338 to 336 BC This article is about a king of Persia. For other uses see Arses disambiguation. Arses  King of Kings Great King King of Persia Pharaoh of Egypt King of Countries Probable portrait of Arses wearing the Egyptian Pharaonic crown.1 King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Reign 338336 BC Predecessor Artaxerxes III Successor Darius III Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 338336 BC Predecessor Artaxerxes III Successor Darius III Died 336 BC Regnal name Artaxerxes IV Dynasty Achaemenid Father Artaxerxes III Mother Atossa Religion Zoroastrianism Arses Old Persian R Greek  also known by his regnal name Artaxerxes IV rtzrksiz Old Persian  Artaxa Greek  was the twelfth Achaemenid King of Kings from 338 to 336 BC. Arses ascended the throne after his father Artaxerxes IIIwho had caused a resurgence of the Persian Empirewas poisoned by the eunuch Bagoas. The latter put Arses on the throne with the expectation of being able to control him. With the weakening of the Achaemenid Empire from the assassination of Artaxerxes III and the succession of Arses the Greek league sent troops into Asia in 336. Arses in an attempt to free himself from Bagoas influences tried to have the eunuch poisoned but did not succeed instead succumbing to poison himself at the orders of Bagoas. Bagoas put Arses cousin Darius III on the throne after him. Nameedit He is known as Arses in Greek sources and that seems to have been his real name but the Xanthus trilingue and potsherds from Samaria report that he took the royal name of Artaxerxes IV following his father and grandfather. Arses is the Greek form of the Old Persian R which is also attested in the Avestan form Aran and is used in multiple Old Persian compoundnames such as Araka Arma and Xayaaran. The term is linguistically related to Greek arsn meaning male manly.2 Biographyedit Arses was the youngest son of Artaxerxes III and his wife Atossa.2 Arses had several brothers only one whose name is attested a certain Bisthanes.2 Persia was experiencing a resurgence under Artaxerxes III who reorganized his empire and suppressed revolts throughout the country.3 However the fortunes of Persia came to an abrupt end in autumn of 338 when Artaxerxes III was murdered by the ambitious eunuch and chiliarch Bagoas who had the king poisoned.4 Artaxerxes IIIs early death proved to be a problematic issue for Persia3 and may have played a role in the weakening of the country.2 The majority of Artaxerxes IIIs sons with the exception of Arses and Bisthanes were also murdered by Bagoas.3 Bagoas who wanted to be kingmaker put the young Arses on the throne.32 On his ascension to the throne Arses most likely assumed the regnal name of Artaxerxes IV.5 He was put on the throne by Bagoas due to his youth which the latter sought to take advantage of in order to control him. Around the same period most of the Greek citystates had joined the Greek league under the leadership of the Macedonian king Philip II who took advantage of the events in Persia by demanding compensation from the country for helping the town of Perinthus during the reign of Artaxerxes III.2 Arses declined and as a result a Greek expedition was started with Philip II as general who sent 10000 Macedonian soldiers into Asia in 336 BC.2 At the same time however Arses was determined on trying to free himself from Bagoas authority and influence he made an unsuccessful effort to have the latter poisoned only to be poisoned himself along with the rest of his family by Bagoas who put Arses cousin Darius III on the throne.2 Macedonian propaganda made in order to legitimize the conquests of Alexander the Great a few years later accused Darius III of playing a key role in the murder of Arses who was portrayed as the last king of the Achaemenid royal house.6 Coinageedit Coinage of Mazaios Satrap of Cilicia 3610334 BC thought to represent Artaxerxes III on the obverse and a young Arses on the reverse.1 There is no dynastic coinage of Artaxerxes IV but it is thought he may be depicted as a young ruler wearing the Pharaonic crown on the reverse of some of the contemporary coinage of satrap Mazaios in Cilicia while his father Artaxerxes III appears seated also in Pharaonic dress on the obverse.1 Referencesedit  a b c Kovacs Frank L. 2002. Two Persian Pharaonic Portraits. Jahrbuch fr Numismatik und Geldgeschichte. R. Pflaum. pp. 5560.  a b c d e f g h LeCoq 1986 p. 548.  a b c d Schmitt 1986 pp. 658659.  Waters 2014 p. 197.  Briant 2002 p. 769.  Briant 2002 p. 770. Bibliographyedit Ancient worksedit Arrian The Anabasis of Alexander. Diodorus Siculus Bibliotheca historica. Justin Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus. Modern worksedit Briant Pierre 2002. From Cyrus to Alexander A History of the Persian Empire. Eisenbrauns. pp. 11196. ISBN 9781575061207. LeCoq P. 1986. Arses. In Yarshater Ehsan ed.. Encyclopdia Iranica Volume II5 Armenia and Iran IVArt in Iran I. London and New York Routledge  Kegan Paul. p. 548. ISBN 9780710091055. Schmitt R. 1986. Artaxerxes III. In Yarshater Ehsan ed.. Encyclopdia Iranica Volume II6 Art in Iran IAr. London and New York Routledge  Kegan Paul. pp. 658659. ISBN 9780710091062. Waters Matt 2014. Ancient Persia A Concise History of the Achaemenid Empire 550330 BCE. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521253697. Arses of Persia Achaemenid dynasty Born c.357 BC Died 336 BC Preceded by Artaxerxes III King of Kings of Persia 338336 BC Succeeded by Darius III Pharaoh of Egypt XXXI Dynasty 338336 BC v t e Median and Achaemenid kings Family tree Median 728550 BC Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages Achaemenid 550330 BC Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cyrus II Cambyses II Smerdis Gaumata Darius the Great Darius I Xerxes the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Nothus Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Italics indicate kings not directly attested and so possibly legendary. v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleArsesofPersiaoldid1210682726 Categories 
4 thcentury BC Kings of the Achaemenid Empire 
4 thcentury BC Pharaohs Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Pharaohs of the Achaemenid dynasty of Egypt Thirtyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 336 BC deaths 
4 thcentury BC murdered monarchs Murdered Persian monarchs Deaths by poisoning 
4 thcentury BC Iranian people Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Old Persian ca. 600400 B.C.language text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Avestanlanguage text Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 27 February 2024 at 2123 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width