Darius III - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Historiography 
3 Background 
4 Early life 
5 Conflict with the Greeks Toggle Conflict with the Greeks subsection 
5.1 Philips campaign 
5.2 Alexanders campaign 
6 Flight imprisonment and death 
7 Notes 
8 References 
9 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 
9.1 Ancient works 
9.2 Modern works 
10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Darius III 72 languages  Azrbaycanca    Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego     Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy     Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Trke   Ting Vit Winaray   Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Darius III of Persia Last king of the Achaemenid Empire r. 336330 BC Darius III  King of Kings Great King King of Persia Pharaoh of Egypt King of Countries Depiction of Darius III during the Battle of Issus in the Alexander Mosaic c.100 BC ancient Roman floor mosaic from the House of the Faun in Pompeii Italy King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Reign 336330 BC Predecessor Artaxerxes IV Arses Successor Alexander the Great Macedonian Empire Artaxerxes V Bessus selfproclaimed Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 336332 BC Predecessor Artaxerxes IV Arses Successor Alexander the Great Born c.380 BC Died July 330 BC aged approximately 50 Parthia Burial Persepolis Spouse Stateira I Issue Stateira II Drypetis Ochus Dynasty Achaemenid Father Arsames Mother Sisygambis Religion Zoroastrianism Darius III Old Persian  Drayavau Greek  Dareios c. 380  330 BC was the last Achaemenid King of Kings of Persia reigning from 336 BC to his death in 330 BC. Contrary to his predecessor Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius was a distant member of the Achaemenid dynasty. During his early career he was reportedly an obscure figure among his peers and first rose to prominence during the Cadusian expedition of Artaxerxes III in the 3
50 s BC. As a reward for his bravery he was given the Satrapy of Armenia. Around 340 BC he was placed in charge of the royal postal service a highranking position. In 338 BC Artaxerxes III met an abrupt end after being poisoned by the court eunuch and chiliarch hazahrapatish Bagoas who installed Artaxerxes youngest son Arses on the throne. He only reigned for a few years until Bagoas had him poisoned as well. Darius was subsequently installed on the throne and soon forced Bagoas to drink his poison after discovering that the eunuch had planned to poison him as well. In 334 BC Alexander the Great began his invasion of the Persian Empire and subsequently defeated the Persians in several battles before looting and destroying their capital Persepolis by fire in 330 BC. With the Persian Empire now effectively under Alexanders control Alexander then decided to pursue Darius. Before Alexander reached him however Darius was killed by his relative Bessus who was also the satrap of Bactria. Darius is partially remembered in Iranian traditions as Dara II the last king of the mythological Kayanian dynasty which reflected memories of the Achaemenids. Name Before his accession Darius bore the name of Artashata Old Persian Artaiyta Happy in Arta.12 The 
2 ndcentury Roman historian Justin is the only historian to refer Darius as Codomannus a name he supposedly bore before he rose to prominence. It may have been his nickname or possibly a third name. Its etymology is uncertain.13 Badian has suggested that the name was of Western Semitic origin most likely from the Aramaic qdmwn from the East Easterner.4 Having two names was not unusual there are several recorded instances of Babylonian figures having two names often a Babylonian and Aramaic name. One Persian magnate is also attested with a Babylonian and Iranian name. However this practice seems to have fallen out of favour during Darius lifetime. Badian suggests that his birth name was the Aramaic Codomannus which he later dropped in favour of Artashata when he rose in ranks.5 He first adopted the regnal name of Darius Old Persian Darayavahau he who holds firm the goodness when he ascended the Achaemenid throne in 336 BC.16 Historiography The last century of the Achaemenid era is notable for lacking in sources especially during the reign of Darius III. He is not attested in any Persian sources and is almost completely only known from the reports of Greek historians who portray his career as a contradiction to that of the successful Alexander the Great.1 Background Darius was born in c.380 BC. He was a distant member of the royal Achaemenid dynasty. He was the son of a certain Arsames and grandson of Ostanes whose father Darius II ruled the Achaemenid Empire from 424 BC to 405 BC.1 His mother was Sisygambis a woman of obscure origins. She was probably of Achaemenid descent although it is unknown to which branch she belonged. She may have been the daughter of Ostanes and thus the sister of Arsames.7 Darius had a brother and sister Oxyathres and Stateira I respectively.81 Early life Coin minted in by Cilicia by its satrap Mazaeus portraying Artaxerxes III as pharaoh on the obverse while a lion is depicted on the reverse Artashata is first attested during the Cadusian expedition of Artaxerxes III r.358338 BC in the 3
50 s BC. During a battle Artashata distinguished himself by slaying a warrior in single combat. His exploit was noticed by Artaxerxes III who sent him gifts and gave him the Satrapy of Armenia.19 It was probably after this promotion that Artashata married for the first time to an unknown noblewoman who bore him two daughters and possibly a son named Ariobarzanes.10 His first marriage has suggested being the terminus ad quem for when he dropped his Aramaic name Codomannus.11 Greek writers report that Artashata later became the courier and slave of the king which some modern historians believe was written to belittle Artashata. However the terms are in reality a Greek translation of the Old Persian bandaka which did not mean slave but henchman loyal servant vassal.11213 On the Behistun inscription Darius the Great r.522486 BC uses the term to refer to his highranking officers.14 It has been deduced that Artashata was probably in charge of the royal postal service a highranking position. He may have held the same Persepolis sector headed by the prominent Persian officer Pharnaces d. 497 BC.114 It is uncertain when this happened it has been suggested this promotion took place around 340 BC when Artashata married for a second time with his sister Stateira I. In 339 BC they had a son named Ochus.1 This demonstrates that Artaxerxes III who was highly alert on any possible relative to challenge the throne did not consider Artashata to pose the slightest threat to him or his son Arses.14 In late Augustlate September 338 BC the court eunuch and chiliarch hazahrapatish Bagoas orchestrated the poisoning and subsequent death of Artaxerxes III through the latters physician.a1617 The majority of Artaxerxes IIIs sons except for Arses and Bisthanes were also murdered by Bagoas.18 Artaxerxes IIIs early death proved to be a problematic issue for Persia.18 Several modern historians argue that his sudden death paved the way for the fall of the Achaemenid Empire.19 Bagoas acting as kingmaker put the young Arses Artaxerxes IV on the throne.182021 Arses was determined on trying to free himself from Bagoas authority and influence he made an unsuccessful effort to have the latter poisoned only to be poisoned himself along with the rest of his family by Bagoas who put Artashata on the throne in 336 BC.20 Darius IIIs reputation for bravery his probable royal descent and the support he enjoyed from Artaxerxes III all helped him gain acceptance amongst the aristocracy.111 Macedonian propaganda made to legitimize the conquests of Alexander the Great a few years later accused Darius III of playing a key role in the murder of Arses who was portrayed as the last king of the Achaemenid royal house.22 Conflict with the Greeks Philips campaign Bagoas soon attempted to poison Darius III as well but his plans were discovered. Darius III summoned Bagoas and asked him to drink a toast for him giving him his cup which was filled with poison. Bagoas was forced to drink the cup resulting in his death.2324 This happened around the time of Alexanders accession to the Macedonian throne in the autumn of 336 BC.11 At the start of Darius IIIs reign Egypt and Babylon may have briefly been plunged into rebellion. Regardless they were seemingly not of heavy significance as reports about the events quickly disappear.1 In 336 BC Philip II of Macedon was authorized by the League of Corinth as its Hegemon to initiate a sacred war of vengeance against the Persians for desecrating and burning the Athenian temples during the Second Persian War over a century before. He sent an advance force into Asia Minor under the command of his generals Parmenion and Attalus to liberate the Greeks living under Persian control. After they took the Greek cities of Asia from Troy to the Maiandros river Philip was assassinated and his campaign was suspended while his heir consolidated his control of Macedonia and the rest of Greece. Alexanders campaign Darius III portrayed in the middle in battle against Alexander in a Greek depiction Possible illustration of either Battle of Issus or Battle of Gaugamela Dariuss flight at the Battle of Gaugamela 
18 thcentury ivory relief In the spring of 334 BC Philips heir Alexander who had himself been confirmed as Hegemon by the League of Corinth invaded Asia Minor at the head of an army of Macedonian and other Greek soldiers. This invasion which marked the beginning of the Wars of Alexander the Great was followed almost immediately by the victory of Alexander over the Persians at Battle of the Granicus. Darius never showed up for the battle because there was no reason for him to suppose that Alexander intended to conquer the whole of Asia and Darius may well have supposed that the satraps of the lower satrapies could deal with the crisis25 so he instead decided to remain at home in Persepolis and let his satraps handle it. In the previous invasion of Asia Minor by the Spartan king Agesilaus II the Persians had pinned him in Asia Minor while fomenting rebellion in Greece. Darius attempted to employ the same strategy with the Spartans rebelling against the Macedonians but the Spartans were defeated at Megalopolis. Darius did not take the field against Alexanders army until a year and a half after Granicus at the Battle of Issus in 333 BC. His forces outnumbered Alexanders soldiers by at least a 2 to 1 ratio but Darius was still outflanked defeated and forced to flee. It is told by Arrian that at the Battle of Issus the moment the Persian left went to pieces under Alexanders attack and Darius in his warchariot saw that it was cut off he incontinently fled  indeed he led the race for safety.26 On the way he left behind his chariot his bow and his royal mantle all of which were later picked up by Alexander. Greek sources such as Diodorus Siculus Library of History and Justins Epitoma Historiarum Philippicarum recount that Darius fled out of fear at the Battle of Issus and again two years later at the Battle of Gaugamela despite commanding a larger force in a defensive position each time.27 At the Battle of Issus Darius III even caught Alexander by surprise and failed to defeat Alexanders forces.28 Darius fled so far so fast that Alexander was able to capture Darius headquarters and take Darius family as prisoners in the process. Darius petitioned to Alexander through letters several times to get his family back but Alexander refused to do so unless Darius would acknowledge him as the new emperor of Persia. Circumstances were more in Darius favor at the Battle of Gaugamela in 331 BC. He had a good number of troops who had been organized on the battlefield properly he had the support of the armies of several of his satraps and the ground on the battlefield was almost perfectly even so as not to impede movement of his scythed chariots. Despite all these beneficial factors he still fled the battle before any victor had been decided and deserted his experienced commanders as well as one of the largest armies ever assembled.29 Another source accounts that when Darius perceived the fierce attack of Alexander as at Issus he turned his chariot around and was the first to flee30 once again abandoning all of his soldiers and his property to be taken by Alexander. Many Persian soldiers died that day so many in fact that after the battle the casualties of the enemy ensured that Darius would never again raise an imperial army.31 Darius then fled to Ecbatana and attempted to raise a third army while Alexander took possession of Babylon Susa and the Persian capital at Persepolis. Darius reportedly offered all of his empire west of the Euphrates River to Alexander in exchange for peace several times each time denied by Alexander against the advice of his senior commanders.32 Alexander could have declared victory after the capture of Persepolis but he instead decided to pursue Darius. The Battle of Gaugamela in which Alexander the Great defeated Darius III of Persia in 331 BC took place approximately 100 kilometres 62 mi west of Erbil Iraq. After the battle Darius managed to flee to the city. However somewhat inaccurately the confrontation is sometimes known as the Battle of Arbela. Flight imprisonment and death Murder of Darius and Alexander at the side of the dying king depicted in a 
15 thcentury manuscript Darius did attempt to restore his oncegreat army after his defeat at the hands of Alexander but he failed to raise a force comparable to that which had fought at Gaugamela partly because the defeat had undermined his authority and also because Alexanders liberal policy for instance in Babylonia and Persis offered an acceptable alternative to Persian policies.31 When at Ecbatana Darius learned of Alexanders approaching army he decided to retreat to Bactria where he could better use his cavalry and mercenary forces on the more even ground of the plains of Asia. He led his army through the Caspian Gates the main road through the mountains that would work to slow the following army.33 Persian forces became increasingly demoralized with the constant threat of a surprise attack from Alexander leading to many desertions and eventually a coup led by Bessus a satrap and Nabarzanes who managed all audiences with the King and was in charge of the palace guard.34 The two men suggested to Darius that the army regroup under Bessus and that power would be transferred back to the King once Alexander was defeated. Darius did not accept this plan and his conspirators became more anxious to remove him for his successive failures against Alexander and his forces. Patron a Greek mercenary encouraged Darius to accept a bodyguard of Greek mercenaries rather than his usual Persian guard to protect him from Bessus and Nabarzanes but the King could not accept for political reasons and grew accustomed to his fate.35 Bessus and Nabarzanes eventually bound Darius and threw him in an oxcart while they ordered the Persian forces to continue. According to Curtius History of Alexander at this point Alexander and a small mobile force arrived and threw the Persians into a panic leading Bessus and two other conspirators Satibarzanes and Barsaentes to wound the king with their javelins and leave him to die.36 The Family of Darius before Alexander by Paolo Veronese 1570. A Macedonian soldier found Darius either dead or dying in the wagon shortly thereaftera disappointment to Alexander who wanted to capture Darius alive. Alexander saw Darius dead body in the wagon and took the signet ring off the dead kings finger. Afterwards he sent Dariuss body back to Persepolis gave him a magnificent funeral and ordered that he be buried like all his royal predecessors in the royal tombs.37 Dariuss tomb has not yet been discovered.38 Alexander eventually married Darius daughter Stateira at Susa in 324 BC. With the old king defeated and given a proper burial Alexanders rulership of Persia became official. This led to Darius being regarded by some historians as cowardly and inefficient39 as under his rulership the entirety of the Persian Empire fell to a foreign invader. After killing Darius Bessus took the regal name Artaxerxes V and began calling himself the King of Asia.31 He was subsequently captured by Alexander tortured and executed. Another of Darius generals ingratiated himself to Alexander by giving the conqueror Darius favored companion Bagoas.40 Notes  According to a Babylonian tablet Artaxerxes III went to his fate which is often understood to indicate death from natural causes. However the same wording is also used to refer to the death of Xerxes I r.486  465 BC who was in reality assassinated by his son.15 References  a b c d e f g h i j k l EIr. 1994 pp. 5154.  Briant 2015 p. 48.  Briant 2015 p. 49.  Badian 2000 p. 247.  Badian 2000 p. 249.  Schmitt 1994 p. 40.  Badian 2015.  Briant 2015 p. 417.  Badian 2000 pp. 245 251.  Badian 2000 p. 251.  a b c Badian 2000 p. 252.  Badian 2000 pp. 249250.  Eilers  Herrenschmidt 1988 pp. 682685.  a b c Badian 2000 p. 250.  Waters 2014 p. 198.  Waters 2014 p. 197.  Dandamaev 1989 p. 312.  a b c Schmitt 1986 pp. 658659.  Briant 2015 p. 88.  a b LeCoq 1986 p. 548.  Briant 2002 p. 690.  Briant 2002 p. 770.  Diodorus Siculus Book XVII Chapter 5.  Heckel 2020 pp. 1112.  George Cawkwell The Greek Wars The Failure of Persia p. 209  Arrian The Campaigns of Alexander.  John Prevas Envy of the Gods Alexanders Illfated Journey across Asia Da Capo Press 2004 47.  Prevas 47.  Prevas 48  Ulrich Wilcken Alexander the Great.  a b c N.G.L. Hammond The Genius of Alexander the Great.  Prevas 52  Prevas 55  Prevas 60  Prevas 6465  Prevas 69  Prevas 71  Siegfried Lauffer Alexander der Groe. third edition Dtv Munich 1993 ISBN 3423042982 p. 114  W.W. Tarn Alexander the Great.  This was a different Bagoas than the unfaithful minister mentioned above. Crompton Louis. Homosexuality  Civilization Belknap Press of Harvard University Press 2003 p. 76. Bibliography Ancient works Diodorus Siculus Bibliotheca historica. Modern works Badian Ernst 2000. Darius III. Harvard Studies in Classical Philology. 100 241267. doi
10.2 3073185218. JSTOR 3185218. registration required Badian Ernst 2015. Sisigambis. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition. New York.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link Briant Pierre 1985. Alexander the Great. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition Vol. I Fasc. 8. New York. pp. 827830.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link Briant Pierre 2002. From Cyrus to Alexander A History of the Persian Empire. Eisenbrauns. pp. 11196. ISBN 9781575061207. Briant Pierre 2015 Darius in the Shadow of Alexander Harvard University Press ISBN 9780674745209 Dandamaev Muhammad A. 1989. A Political History of the Achaemenid Empire. Brill. ISBN 9789004091726. Eilers W. Herrenschmidt C. 1988. Banda. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition Vol. III Fasc. 7. New York. pp. 682685.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link EIr. 1994. Darius v. Darius III. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition Vol. VI Fasc. 1. New York. pp. 5154.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link Frye R. N. 1988. Bbak 1. Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. III Fasc. 3. pp. 298299. Hanaway William L. 1994. Drbnma. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition Vol. VII Fasc. 1. New York. pp. 89.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link Heckel Waldemar 2020. In the Path of Conquest Resistance to Alexander the Great. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780190076689. LeCoq P. 1986. Arses. Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. II Fasc. 5. p. 548. LlewellynJones Lloyd 2017. The Achaemenid Empire. In Daryaee Touraj ed.. King of the Seven Climes A History of the Ancient Iranian World 3000 BCE  651 CE. UCI Jordan Center for Persian Studies. ISBN 9780692864401. Olbrycht Marek Jan 2016. Dynastic Connections in the Arsacid Empire and the Origins of the House of Ssn. In Curtis Vesta Sarkhosh Pendleton Elizabeth J. Alram Michael Daryaee Touraj eds.. The Parthian and Early Sasanian Empires Adaptation and Expansion. Oxbow Books. ISBN 9781785702082. Roberts John. Darius III. Oxford Reference. Oxford University Press. Schmitt R. 1986. Artaxerxes III. Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. II Fasc. 6. pp. 658659. Schmitt Rudiger 1994. Darius i. The Name. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition Vol. VII Fasc. 1. New York. p. 40.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link Tafazzoli Ahmad 1994. Drb 1. Encyclopdia Iranica online edition Vol. VII Fasc. 1. New York. pp. 12.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link Waters Matt 2014. Ancient Persia A Concise History of the Achaemenid Empire 550330 BCE. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1272. ISBN 9781107652729. Further reading Charles Michael 2016. Two notes on Darius III. The Cambridge Classical Journal. 62 5264. doi
10.1 0
17 S1750270516000063. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Darius III. Darius III Achaemenid dynasty Born c.380 BC Died 330 BC Preceded by Arses King of Kings of Persia 336330 BC Succeeded by Bessus Pharaoh of Egypt XXXI Dynasty 336332 BC Succeeded by Alexander the Great v t e Median and Achaemenid kings Family tree Median 728550 BC Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages Achaemenid 550330 BC Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cyrus II Cambyses II Smerdis Gaumata Darius the Great Darius I Xerxes the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Nothus Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Italics indicate kings not directly attested and so possibly legendary. v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Kings of Babylon List of kings of Babylon Royal titles Period Dynasty Kings foreign ruler vassal king female Old Babylonian Empire 18941595 BC I Sumuabum SumulaEl Sabium ApilSin SinMuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna AbiEshuh AmmiDitana AmmiSaduqa SamsuDitana II Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Unknown king  Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Kassite period 17291157 BC III Gandash Agum I Kashtiliash I Unknown king AbiRattash Kashtiliash II Urzigurumash Agum II HarbaShipak Shiptaulzi Unknown king Burnaburiash I Ulamburiash Kashtiliash III Agum III KadashmanSah Karaindash KadashmanHarbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I BurnaBuriash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Babylonian period 1157732 BC IV Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur V Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi VI Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna VII Marbitiaplausur VIII Nabmukinapli Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabusumaukin II NeoAssyrian period 732626 BC IX Nabumukinzeri TiglathPileser III Shalmaneser V Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon II Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Aurndinumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Sennacherib Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal amaumaukin Ashurbanipal Kandalanu Snumulir Sinsharishkun NeoBabylonian Empire 626539 BC X Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Babylon under foreign rule 539 BC  AD 224 Persian period 539331 BC XI Cyrus II Cambyses II Bardiya Nebuchadnezzar III Darius I Nebuchadnezzar IV Xerxes I Shamasheriba Belshimanni Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV NidinBel  Darius III Hellenistic period 331141 BC XII Alexander III Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antigonus I Monophthalmus XIII Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Seleucus Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III Megas Antiochus Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Timarchus Demetrius I Soter Alexander Balas Demetrius II Nicator Parthian period 141 BC  AD 224 XIV Mithridates I Phraates II Rinnu Antiochus VII Sidetes Phraates II Ubulna Hyspaosines Artabanus I Mithridates II Gotarzes I Asiabatar Orodes I Ispubarza Sinatruces Phraates III Piriustana Teleuniqe Orodes II Phraates IV Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Vonones II Vologases I Pacorus II Artabanus III Osroes I Vologases III Parthamaspates Vologases IV Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV Category v t e Shahnameh of Ferdowsi Characters Pishdadian Keyumars Hushang Tahmuras Jamshid Fereydun Iraj Manuchehr Nowzar Zaav Garshasp Kayanian Kay Kawd Kay Kvus Kay Khosrow Kay Lohrasp Goshtasb Kay Bahman Humay Chehrzad Kay Darab Dara II Male characters Jamasp Siamak Shahrasp Abtin Kayanoush Kve Arash Salm Tur Qobd Qaren Tous Gostaham Gershasp Nariman Sm Zl Rostam Sohrab Esfandiyr Pashotan Faramarz Fariborz Siyvash Farud Zangayi Shavaran Kashvad Goudarz Giv Bizhan Rohham Bahram Hojir Gorgin Zavara Shaghad Rostam Farrokhzd Barbad Eskandar Alexander Female characters Faranak Arnavz Shahrnz Sindukht Rudaba Sudabeh Tahmina Banu Goshasp Gordafarid Farangis Manizheh Katyoun Tazian Mardas Zahhak Mehrab Kaboli Turanian Zadashm Pashang Aghrirat Garsivaz Afrasiab Tageuo Shideh Arjasp Viseh Piran Houman Barman Nastihan Biderafsh Clans and families Kashvadian House of Goudarz House of Viseh House of Nowzar House of Sasan House of Sm Creatures and animals Akvan Div Kharvazan Div Arzhang Div Dive Sepid KouladGhandi Huma bird Simurgh Rakhsh Shabdiz Shabrang White Elephant Places Iran Turan Zabulistan Sistan Kabul Balkh Ctesiphon Estakhr Mazandaran Alborzkouh Mount Damavand Tammisha KasaRoud Other locations... Structures Gonbadan Castle Dezi Gonbadan Roein Castle Dezi Roein Sepid Castle Dezhi Sepid Bahman Castle Dezhi Bahman Alanan Castle Dezhi Alanan Gang Castle GangDez Manuscripts Florence Shahnameh Great Mongol Shahnameh or Demotte Baysonghor Shahnameh Shahnameh of Shah Tahmasp Shahnameh of Rashida Windsor Shahnameh Davari Shahnameh Related Daqiqi AbuMansuri Shahnameh Derafsh Kaviani Babre Bayan Zal and Rudabeh Rostam and Sohrab Rostam and Esfandiyar Rostams Seven Labours Davazdah Rokh Khosrow and Shirin Bijan and Manijeh Persian mythology Category Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 WorldCat National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Australia Netherlands Poland Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDariusIIIoldid1210679486 Categories Darius III 
4 thcentury BC Kings of the Achaemenid Empire 
4 thcentury BC Pharaohs Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenid satraps of Armenia People in the deuterocanonical books Pharaohs of the Achaemenid dynasty of Egypt Thirtyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 3
80 s BC births 330 BC deaths 
4 thcentury BC murdered monarchs Opponents of Alexander the Great Deaths by javelin Murdered Persian monarchs 
4 thcentury BC Iranian people Shahnameh characters Dethroned monarchs Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia semiprotected pages Articles containing Old Persian ca. 600400 B.C.language text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Pages with login required references or sources CS1 maint location missing publisher Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 27 February 2024 at 2059 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width