File:Alexander III of Macedon.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileAlexander III of Macedon.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. AlexanderIIIofMacedon.jpg 269  358 pixels file size 75 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. DescriptionAlexander III of Macedon.jpg English Alexander III of Macedon. Date Original c. 100 BC Cropped 5 March 2013 Source Cropped from FileBattleofIssus3
33 BCmosaicdetail1.jpg Author Unknown authorUnknown author Permission Reusing this file This is a faithful photographic reproduction of a twodimensional public domain work of art. The work of art itself is in the public domain for the following reason Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. You must also include a United States public domain tag to indicate why this work is in the public domain in the United States. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse The official position taken by the Wikimedia Foundation is that faithful reproductions of twodimensional public domain works of art are public domain. This photographic reproduction is therefore also considered to be in the public domain in the United States. In other jurisdictions reuse of this content may be restricted see Reuse of PDArt photographs for details. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts media type imagejpeg checksum dcc1909988
77 a
59 d739
27 d477
54 e
70 cd9
41 ec480 determination method SHA1 data size 77160 byte height 358 pixel width 269 pixel File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2250 5 March 2013 269  358 75 KB TRAJAN 117 Information Description en
1 Alexander III of Macedon. Source Cropped from httpcommons.wikimedia.orgwikiFileBattleofIssus3
33 BCmosaicdetail1.jpg Author unknownAuthor Date Original c. 100 B... File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org    Usage on arz.wikipedia.org    Usage on az.wikipedia.org Makedoniya arl stifadiAtro SAzrbaycan hkmdarlarnn siyahs Usage on da.wikipedia.org Monarker af Persien Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Lista de monarcas da ndia Lista de monarcas da Prsia Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam perzijskih kraljev Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi ran hkmdarlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org    Usage on ur.wikipedia.org           Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. JPEG file comment File written by Adobe Photoshop 
4.0  Orientation Normal Software used Microsoft Windows Photo Gallery 

6.0.6 0
01.1 8000 File change date and time 2236 5 March 2013 Unique image ID 
9 D
8 C
0 DCD5
29 C
4 C
75 B
8 F
5 EA
7 CCF
2 AEF42 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileAlexanderIIIofMacedon.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width