View source for List of pharaohs - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk View source for List of pharaohs Add languages Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item  List of pharaohs You do not have permission to edit this page for the following reason This IP address has been blocked from editing Wikipedia. This does not affect your ability to read Wikipedia pages. Most people who see this message have done nothing wrong. Some kinds of blocks restrict editing from specific service providers or telecom companies in response to recent abuse or vandalism and can sometimes affect other users who are unrelated to that abuse. Review the information below for assistance if you do not believe that you have done anything wrong. The IP address or range 1
56.2 

08.0.0 16 has been blocked disabled by Materialscientist for the following reasons To edit please log in. Last edited Last edited by 1530 8 May 2024 UTC Usermulti error no username detected help. Editing by unregistered users from your shared IP address or address range may be currently disabled due to abuse. However you are still able to edit if you sign in with an account. If you are currently blocked from creating an account and cannot create one elsewhere in the foreseeable future you may follow the instructions at WikipediaRequest an account to request that volunteers create your username for you. Please use an email address issued to you by your ISP school or organization so that we may verify that you are a legitimate user on this network. Please reference this block in the comment section of the form. Please check on this list that the username you choose has not already been taken. We apologize for any inconvenience. This block will expire on 0031 8 August 2024. Even when blocked you will usually still be able to edit your user talk page as well as email administrators and other editors. For information on how to proceed please read the FAQ for blocked users and the guideline on block appeals. The guide to appealing blocks may also be helpful. Other useful links Blocking policy  HelpI have been blocked You can view and copy the source of this page Argead Dynasty This section is linked from Alexander the Great MainArgead dynastyThe Macedonian Greeks ancientMacedonian Greeks under Alexander the Great ushered in the Hellenistic period with his conquest of Persia and Egypt. The Argead dynastyArgeads ruled from 332 to 309 BC classwikitable width100 width15  ImageThrone name width15  Personal name width50  Comments width20  Dates FileAlexander III of Macedon.jpg1
00 px Setpenre Meryamun Aluksindres Alexander the Great Formally Alexander III of Macedon conquered IranPersia and Egypt. 33213 June 323 BCref nameStewart83 FileThodule Devria French  Closeup of a Sculpture Profile of a Head Karnak  Google Art Project.jpg1
00 px Setpenre Meryamun Pelupuisa Philip III of MacedonPhilip Arrhidaeuswidth400 Formally Philip III of Macedon. Mentally disabled halfbrother of Alexander the Great. 323317 BC FileAlexandros IV Aigos Budge.png1
00 pxKhaibre Setepenamun Aluksindres Alexander IV of MacedonAlexander IV Formally Alexander IV of Macedon. Son of Alexander the Great and Roxana. 317309 BC Return to List of pharaohs. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiListofpharaohs Hidden category UserLinks transclusions with errors Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width