Alexander IV of Macedon - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Birth 
2 Regents 
3 Civil war 
4 Death 
5 References 
6 Further reading 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexander IV of Macedon 50 languages  Azrbaycanca    Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto  Franais    Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar    Nederlands   Norsk bokml Polski Portugus   Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska    Trke  Ting Vit  Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia King of Macedon from 323322309 BC You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Russian. October 2023 Click show for important translation instructions. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate rather than simply copypasting machinetranslated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or lowquality. If possible verify the text with references provided in the foreignlanguage article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Russian Wikipedia article at ru IV   see its history for attribution. You may also add the template Translatedru IV   to the talk page. For more guidance see WikipediaTranslation. This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Alexander IV of Macedon  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR April 2021 Learn how and when to remove this message Alexander IV Megas Basileus King of Macedonia Reign 323322309 BC Predecessor Philip III Successor Cassander Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 323322309 BC Predecessor Philip III Successor Ptolemy I Royal titulary Horus name Hunu weser pehty1 The youthful one powerful of strength1 Nebty name Mery netjeru redi en.ef iaut en it.ef1 Beloved of the gods to whom the office of his father was given1 Golden Horus Heqa nakht em ta erdjeref1 Victorious ruler in the entire land1 Prenomen Praenomen Haa ib re setep en imen1 Who continually rejoices over the mind Re chosen by Amun1 Ra makes the heart rejoice elected by Amun 2 Nomen Aleksindres1 Alexandros1 King of Persia Reign 323322309 BC Predecessor Philip III Successor Seleucus I Born 323 or 322 BC Babylon Died Late summer 309 BC aged 13 or 14 Macedon Dynasty Argead Father Alexander III of Macedon Mother Roxana of Bactria Religion Ancient Greek religion Alexander IV Greek  323322 309 BC sometimes erroneously called Aegus in modern times3 was the son of Alexander the Great Alexander III of Macedon and Princess Roxana of Bactria. Birthedit Alexander IV was the son of Alexander the Great a Macedonian Greek and Alexanders wife Roxana a Sogdian.456 He was the grandson of Philip II of Macedon. Because Roxana was pregnant when Alexander the Great died on 11 June 323 BC and the sex of the baby was unknown there was dissension in the Macedonian army regarding the order of succession. While the infantry supported Alexander the Greats halfbrother Philip III who had some unknown cognitive disability present throughout his life7 the chiliarch Perdiccas commander of the elite Companion cavalry persuaded them to wait in the hope that Roxanas child would be male. The factions compromised deciding that Perdiccas would rule the Empire as regent while Philip would reign but only as a figurehead with no real power. If the child was male then he would be king. Alexander IV was born in late 323 or early 322 BC. Regentsedit After a severe regency military failure in Egypt and mutiny in the army Perdiccas was assassinated by his senior officers in May or June 321 or 320 BC problems with Diodoruss chronology have made the year uncertain8 after which Antipater was named as the new regent at the Partition of Triparadisus. He brought with him Roxana and the two kings to Macedon and gave up the pretence of ruling Alexanders Empire leaving former provinces in Egypt and Asia under the control of the satraps. When Antipater died in 319 BC he left Polyperchon a Macedonian general who had served under Philip II and Alexander the Great as his successor passing over his own son Cassander. Civil waredit Cassander allied himself with Ptolemy Soter Antigonus and Eurydice the ambitious wife of king Philip Arrhidaeus and declared war upon the regency. Polyperchon was allied with Eumenes and Olympias. Although Polyperchon was successful at first taking control of the Greek cities his fleet was destroyed by Antigonus in 318 BC. When after the battle Cassander assumed full control of Macedon Polyperchon was forced to flee to Epirus followed by Roxana and the young Alexander. A few months later Olympias was able to persuade her relative Aeacides of Epirus to invade Macedon with Polyperchon. When Olympias took the field Eurydices army refused to fight against the mother of Alexander and defected to Olympias after which Polyperchon and Aeacides retook Macedon. Philip and Eurydice were captured and executed on December 25 317 BC leaving Alexander IV king and Olympias in effective control as she was his regent. Cassander returned in the following year 316 BC conquering Macedon once again. Olympias was immediately executed while the king and his mother were taken prisoner and held in the citadel of Amphipolis9 under the supervision of Glaucias. When the general peace between Cassander Antigonus Ptolemy and Lysimachus put an end to the Third Diadoch War in 311 BC the peace treaty recognized Alexander IVs rights and explicitly stated that when he came of age he would succeed Cassander as ruler. Deathedit Tomb III in Vergina which probably belonged to Alexander IV Following the treaty defenders of the Argead dynasty began to declare that Alexander IV should now exercise full power and that a regent was no longer needed since he had almost reached the significant age of 14 the age at which a Macedonian noble could become a court page. Cassanders response was definitive to secure his rule in 309 BC he commanded Glaucias to secretly assassinate the 
14 yearold Alexander IV and his mother. The orders were carried out and they were both poisoned. There is controversy about the exact year of Alexander IVs death because of conflicting sources but the consensus of ancient Macedonian scholars N.G.L. Hammond and F.W. Walbank in A History of Macedonia Vol. 3 was that Alexander was killed late in the summer of 309 BC shortly after his alleged halfbrother Heracles. However classical historian Peter Green contends that Heracles was killed after Alexander IVs assassination.10 One of the royal tombs discovered by the archaeologist Manolis Andronikos in the socalled Great Tumulus in Vergina in 19778 is believed to belong to Alexander IV.11 Referencesedit  a b c d e f g h i j Leprohon 2013. Doxey Denise M. ed.. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary. Atlanta Society of Biblical Literature. p. 176. Retrieved 29 September 2022.  Lepsius Karl Richard 1849. Denkmler aus gypten und thiopien IV. pp. 
1 a.  The error was caused by a modern misreading  for  of the text of Ptolemys Canon of Kings. See e.g. Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Alexander the Great s.v. Alexander Aegus . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 1 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 549. and Chugg Andrew Michael 2007. The Quest for the Tomb of Alexander the Great. Lulu. p. 42. ISBN 9780955679001. At Google Books.  Ahmed S. Z. 2004 Chaghatai the Fabulous Cities and People of the Silk Road West Conshokoken Infinity Publishing p. 61.  Strachan Edward and Roy Bolton 2008 Russia and Europe in the Nineteenth Century London Sphinx Fine Art p. 87 ISBN 9781907200021.  Livius.org. Roxane. Articles on Ancient History. Page last modified 17 August 2015. Retrieved on 29 August 2016.  Habicht Christian 1998. Hellnistik Athna 1. ekdos ed.. Ekdoseis Odysseas. p. 69. ISBN 9602103108.  Anson Edward M Summer 1986. Diodorus and the Date of Triparadeisus. The American Journal of Philology. 107 2. The Johns Hopkins University Press 208217. doi
10.2 307294603. JSTOR 294603.  Anson Edward M. 20140714. Alexanders Heirs The Age of the Successors. John Wiley  Sons. p. 116. ISBN 9781444339628.  Green Peter. Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic Age. p44 2007 Ed.  Royal Tombs Vergina. Macedonian Heritage. Archived from the original on 10 December 2017. Retrieved 9 July 2013. Further readingedit Smith William editor Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology Alexander IV Boston 1867. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alexander IV of Macedon. Livius.org Alexander IV Wiki Classical Dictionary Alexander IV Alexander IV of Macedon Argead dynasty Born 323 BC Died 309 BC Regnal titles Preceded by Philip III King of Macedon 323309 BC Succeeded by Cassander King of Persia 323309 BC Succeeded by Seleucus I Nicator Pharaoh of Egypt 323309 BC Succeeded by Ptolemy I Soter King of Thrace 323309 BC Succeeded by Lysimachus King of Asia Minor 323309 BC Succeeded by Antigonus I Monophthalmus v t e Kings of Macedon Legendary Caranus Coenus Tyrimmas Vergina Sun Argead dynasty Perdiccas I Argaeus I Philip I Aeropus I Alcetas Amyntas I Alexander I Perdiccas II Archelaus Orestes Aeropus II Amyntas II Pausanias Amyntas III Argaeus II Alexander II Ptolemy of Aloros Perdiccas III Amyntas IV Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Alexander IV Antipatrid dynasty Cassander Philip IV Antipater I Alexander V Dynastic conflict Demetrius I Pyrrhus Lysimachus Ptolemy Ceraunus Meleager Antipater II Sosthenes Antigonus II Pyrrhus Antigonid dynasty Antigonus II Demetrius II Antigonus III Philip V Perseus PostConquest Rebel Kings Andriscus PseudoAlexander PseudoPhilipPseudoPerseus Euephenes Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics. v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAlexanderIVofMacedonoldid1220666238 Categories 323 BC births 309 BC deaths 
4 thcentury BC Macedonian monarchs 
4 thcentury BC murdered monarchs 
4 thcentury BC Pharaohs Ancient child monarchs Argead kings of Macedonia Deaths by poisoning Family of Alexander the Great Greek people of Iranian descent Monarchs of Persia Murdered royalty of Macedonia ancient kingdom People who died under the regency of Cassander Pharaohs of the Argead dynasty Monarchs who died as children Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Russian Wikipedia Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 April 2024 at 0506 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width