Philip III of Macedon - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 
1.1 Succession 
1.2 Regents 
1.3 Death 
2 Tomb 
3 Arrhidaeus in fiction 
4 References 
5 Sources 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Philip III of Macedon 45 languages  Azrbaycanca   Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto  Franais    Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Trke  Ting Vit  Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Philip III of Macedon  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR May 2013 Learn how and when to remove this message King of Macedon from 323 to 317 BC Philip III Gold stater struck in Babylon sometime during Philips reign. Obv. helmeted head of Athena facing right rev. Nike standing left holding wreath and stylis. King of Macedonia Reign 323317 BC Predecessor Alexander III Successor Alexander IV Corulers Alexander IV 323317 Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 323317 BC Predecessor Alexander III Successor Alexander IV Royal titulary Horus name knt mrjmt Kanakht merymaat The strong bull beloved of Maat Nebty name swt Heqakhasut The ruler of foreign countries Golden Horus mrjw Meriu The beloved one Nomen plwpwys Pelupuisa Philippos King of Persia Reign 323317 BC Predecessor Alexander III Successor Alexander IV Born Arrhidaeus c.357 BC Died 317 BC Spouse Adea Eurydice Dynasty Argead dynasty Father Philip II Mother Philinna of Larissa Religion Ancient Greek religion Philip III Arrhidaeus Ancient Greek   romanized Phlippos Arrhidaos c.357 BC  317 BC was king of the ancient Greek kingdom of Macedonia from 323 until his execution in 317 BC. He was a son of King Philip II of Macedon by Philinna of Larissa and thus an elder halfbrother of Alexander the Great. Named Arrhidaeus at birth he assumed the name Philip when he ascended to the throne. As Arrhidaeus grew older it became apparent that he had mild learning difficulties. Plutarch was of the view that he became disabled by means of an attempt on his life by Philip IIs wife Queen Olympias who wanted to eliminate a possible rival to her son Alexander through the employment of pharmaka drugsspells however most modern authorities doubt the truth of this claim.1 Alexander was fond of Arrhidaeus and took him on his campaignscitation needed both to protect his life and to prevent his use as a pawn in any prospective challenge for the throne. After Alexanders death in Babylon in 323 BC the Macedonian army in Asia proclaimed Arrhidaeus as king2 however he served merely as a figurehead and as the pawn of a series of powerful generals.3 Biographyedit Philip III as pharaoh on a relief in Karnak Even though Arrhidaeus and Alexander were about the same age Arrhidaeus appears never to have been a danger as an alternative choice for Alexanders succession to Philip II. Nevertheless when the Persian satrap of Caria Pixodarus proposed his daughter in marriage to Alexander the king declined offering his son Arrhidaeus as husband instead and Alexander thought it prudent to block the dynastic union which might have produced a possible future heir to Philips domain before Alexander himself did resulting in considerable irritation on the part of his father 337 BC.4 Arrhidaeus whereabouts during the reign of his brother Alexander are unclear from the extant sources what is certain is that no civil or military command was given to him in those thirteen years 336323 BC. Successionedit Arrhidaeus was in Babylon at the time of Alexanders death on 10 June 323 BC. A succession crisis ensued. Arrhidaeus was the most obvious candidate but he was mentally disabled and thus unfit to rule.5 A conflict then arose between Perdiccas leader of the cavalry and Meleager who commanded the phalanx the first wanted to wait to see if Roxana Alexanders pregnant wife would deliver a son citation needed while Meleager objected that Arrhidaeus should be chosen king.6 A compromise was engineered in which Arrhidaeus would become king with the name of Philip III and would be joined by Roxanas yetunborn child as cosovereign should that child prove to be a male.7 This eventuality did indeed arise and resulted in Roxanas son Alexander becoming with his uncle Phillip cosovereign on the throne of Macedon. It was immediately decided that Philip Arrhidaeus would reign but not rule this was to be the prerogative of the new regent Perdiccas. When news arrived in Macedonia that Arrhidaeus had been chosen as king Cynane a daughter of Philip II developed a plan to travel to Asia and offer the new king her daughter Eurydice for his wife. This move was an obvious affront to the regent whom Cynane had completely bypassed and to prevent the marriage Perdiccas sent his brother Alcetas to kill Cynane. The reaction among the troops generated by this murder was such that the regent had to give up his opposition to the proposed match and accept the marriage. From that moment on Philip Arrhidaeus was to be under the sway of his bride a proud and determined woman bent on substantiating her husbands power. Regentsedit Coin of Philip III Arrhidaios. 323317 BC. AR Tetradrachm 
17.2 0 g 
1 h. Babylon mint. Struck under Perdikkas circa 323320 BC. Head of Herakles right wearing lion skin headdress  BASILEWS FILIPPOU Zeus Atophoros seated left wheel and monogram in left field monogram below throne. Eurydices chance to increase her husbands power came when the first war of the Diadochi sealed the fate of Perdiccas making a new settlement necessary. An agreement was made at Triparadisus in Syria in 321 BC. Eurydice moved deftly enough to achieve the removal of the first two designated regents Peithon and Arrhidaeus a namesake of her husband but was powerless to block the aspirations of Antipater whose position proved too powerful and the latter was made the new regent Philip Arrhidaeus and Eurydice were forced to follow Antipater back to Macedonia. The regent died of natural causes the following year nominating as his successor not his son Cassander but his friend and lieutenant Polyperchon. Cassanders refusal to accept his fathers decision sparked the Second War of the Diadochi in which Eurydice saw once again a chance to free Philip from the control of the regent. An opportunity presented itself in 317 BC when Cassander expelled Polyperchon from Macedonia. Eurydice immediately allied herself with Cassander and persuaded her husband to nominate him as the new regent. Cassander reciprocated by leaving her in full control of the country when he left to campaign in Greece. Deathedit That same year 317 BC Polyperchon and Olympias allied with her cousin Aeacides king of Epirus and invaded Macedonia. The Macedonian troops refused to fight Olympias the mother of Alexander. Philip and Eurydice had no choice but to escape only to be captured at Amphipolis and thrown into prison. It soon became clear that Philip was too dangerous to be left alive as Olympias many enemies saw him as a useful tool against her. She had him executed while his wife was forced to commit suicide.8 Tombedit Golden Larnax Chrysi Larnaka with the Sun of Vergina on the lid that contains the remains bones from the burial of King Philip II of Macedonia and the royal golden wreath. Formerly located at the Thessaloniki Archaeological Museum since 1997 displayed in the underground museum of Vergina inside the Great Tumulus.9 In 1977 excavations near Vergina in northern Greece led to the unearthing of three Macedonian tombs.10 Tomb II is a twochambered royal tomb richly decorated with grave goods such as silver vessels bronze weaponry and bath equipment and a goldandivory shield. The outer chamber of the tomb contained a golden box with the bones of a woman in her twenties and the inner chamber contained a gold box with a golden crown and the bones of a man in his forties.3 Professor Manolis Andronikos the chief archaeologist at the site along with a number of other archaeologists decided that Tomb II contained the remains of Philip II and his final wife Cleopatra Eurydice due to the rich decoration of the tomb the age of the skeletal remains the damage on the male skeletons right eye socket and his thigh bone that had suffered trauma.113 Philip lost his right eye in battle and had been wounded in one leg. However as the right eye socket was almost entirely missing the damage could not be specified and the wound was to the wrong leg.3 Athenian pottery found in the tomb dates between the last quarter of the fourth century to the early third century BC while Philip II died in 336 BC. Architectural evidence regarding the vaulted roof and its similarity to Lycian tombs points to a later date after Alexander the Greats invasion of Asia.3 Due to forensic studies in 2015 it is now believed that Philip II was buried in Tomb I.11 As such others have proposed Tomb II to contain the remains of Philip Arrhidaeus and his wife Eurydice due to the time of their death in 317 BC and that Arrhidaeus was known to have received honors at burial.3 In Tomb II greaves that many archaeologists had argued belong to Philip II could also belong to Eurydice or Alexander the Great according to Antonios Bartsiokas.11 Bartsiokas one of the lead authors in the 2015 study identifying Philip as the occupant of Tomb I explained that Eurydice was a warrior who fought in many battles and could have required greaves.12 It is also possible that some of Alexander the Greats armor could have been buried at the tomb as Arrhideaus wore Alexanders garments when he ascended to the throne in 323 BC although he did not fight in battles himself. A handhammered iron helmet found in Tomb II matches Plutarchs description of Alexanders helmet.11 Arrhidaeus in fictionedit He appears as one of the main characters in the novel Funeral Games by Mary Renault. In Renaults version the villainous Cassander slows down his advance on Macedonia to give Olympias enough time to kill Arrhidaeus and Eurydice. Arrhidaeus is also a main character in Annabel Lyons novel The Golden Mean. In it the young Arrhidaeus is tutored by Aristotle while he also mentors his younger halfbrother the future Alexander the Great. Alexander who is initially disgusted with his brothers inferior intellect learns to love him before he sets out to conquer the world. In the Japanese fiction manga Historie he was shown as an intellectually disabled young child who became happy when Eumenes made him a toy chariot and became sad when Alexander the Great destroyed his toy. Eumenes later replaced it with a new one telling him to bury the chariot. Arrhideaus is also portrayed in the Indian historical drama series Porus. Phillip is a prominent character in the Eric Flint novel The Alexander Inheritance and its sequel The Macedonian Hazard. Phillip is portrayed as having an affectionate relationship with Eurydice that is marred by his inability to stand being touched. The appearance of a cruise ship of time travelers a few months after Alexanders death changes history and prevents Phillip and Eurydices deaths although they spend a time as prisoners of Antigonus I Monophthalamus. He is portrayed as having a spectrum disorder but a photographic memory and a talent for mental arithmetic. His condition improves after sessions from a therapist among the time travelers along with medical marijuana and other drugs and fathers a child with Eurydice in the second book. Referencesedit  Elizabeth Donnelly Carney 2006. Olympias mother of Alexander the Great. Taylor  Francis. pp. 2425. ISBN 9780415333160. Retrieved 14 June 2011.  Siculus Diodorus. Bibliotheca Historica 

18.2.1 4.  a b c d e f Neer Richard T. 2018. Greek Art and Archaeology c. 25
00 c.150 BCE Second Edition. Thames  Hudson. pp. 358359. ISBN 9780500052099.  Plutarch. Alex.. 
10.2 3.  Habicht 1998 p. 69.  Anson Edward M. 20
14 p.19  Anson Edward M. 20140714. Alexanders Heirs The Age of the Successors. John Wiley  Sons. p. 20. ISBN 9781444339628.  Hammond Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprire Walbank Frank William 1988. A History of Macedonia 336167 B.C. Clarendon Press. p. 140. ISBN 9780198148159.  Stella Drougou Chrysoula SaatsoglouPaliadeli. Verghina Hellenic Minister of Culture Athens 2005 p. 45 p. 59 ISBN 9602143851  The Royal Macedonian Tombs at Vergina. World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 20220106.  a b c d Was This Really the Tomb of Alexander the Greats Father. History. 20150721. Archived from the original on February 27 2021. Retrieved 20220106.  Bartsiokas Antonis Arsuaga JuanLuis Santos Elena Algaba Milagros GmezOlivencia Asier 20150716. The lameness of King Philip II and Royal Tomb I at Vergina Macedonia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 112 32 98449848. Bibcode20
15 PNAS..1
12.9 8
44 B. doi
10.1 0
73 pnas.1510906112. ISSN 00278424. PMC 4538655. PMID 26195763. Sourcesedit Habicht Christian 1998.   Hellenistic Athens in Greek. Athens Odysseas. ISBN 9602103108. Smith William editor Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology Arrhidaeus 1 Archived 20051026 at the Wayback Machine Eurydice 3 Archived 20051231 at the Wayback Machine Boston 1867 External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philip III of Macedon. Wiki Classical Dictionary Arrhidaeus Page about coinage during his reign An archaeological report about his grave and remains Philip III of Macedon Argead dynasty Born 359 BC Died 317 BC Regnal titles Preceded by Alexander the Great King of Macedon King of Persia Pharaoh of Egypt 323 BC  317 BC Succeeded by Alexander IV v t e Kings of Macedon Legendary Caranus Coenus Tyrimmas Vergina Sun Argead dynasty Perdiccas I Argaeus I Philip I Aeropus I Alcetas Amyntas I Alexander I Perdiccas II Archelaus Orestes Aeropus II Amyntas II Pausanias Amyntas III Argaeus II Alexander II Ptolemy of Aloros Perdiccas III Amyntas IV Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Alexander IV Antipatrid dynasty Cassander Philip IV Antipater I Alexander V Dynastic conflict Demetrius I Pyrrhus Lysimachus Ptolemy Ceraunus Meleager Antipater II Sosthenes Antigonus II Pyrrhus Antigonid dynasty Antigonus II Demetrius II Antigonus III Philip V Perseus PostConquest Rebel Kings Andriscus PseudoAlexander PseudoPhilipPseudoPerseus Euephenes Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics. v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Netherlands People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePhilipIIIofMacedonoldid1211778468 Categories 3
50 s BC births 317 BC deaths 
4 thcentury BC Macedonian monarchs 
4 thcentury BC Pharaohs Argead kings of Macedonia Monarchs of Persia Pharaohs of the Argead dynasty Executed monarchs People who died under the regency of Polyperchon Family of Alexander the Great Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles needing additional references from May 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 CS1 Greeklanguage sources el Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 4 March 2024 at 1158 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width