Deshret - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Significance 
2 Records 
3 Phonogram 
4 See also 
5 Gallery 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Deshret 20 languages  Azrbaycanca  etina Deutsch Espaol  Franais Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Svenska   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Red crown of Lower Egypt Red crown redirects here. For the Missouri tavern see Red Crown Tourist Court. Deshret Deshret the Red Crown of Lower Egypt Details Country Ancient Lower Egypt Successors Pschent Deshret Red Crown crown as determinative in hieroglyphs Deshret Ancient Egyptian  romanized darat lit.Red One was the Red Crown of Lower Egypt. When combined with the Hedjet White Crown of Upper Egypt it forms the Pschent Double Crown in ancient Egyptian called the sekhemti. The Red Crown in Egyptian language hieroglyphs eventually was used as the vertical letter n. The original n hieroglyph from the Predynastic Period and the Old Kingdom was the sign depicting ripples of water. The word Deshret also referred to the desert Red Land on either side of Kemet Black Land the fertile Nile river basin. Significanceedit In mythology the earth deity Geb original ruler of Egypt invested Horus with the rule over Lower Egypt.1 The Egyptian pharaohs who saw themselves as successors of Horus wore the deshret to symbolize their authority over Lower Egypt.2 Other deities wore the deshret too or were identified with it such as the protective serpent goddess Wadjet and the creatorgoddess of Sais Neith who often is shown wearing the Red Crown.3 The Red Crown would later be combined with the White Crown of Upper Egypt to form the Double Crown symbolizing the rule over the whole country The Two Lands as the Egyptians expressed it.4 Recordsedit No Red Crown has been found. Several ancient representations indicate it was woven like a basket from plant fiber such as grass straw flax palm leaf or reed. The Red Crown frequently is mentioned in texts and depicted in reliefs and statues. An early example is the depiction of the victorious pharaoh wearing the deshret on the Narmer Palette. A label from the reign of Djer records a royal visit to the shrine of the Deshret which may have been located at Buto in the Nile delta.5 The fact that no crown has ever been found buried with any of the pharaohs even in relatively intact tombs might suggest that it was passed from one reign to the next much as in presentday monarchies. Toby Wilkinson has cited the iconography on rock art in the Eastern Desert region as depicting what he interpreted to be among the earliest representations of the royal crowns and suggested the Red Crown could have originated in the southern Nile Valley.6 Phonogramedit 1 Red Crown Deshret 2 also vertical N in hieroglyphs Deshret the ancient Egyptian Red Crown is one of the oldest Egyptian hieroglyphs. As an iconographic element it is used on the famous palette of Pharaoh Narmer as the Red Crown of the Delta the Delta being Lower Egypt. The first usage of the Red Crown was in iconography as the symbol for Lower Egypt with the Nile Delta horizontal letter n Gardiner no. 35 Later it came to be used in the Egyptian language as an alphabetic uniliteral vertical form for letter n as a phoneme or preposition. It became functional in running hieroglyphic texts where either the horizontal or vertical form preposition satisfied space requirements. Both the vertical and horizontal forms are prepositional equivalents with the horizontal letter n the Nwater ripple n hieroglyph being more common as well as more common to form parts of Egyptian language words requiring the phoneme n. One old use of the red crown hieroglyph is to make the word in formerly anawith dotthe vertical feather hieroglyph a plus the red crown. Egyptian in is used at the beginning of a text and translates as Behold or Lo and is an emphatic. The Red Crown is also used as a determinative most notably in the word for deshret. It is also used in other words or names of gods. Use in the Rosetta Stone Rosetta Stone usage of Red Crown not as preposition part of Pschent Double Crown and part of Taui the name for Upper and Lower Egypt used combined with a Crossroads hieroglyph In the 198 BC Rosetta Stone the Red Crown as hieroglyph has the usage mostly of the vertical form of the preposition n. In running text word endings are not always at the end of hieroglyph blocks when they are at the end a simple transition to start the next block is a vertical separator in this case the preposition vertical n thus a space saver. Since the start of the next hieroglyphic block could also be started with a horizontal n at the bottom of the previous block it should be thought that the vertical n is also chosen for a visual effect in other words it visually spreads out the running text of words instead of piling horizontal prepositions in a more tight text. Visually it is also a hieroglyph that takes up more spaceversus a straightline type for the horizontal water ripple so it may have a dual purpose of a less compact text and a better seguetransition to the next words. The Red Crown hieroglyph is used 35 times in the Rosetta Stone only 4 times is it used as a nonpreposition. It averages once per line usage in the 36 line Decree of Memphis Ptolemy VRosetta Stone. See alsoedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Red crown. Atef  Hedjet Crown with feathers identified with Osiris Khepresh  Blue or War Crown also called Royal Crown Galleryedit Examples of representations Ramesside Period ostracon pharaoh wearing Red Crown Narmer Palette front The vertical letter N as preposition or determinative in the Egyptian language Closeup of Narmer Palette Pharaoh Narmer with crown Bronze statuette of a Kushite king wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt 
25 th Dynasty c. 670 BCE Neues Museum Berlin Sandstone statue of Mentuhotep II 
11 th Dynasty c. 20602009 BCE Egyptian Museum Cairo A guardian statue wearing the red crown which reflected the facial features of the reigning king probably Amenemhat II or Senwosret II and which functioned as a divine guardian for the imiut made of cedar wood and plaster c. 19191885 BC Deshret vertical letter N in hieroglyphic writing Philistine captives at Medinet Habu Stele of Tchia at the Louvre Apep being slain Referencesedit  Ewa Wasilewska Creation Stories of the Middle East Jessica Kingsley Publishers 2000 p.128  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge 1999 p.194  George Hart The Routledge Dictionary Of Egyptian Gods And Goddesses p.100  Ana Ruiz The Spirit of Ancient Egypt Algora Publishing 2001 p.8  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge 1999 p.284  Wilkinson Toby 2003. Genesis of the Pharaohs  dramatic new discoveries rewrite the origins of ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. pp. 5482. ISBN 0500051224.  Guardian Figure. www.metmuseum.org. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Budge. An Egyptian Hieroglyphic Dictionary E.A.Wallace Budge Dover Publications c 1978 c 1920 Dover edition 1978. In two volumes softcover ISBN 0486236153 Budge. The Rosetta Stone E.A.Wallace Budge Dover Publications c 1929 Dover editionunabridged 1989. softcover ISBN 0486261638 v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDeshretoldid1209433963 Categories Lower Egypt Crowns headgear Egyptian hieroglyphs crownsdressstaves Egyptian artefact types Egyptian hieroglyphs Wadjet Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 February 2024 at 2216 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width