Ptolemy III Euergetes - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background and early life 
2 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
2.1 Cyrenaica 246 BC 
2.2 Third Syrian War 246241 BC 
2.3 Later reign 241222 BC 
3 Regime Toggle Regime subsection 
3.1 Pharaonic ideology and Egyptian religion 
3.2 Scholarship and culture 
3.3 Red Sea trade 
4 Marriage and issue 
5 See also 
6 Notes 
7 References Toggle References subsection 
7.1 Bibliography 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy III Euergetes 50 languages Afrikaans  Aragons Azrbaycanca   Catal  etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Kurd Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan  Polski Portugus     srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit  Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Ptolemy III of Egypt 
3 rd pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt r. 246222 BC Ptolemy III Euergetes Greek   Pharaoh King of the Ptolemaic Kingdom Reign 28 January 246  NovemberDecember 222 BC1 Predecessor Ptolemy II Successor Ptolemy IV Royal titulary Horus name knnrwrmr.f Khekenetjeruremetjheref The one over whom gods and people have rejoiced Second Horus name knnrwrmr.f msp.fnsytmjt.f Hekenetjeruremetjheref emshesepefnesytemaitef The one over whom gods and people have rejoiced when he has received the kingship from his fathers hand v Nebty name n ntjnrw jnbmnntmrj Qen nedjtinetjeru inebmenekhentamery The brave one who has protected the gods a potent wall for The Beloved Land Golden Horus wrptj jrjt nbbwsdmipttnn jtymir Werpehty iryakhut nebkhabusedmiptahtatenen itymire Whose might is great doing that which is beneficial Lord of the years of Jubilee like Ptah TaTjenen a ruler like Ra Prenomen Praenomen jwnnrwjsnwj stp.nr smnnjmn iwaensenwy netjerwy setepenra sekhemankhenimen2 Heir of the Twin Gods Chosen of Re Living Image of Amun2 Nomen ptwlmys nt mrjpt Petolemys ankhdjet meryptah Ptolemy who lives eternally beloved of Ptah Consort Berenice II Children Ptolemy IV Arsinoe III Alexander Magas Berenice Father Ptolemy II Mother Arsinoe I Born c. 280 BC1 Kos or Egypt Died NovemberDecember 222 BC aged c. 581 Burial Alexandria Dynasty Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemy III Euergetes Greek   romanized Ptolemaios Euergetes Ptolemy the Benefactor c. 280  NovemberDecember 222 BC was the third pharaoh of the Ptolemaic dynasty in Egypt from 246 to 222 BC. The Ptolemaic Kingdom reached the height of its military and economic power during his kingship as initiated by his father Ptolemy II Philadelphus. Ptolemy III was the eldest son of Ptolemy II and Arsinoe I. When Ptolemy III was young his mother was disgraced and he was removed from the succession. He was restored as heir to the throne in the late 2
50 s BC and succeeded his father as king without issue in 246 BC. On his succession Ptolemy III married Berenice II reigning queen of Cyrenaica thereby bringing her territory into the Ptolemaic realm. In the Third Syrian War 246241 BC Ptolemy III invaded the Seleucid empire and won a near total victory but was forced to abandon the campaign as a result of an uprising in Egypt. In the aftermath of this rebellion Ptolemy forged a closer bond with the Egyptian priestly elite which was codified in the Canopus decree of 238 BC and set a trend for Ptolemaic power in Egypt for the rest of the dynasty. In the Aegean Ptolemy III suffered a major setback when his fleet was defeated by the Antigonids at the Battle of Andros around 246 BC but he continued to offer financial support to their opponents in mainland Greece for the rest of his reign. At his death Ptolemy III was succeeded by his eldest son Ptolemy IV. Background and early lifeedit Ptolemy III was born some time around 280 BC as the eldest son of Ptolemy II and his first wife Arsinoe I daughter of King Lysimachus of Thrace. His father had become coregent of Egypt in 284 BC and sole ruler in 282 BC. Around 279 BC the collapse of Lysimachus kingdom led to the return to Egypt of Ptolemy IIs sister Arsinoe II who had been married to Lysimachus. A conflict quickly broke out between Arsinoe I and Arsinoe II. Sometime after 275 BC Arsinoe I was charged with conspiracy and exiled to Coptos.3 When Ptolemy II married Arsinoe II probably in 2732 BC her victory in this conflict was complete. As children of Arsinoe I Ptolemy III and his two siblings seem to have been removed from the succession after their mothers fall.4 This political background may explain why Ptolemy III seems to have been raised on Thera in the Aegean rather than in Egypt.51 His tutors included the poet and polymath Apollonius of Rhodes later head of the Library of Alexandria.6 From 267 BC a figure known as Ptolemy the Son was coregent with Ptolemy II. He led naval forces in the Chremonidean war 267261 BC but revolted in 259 BC at the beginning of the Second Syrian War and was removed from the coregency. Some scholars have identified Ptolemy the Son with Ptolemy III. This seems unlikely since Ptolemy III was probably too young to lead forces in the 2
60 s and does not seem to have suffered any of the negative consequences that would be expected if he had revolted from his father in 259 BC. Chris Bennett has argued that Ptolemy the Son was a son of Arsinoe II by Lysimachus.
7 notes 1 Around the time of the rebellion Ptolemy II legitimised the children of Arsinoe I by having them posthumously adopted by Arsinoe II.4 In the late 2
50 s BC Ptolemy II arranged the engagement of Ptolemy III to Berenice the sole child of Ptolemy IIs halfbrother King Magas of Cyrene.8 The decision to single Ptolemy III out for this marriage indicates that by this time he was the heir presumptive. On his fathers death Ptolemy III succeeded him without issue taking the throne on 28 January 246 BC.1 Reignedit Cyrenaica 246 BCedit Berenice II the wife and halfcousin of Ptolemy III Cyrene had been the first Ptolemaic territory outside Egypt but Magas had rebelled against Ptolemy II and declared himself king of Cyrenaica in 276 BC. The aforementioned engagement of Ptolemy III to Berenice had been intended to lead to the reunification of Egypt and Cyrene after Magas death. However when Magas died in 250 BC Berenices mother Apame refused to honour the agreement and invited an Antigonid prince Demetrius the Fair to Cyrene to marry Berenice instead. With Apames help Demetrius seized control of the city but he was assassinated by Berenice.9 A republican government led by two Cyrenaeans named Ecdelus and Demophanes controlled Cyrene for four years.10 It was only with Ptolemy IIIs accession in 246 BC that the wedding of Ptolemy III and Berenice seems to have actually taken place. Ptolemaic authority over Cyrene was forcefully reasserted. Two new port cities were established named Ptolemais and Berenice modern Tolmeita and Benghazi after the dynastic couple. The cities of Cyrenaica were unified in a League overseen by the king as a way of balancing the cities desire for political autonomy against the Ptolemaic desire for control.11 Third Syrian War 246241 BCedit Seleucus II Main article Third Syrian War In July 246 BC Antiochus II king of the Seleucid empire died suddenly. By his first wife Laodice I Antiochus II had had a son Seleucus II who was about 19 years old in 246 BC. However in 253 BC he had agreed to repudiate Laodice and marry Ptolemy IIIs sister Berenice. Antiochus II and Berenice had a son named Antiochus who was still an infant when his father died. A succession dispute broke out immediately after Antiochus IIs death. Ptolemy III quickly invaded Syria in support of his sister and her son marking the beginning of the Third Syrian War also known as the Laodicean War.1213 An account of the initial phase of this war written by Ptolemy III himself is preserved on the Gurob papyrus. At the outbreak of war Laodice I and Seleucus II were based in western Asia Minor while the widowed Queen Berenice was in Antioch. The latter quickly seized control of Cilicia to prevent Laodice I from entering Syria. Meanwhile Ptolemy III marched along the Levantine coast encountering minimal resistance. The cities of Seleucia and Antioch surrendered to him without a fight in late autumn.14 At Antioch Ptolemy III went to the royal palace to plan his next moves with Berenice in person only to discover that she and her young son had been murdered.1513 Rather than accept defeat in the face of this setback Ptolemy III continued his campaign through Syria and into Mesopotamia where he conquered Babylon at the end of 246 or beginning of 245 BC.16 In light of this success he may have been crowned Great King of Asia.17 Early in 245 BC he established a governor of the land on the other side of the Euphrates indicating an intention to permanently incorporate the region into the Ptolemaic kingdom.1819 A statue that may represent Ptolemy III in Pharaonic guise At this point however Ptolemy III received notice that a revolt had broken out in Egypt and he was forced to return home to suppress it.20 By July 245 BC the Seleucids had recaptured Mesopotamia.21 The Egyptian revolt is significant as the first of a series of native Egyptian uprisings which would trouble Egypt for the next century. One reason for this revolt was the heavy taxburdens placed on the people of Egypt by Ptolemy IIIs war in Syria. Furthermore papyri records indicate that the inundation of the Nile river failed in 245 BC resulting in famine.19 Climate proxy studies suggest that this resulted from changes of the monsoon pattern at the time resulting from a volcanic eruption which took place in 247 BC.22 After his return to Egypt and suppression of the revolt Ptolemy III made an effort to present himself as a victorious king in both Egyptian and Greek cultural contexts. Official propaganda like OGIS 54 an inscription set up in Adulis and probably the copy of an inscription in Alexandria vastly exaggerated Ptolemy IIIs conquests claiming even Bactria among his conquests.2324 At the new year in 243 BC Ptolemy III incorporated himself and his wife Berenice II into the Ptolemaic state cult to be worshipped as the Theoi Euergetai Benefactor Gods in honour of his restoration to Egypt of statues found in the Seleucid territories which had been seized by the Persians.1819 There may also have been a second theatre to this war in the Aegean. The general Ptolemy Andromachou ostensibly an illegitimate son of Ptolemy II and the halfbrother of Ptolemy III25 captured Ephesus from the Seleucids in 246 BC. At an uncertain date around 245 BC he fought a seabattle at Andros against King Antigonus II of Macedon in which the Ptolemaic forces were defeated. It appears that he then led an invasion of Thrace where Maroneia and Aenus were under Ptolemaic control as of 243 BC. Ptolemy Andromachou was subsequently assassinated at Ephesus by Thracian soldiers under his control.2627 The only further action known from the war is some fighting near Damascus in 242 BC.28 Shortly after this in 241 BC Ptolemy made peace with the Seleucids retaining all the conquered territory in Asia Minor and northern Syria. Nearly the whole Mediterranean coast from Maroneia in Thrace to the Syrtis in Libya was now under Ptolemaic control. One of the most significant acquisitions was Seleucia Pieria the port of Antioch whose loss was a significant economic and logistical setback for the Seleucids.29 Later reign 241222 BCedit The conclusion of the Third Syrian War marked the end of military intervention in the Seleucid territories but Ptolemy III continued to offer covert financial assistance to the opponents of Seleucus II. From 241 BC this included Antiochus Hierax the younger brother of Seleucus II who rebelled against his brother and established his own separate kingdom in Asia Minor. Ptolemy III sent military forces to support him only when a group of Galatian mercenaries rebelled against him30 but is likely to have supported him more tacitly throughout his conflict with Seleucus II. He offered similar support to Attalus I the dynast of Pergamum who took advantage of this civil conflict to expand his territories in northwestern Asia Minor. When the Seleucid general Achaeus was sent in 223 BC to reconquer the territories in Asia Minor that had been lost to Attalus Ptolemy III sent his son Magas with a military force to aid Attalus but he was unable to prevent Attalus defeat.31 Greece around the time of the Cleomenean War Ptolemy III maintained his fathers hostile policy to Macedonia. This probably involved direct conflict with Antigonus II during the Third Syrian War but after the defeat at Andros in c. 245 BC Ptolemy III seems to have returned to the policy of indirect opposition financing enemies of the Antigonids in mainland Greece. The most prominent of these was the Achaian League a federation of Greek citystates in the Peloponnese that were united by their opposition to Macedon. From 243 BC Ptolemy III was the nominal leader hegemon and military commander of the League32 and supplied them with a yearly payment.33 After 240 BC Ptolemy also forged an alliance with the Aetolian League in northwest Greece.34 From 238 to 234 BC the two leagues waged the Demetrian War against Macedon with Ptolemaic financial support.35 However in 229 BC the Cleomenean War 229222 BC broke out between the Achaian League and Cleomenes III of Sparta. As a result in 226 BC Aratos of Sicyon the leader of the Achaian League forged an alliance with the Macedonian king Antigonus III. Ptolemy III responded by immediately breaking off relations with the Achaian League and redirecting his financial support to Sparta. Most of the rest of the Greek states were brought under the Macedonian umbrella in 224 BC when Antigonus established the Hellenic League. However Aetolia and Athens remained hostile to Macedon and redoubled their allegiance to Ptolemy III. In Athens in 224 BC extensive honours were granted to Ptolemy III to entrench their alliance with him including the creation of a new tribe named Ptolemais in his honour and a new deme named Berenicidae in honour of Queen Berenice II.36 The Athenians instituted a state religious cult in which Ptolemy III and Berenice II were worshipped as gods including a festival the Ptolemaia. The centre of the cult was the Ptolemaion37 which also served as the gymnasium where young male citizens undertook civic and military training.38 Cleomenes III suffered serious defeats in 223 BC and Ptolemy III abandoned his support for him in the next year  probably as a result of an agreement with Antigonus. The Egyptian king seems to have been unwilling to commit actual troops to Greece particularly as the threat of renewed war with the Seleucids was looming. Cleomenes III was defeated and forced to flee to Alexandria where Ptolemy III offered him hospitality and promised to help restore him to power.39 However these promises were not fulfilled and the Cleomenian War would in fact be the last time that the Ptolemies intervened in mainland Greece.37 In November or December 222 BC shortly after Cleomenes arrival in Egypt and Magas failure in Asia Minor Ptolemy III died of natural causes.401 He was succeeded by his son Ptolemy IV without incident. Regimeedit Pharaonic ideology and Egyptian religionedit Forecourt of the Temple of Horus at Edfu constructed under Ptolemy III Ptolemy III built on the efforts of his predecessors to conform to the traditional model of the Egyptian pharaoh. He was responsible for the first known example of a series of decrees published as trilingual inscriptions on massive stone blocks in Ancient Greek Egyptian hieroglyphs and demotic. Earlier decrees like the Satrap stele and the Mendes stele had been in hieroglyphs alone and had been directed at single individual sanctuaries. By contrast Ptolemy IIIs Canopus decree was the product of a special synod of all the priests of Egypt which was held in 238 BC. The decree instituted a number of reforms and represents the establishment of a full partnership between Ptolemy III as pharaoh and the Egyptian priestly elite. This partnership would endure until the end of the Ptolemaic dynasty. In the decree the priesthood praise Ptolemy III as a perfect pharaoh. They emphasise his support of the priesthood his military success in defending Egypt and in restoring religious artefacts supposedly held by the Seleucids and his good governance especially an incident when Ptolemy III imported at his own expense a vast amount of grain to compensate for a weak inundation. The rest of the decree consists of reforms to the priestly orders phylai. The decree also added a leap day to the Egyptian calendar of 365 days and instituted related changes in festivals. Ptolemy IIIs infant daughter Berenice died during the synod and the stele arranges for her deification and ongoing worship. Further decrees would be issued by priestly synods under Ptolemy IIIs successors. The bestknown examples are the Decree of Memphis passed by his son Ptolemy IV in about 218 BC and the Rosetta Stone erected by his grandson Ptolemy V in 196 BC. The Ptolemaic kings before Ptolemy III his grandfather Ptolemy I and his father Ptolemy II had followed the lead of Alexander the Great in prioritising the worship of Amun worshipped at Karnak in Thebes among the Egyptian deities. With Ptolemy III the focus shifted strongly to Ptah worshipped at Memphis. Ptahs earthly avatar the Apis bull came to play a crucial role in royal new year festivals and coronation festivals. This new focus is referenced by two elements of Ptolemy IIIs Pharaonic titulary his nomen which included the phrase MeryPtah beloved of Ptah and his golden Horus name Neb khabused mi ptahtatenen Lord of the Jubileefestivals as well as Ptah Tatjenen.41 Alexandria Canopus Sebennytos Edfu Medamud Esna Karnak Philae classnotpageimage Sites of construction work under Ptolemy III Ptolemy III financed construction projects at temples across Egypt. The most significant of these was the Temple of Horus at Edfu one of the masterpieces of ancient Egyptian temple architecture and now the bestpreserved of all Egyptian temples. The king initiated construction on it on 23 August 237 BC.42 Work continued for most of the Ptolemaic dynasty the main temple was finished in the reign of Ptolemy IV in 231 BC and the full complex was only completed in 142 BC during the reign of Ptolemy VIII while the reliefs on the great pylon were finished in the reign of Ptolemy XII. Other construction work took place at a range of sites including from north to south Serapeum of Alexandria Temple of Osiris at Canopus42 Decorative work on the Temple of Isis at Behbeit El Hagar near Sebennytos42 A sacred lake in the Temple of Montu at Medamud42 The Gateway of Ptolemy III in the Temple of Khonsu and decorative work on the Temple of Opet at Karnak Thebes.4243 Temple of Khnum at Esna A birth house at the Temple of Isis at Philae.42 Scholarship and cultureedit Ptolemy III continued his predecessors sponsorship of scholarship and literature. The Great Library in the Musaeum was supplemented by a second library built in the Serapeum. He was said to have had every book unloaded in the Alexandria docks seized and copied returning the copies to their owners and keeping the originals for the Library.44 Galen attests that he borrowed the official manuscripts of Aeschylus Sophocles and Euripides from Athens and forfeited the considerable deposit he paid for them in order to keep them for the Library rather than returning them.45 The most distinguished scholar at Ptolemy IIIs court was the polymath and geographer Eratosthenes most noted for his remarkably accurate calculation of the circumference of the world. Other prominent scholars include the mathematicians Conon of Samos and Apollonius of Perge.46 Red Sea tradeedit Ptolemy IIIs reign was also marked by trade with other contemporaneous polities. In the 19
30 s excavations by Mattingly at a fortress close to Port Dunford the likely Nikon of antiquity in presentday southern Somalia yielded a number of Ptolemaic coins. Among these pieces were 17 copper coins from the reigns of Ptolemy III to Ptolemy V as well as late Imperial Rome and Mamluk Sultanate coins.47 Marriage and issueedit Ptolemy III married his halfcousin Berenice of Cyrene in 244243 BC. Their children were Name Image Birth Death Notes Arsinoe III 2465 BC 204 BC Married her brother Ptolemy IV in 220 BC. Ptolemy IV MayJune 244 BC JulyAugust 204 BC King of Egypt from 222 to 204 BC. A son JulyAugust 243 BC Perhaps 221 BC Name unknown possibly Lysimachus. He was probably killed in or before the political purge of 221 BC.48 Alexander SeptemberOctober 242 BC Perhaps 221 BC He was probably killed in or before the political purge of 221 BC.49 Magas NovemberDecember 241 BC 221 BC Scalded to death in his bath by Theogos or Theodotus at the orders of Ptolemy IV.50 Berenice JanuaryFebruary 239 BC FebruaryMarch 238 BC Posthumously deified on 7 March 238 BC by the Canopus Decree as Berenice Anasse Parthenon Berenice mistress of virgins.51 See alsoedit History of Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemais  towns and cities named after members of the Ptolemaic dynasty. Notesedit  This identification of Ptolemy son of Lysimachus with Ptolemy the Son who is attested as Ptolemy IIs coregent is argued in detail by Chris Bennett. Other scholars have identified the coregent as an illegitimate or otherwise unknown son of Ptolemy II. Referencesedit  a b c d e f Bennett Chris. Ptolemy III. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 13 October 2019.  a b Ronald J. Leprohon The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary Society of Biblical Literature 2013 p. 190.  Hlbl 2001 p. 36  a b Bennett Chris. Arsinoe II. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 10 October 2019.  IG XII.3 464  Hlbl 2001 p. 63  Bennett Chris. Ptolemy the son. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 10 October 2019.  Justin 

26.3.2   Justin 

26.3.3 6 Catullus 
66.2 528  Hlbl 2001 pp. 4446  Hlbl 2001 pp. 4647  Bevan  a b Hlbl 2001 p. 48  Gurob Papyrus  Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 
27.1  Polyaenus Stratagems 
8.5 0  Ptolemy III chronicle Appian Syriaca 
11.6 5.  OGIS 54 the Adulis inscription.  a b Jerome Commentary on Daniel 
11.7 9  a b c Hlbl 2001 p. 49  Justin 

27.1.9  Porphyry FGrH 260 F43  Hlbl 2001 pp. 4950  Volcanic eruptions linked to social unrest in Ancient Egypt. EurekAlert. 2017.  Pfeiffer Stefan Griechische und lateinische Inschriften zum Ptolemerreich und zur rmischen Provinz Aegyptus. Mnster Lit 2015 p. 5661.  Rossini A. December 2021. Iscrizione trionfale di Tolomeo III ad Aduli. Axon. 5 2 93142. doi
10.3 06
87 Axon25326848202102005. S
2 CID 245042574.  Ptolemy Andromachou by Chris Bennett  P. Haun 6 Athenaeus Deipnosophistae 
13.5 
93 a  Hlbl 2001 p. 50  Porphyry FGrH 260 F 
32.8   Hlbl 2001 pp. 5051  Porphyry FGrH 260 F
32.8   Hlbl 2001 pp. 534  Plutarch Life of Aratus 
24.4   Plutarch Life of Aratus 
41.5   Frontinus Stratagems 

2.6.5  P. Haun. 6  Hlbl 2001 p. 51  Pausanias 

1.5.5  Stephanus of Byzantium sv.   a b Hlbl 2001 p. 52  Plkidis Ch. 1962. Histoire de lphbie attique des origines  31 av. J.C. pp. 26364.  Plutarch Life of Cleomenes 2932  Polybius 
2.7 
1.3  Justin 
29.1  claims that Ptolemy III was murdered by his son but this is probably slander.  Holbl 2001 pp. 8081 harvnb error no target CITEREFHolbl2001 help  a b c d e f Holbl 2001 pp. 8687 harvnb error no target CITEREFHolbl2001 help  Wilkinson Richard H. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 163. ISBN 9780500283967.  Galen Commentary on the Epidemics 3.

17.1.6 06  ElAbbadi Mostafa. Library of Alexandria. Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved 10 March 2022.  Hlbl 2001 pp. 6365  Hildegard Temporini ed. 1978. Politische Geschichte Provinzien und Randvlker Mesopotamien Armenien Iran Sdarabien Rom und der Ferne Osten Part 2 Volume 9. Walter de Gruyter. p. 977. ISBN 3110071754. Retrieved 1 November 2014.  Lysimachus by Chris Bennett  Alexander by Chris Bennett  Magas by Chris Bennett  Berenice by Chris Bennett Bibliographyedit Clayton Peter A. 2006. Chronicles of the Pharaohs the reignbyreign record of the rulers and dynasties of ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500286280. Hlbl Gnther 2001. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire. London  New York Routledge. pp. 143152  181194. ISBN 0415201454. External linksedit Ptolemy Euergetes I at LacusCurtius  Chapter VI of E. R Bevans House of Ptolemy 1923 Ptolemy III  Royal Egyptian Genealogy Ptolemy III Euergetes entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Bust of Ptolemy III from Herculaneum  now in the Museo Nazionale Naples. Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemaic dynasty Born Unknown Died 222 BC Preceded by Ptolemy II Pharaoh of Egypt 246222 BC Succeeded by Ptolemy IV v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI 2 VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Sweden Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists Te Papa New Zealand ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePtolemyIIIEuergetesoldid1207292095 Categories 284 BC births 222 BC deaths 
3 rdcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic dynasty 
3 rdcentury BC Macedonians Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Harv and Sfn notarget errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles containing Greeklanguage text Instances of Langel using second unnamed parameter Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 14 February 2024 at 1245 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width