Hedjet - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 See also 
3 References Toggle the table of contents Hedjet 20 languages  Azrbaycanca  etina Deutsch Espaol  Franais Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Svenska   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia White Crown of Higher Egypt Hedjet Hedjet the white crown of Upper Egypt Details Country Ancient Upper Egypt Successors Pschent Hedjet t in hieroglyphs Hedjet Ancient Egyptian  romanized uat lit.White One is the White Crown of pharaonic Upper Egypt. After the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt it was combined with the Deshret the Red Crown of Lower Egypt to form the Pschent the double crown of Egypt. The symbol sometimes used for the White Crown was the vulture goddess Nekhbet shown next to the head of the cobra goddess Wadjet the uraeus on the Pschent.1 Historyedit Head of a royal statue wearing the White Crown. Between 1493 and 1482 BC New Kingdom from the Karnak precinct of AmunRa. Museo Egizio Turin. The white crown along with the red crown has a long history with each of their respective representations going back into the Predynastic Period indicating that kingship had been the base of Egyptian society for some time. The earliest image of the hedjet was thought to have been in the Qustul in Nubia. According to Jane Roy At the time of Williams argument the Qustul cemetery and the royal iconography found there was dated to the Naqada IIIA period thus antedating royal cemeteries in Egypt of the Naqada IIIB phase. New evidence from Abydos however particularly the excavation of Cemetery U and the tomb Uj dating to Naqada IIIA has shown that this iconography appears earlier in Egypt.2 Frank Yurco stated that depictions of pharonic iconography such as the royal crowns Horus falcons and victory scenes were concentrated in the Upper Egyptian Naqada culture and AGroup Nubia. He further elaborated that Egyptian writing arose in Naqadan Upper Egypt and AGroup Nubia and not in the Delta cultures where the direct Western Asian contact was made which further vitiates the Mesopotamianinfluence argument.3 According to David Wengrow the AGroup polity of the late 
4 th millenninum BCE is poorly understood since most of the archaeological remains are submerged underneath Lake Nasser.4 Stan Hendrick John Coleman Darnell and Maria Gatto in 2012 excavated petroglyphic engravings from Nag elHamdulab in Aswan the extreme southern region of Egypt that borders the Sudan which featured representations of boat procession solar symbolism and the earliest depiction of the white crown with an estimated dating range between 32
00 BC and 31
00 BC.5 Nekhbet the tutelary goddess of Nekhebet modern el Kab near Hierakonpolis was depicted as a woman sometimes with the head of a vulture wearing the white crown.6 The falcon god Horus of Hierakonpolis Egyptian Nekhen was generally shown wearing a white crown.7 A famous depiction of the white crown is on the Narmer palette found at Hierakonpolis in which the king of the South wearing the hedjet is shown triumphing over his northern enemies. The kings of the united Egypt saw themselves as successors of Horus. Vases from the reign of Khasekhemwy show the king as Horus wearing the white crown.8 As with the deshret red crown no example of the white crown has been found. It is unknown how it was constructed and what materials were used. Felt or leather have been suggested but this is purely speculative. Like the deshret the hedjet may have been woven like a basket from plant fiber such as grass straw flax palm leaf or reed. The fact that no crown has ever been found even in relatively intact royal tombs such as that of Tutankhamun suggests the crowns may have been passed from one monarch to the next much as in presentday monarchies. Early Dynastic usage of the white crown the Narmer palette of Pharaoh Narmer Small bronze statuary usage with the hedjet white crown Bronze statuette of a Kushite king wearing the white crown of Upper Egypt 
25 th Dynasty 670 BCE Neues Museum Berlin Painted relief of Mentuhotep II from his mortuary temple at Deir elBahri 
11 th Dynasty c. 20602009 BCE A couple of statuettes which represent a Middle Kingdom pharaoh as King of Upper Egypt left with the white crown and King of Lower Egypt right with the red crown wood from elLisht 
12 th dynasty Middle Kingdom Egyptian Museum main floor room 22 JE44951 See alsoedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to white crown. Atef  hedjet crown with feathers identified with Osiris Khepresh  blue or war crown also called royal crown Referencesedit  Arthur Maurice Hocart The LifeGiving Myth Routledge 2004 p.209  Roy Jane February 2011. The Politics of TradeEgypt and Lower Nubia in the 
4 th Millennium BC. Brill. p. 215. ISBN 9789004196117. Retrieved 16 June 2015.  Frank J.Yurco 1996. The Origin and Development of Ancient Nile Valley Writing in Egypt in Africa Theodore Celenko ed. Indianapolis Ind. Indianapolis Museum of Art. pp. 3435. ISBN 0936260645.  Wengrow David 2023. Ancient Egypt and Nubian Kings of Flood and Kings of Rain in Great Kingdoms of Africa John Parker eds. S.l. THAMES  HUDSON. pp. 140. ISBN 9780500252529.  Hendrickx Stan Darnell John Coleman Gatto Maria Carmela December 2012. The earliest representations of royal power in Egypt the rock drawings of Nag elHamdulab Aswan. Antiquity. 86 334 10681083. doi
10.1 0
17 S00035
98 X00048250. ISSN 00035
98 X. S
2 CID 53631029.  Cherine Badawi Egypt 2004 p.550  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge 1999 p.285  Jill Kamil The Ancient Egyptians Life in the Old Kingdom American Univ in Cairo Press 1996 p.61 v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHedjetoldid1194994293 Categories Egyptian artefact types Crowns headgear Upper Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 11 January 2024 at 2025 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width