Ptolemy IV Philopator - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background and early life 
2 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
2.1 Fourth Syrian War 219217 BC 
2.2 Foreign affairs in the later reign 217205 BC 
2.3 Egyptian Revolt and death 206204 BC 
3 Regime Toggle Regime subsection 
3.1 Ptolemaic dynastic cult 
3.2 Pharaonic ideology and Egyptian religion 
3.3 Literature 
3.4 Luxury 
4 Legacy and reception 
5 Marriage and issue 
6 Notes 
7 References 
8 Bibliography 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy IV Philopator 48 languages Afrikaans  Aragons Azrbaycanca   Catal etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan  Polski Portugus     srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit  Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Ptolemy IV of Egypt 
4 th Pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt r. 221204 BC Ptolemy IV Philopator Greek   Ancient Egyptian Iwaennetjerwymenkhwy Setepptah Userkare Sekhemankhamun1 Gold octadrachm in the British Museum Pharaoh King of the Ptolemaic Kingdom Reign 221  204 BC Predecessor Ptolemy III Successor Ptolemy V Royal titulary Horus name nwni si.nswit.f Khunuqeni sekhaensuitef The strong youth whose father has allowed him to appear Nebty name wrptj mnjbrnrwnbw ntjnnmmt Werpekhty menekhibkhernetjerunebu nedjtyenkhenmemet Whose might is great whose heart is beneficial with all the Gods who is the savior of mankind Golden Horus swbt sgswprw smnhpwmi wti nbbwsdmipttnn itymir Sewedjabaqet sekhedjgesuperu semenhepumi Djehutiaa nebkhabusedmiptahtatjenen itymire Who has kept Baqet safe by illuminating the temples and establishing laws like the twicegreat Thoth possessor of Sed festivals like Ptah Tatenen and a sovereign like Ra Prenomen Praenomen jwnnrwjmnwj stp.npt wsrkr smnnjmn Iwaennetjerwymenekhwy Setepenptah Userkare Sekhemankhamun The heir of the two potent gods chosen by Ptah the strong one of the ka of Ra the living image of Amun Nomen ptwlmjs nt mrjst Ptolemys ankhdjet meryaset Ptolemaios living forever beloved of Isis Consort Arsinoe III Agathoclea Children Ptolemy V Father Ptolemy III Mother Berenice II Born May or June 244 BC2 Died July or August 204 BC aged 402 Dynasty Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemy IV Philopatornote 1 Greek   romanized Ptolemaos Philoptr Ptolemy lover of his Father MayJune 244  JulyAugust 204 BC was the fourth pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt from 221 to 204 BC. Ptolemy IV was the son of Ptolemy III and Berenice II. His succession to the throne was accompanied by a wideranging purge of the Ptolemaic royal family which left control of the realms government largely in the hands of his courtiers Sosibius and Agathocles. His reign was marked by the Fourth Syrian War 219217 BC with the Seleucid empire which culminated in a decisive Ptolemaic victory at the Battle of Raphia one of the largest battles of the whole Hellenistic Age. In the final years of his rule control over the southern portion of the country was lost to the rebel pharaoh Hugronaphor. Ptolemy IV died in mysterious circumstances in 204 BC and was succeeded by his young son Ptolemy V Epiphanes under the regency of Sosibius and Agathocles. In ancient sources Ptolemy IV was criticised for being more interested in luxury and court ceremony than government politics and foreign relations. The decline of the Ptolemaic dynasty is usually traced to his reign. Background and early lifeedit Ptolemy IV was the second child and eldest son of Ptolemy III and his wife Berenice II. He was born about two years after his fathers accession to the throne of Egypt. Ptolemy IV had an older sister Arsinoe III and three younger brothers Lysimachus name uncertain Alexander and Magas all born in the 2
40 s BC. The whole family is commemorated by a statuary groups set up at Thermos and Delphi by the Aetolian League.34 Under Ptolemy III the Ptolemaic kingdom had reached its height decisively defeating the rival Seleucid kingdom in the Third Syrian War 246241 BC financing mainland Greek opposition to Antigonid Macedonia and maintaining control of nearly the entire eastern Mediterranean seaboard. However the reign was also marked by the first native Egyptian revolt against Ptolemaic rule in 245 BC. In the final years of Ptolemy IIIs reign the Cleomenean War 229222 BC broke out in Greece and despite receiving substantial Ptolemaic support Cleomenes III of Sparta had been completely defeated by an Antigonidled coalition and forced to flee to Egypt.56 Reignedit Bronze bust of the 
1 st century BC possibly depicting Queen Arsinoe III Two rivals of Ptolemy IV the Spartan king Cleomenes III left and the Seleucid king Antiochus III right Sometime between October and December 222 BC Ptolemy III died and Ptolemy IV was crowned king. The new king was about twenty years old and was under the strong influence of two prominent aristocrats Sosibius and Agathocles the brother of Ptolemy IVs mistress Agathoclea. On Ptolemy IVs accession Sosibius engineered a largescale purge of the royal family in order to eliminate anyone who might be able to oppose him. Ptolemy IVs uncle Lysimachus was probably murdered at this time.78 His mother Berenice II was believed to support his younger brother Magas who had held substantial military commands and was popular with the army so Magas was scalded to death in his bath.94 Berenice II died shortly afterwards she is said to have been poisoned.1011 By contrast Ptolemy IVs older sister Arsinoe III was brought into close association with the king. They had married by 220 BC sibling marriage was a common practice among Egyptian royal families including the Ptolemies.12 Fourth Syrian War 219217 BCedit Main article Fourth Syrian War In 222 BC Antiochus III had assumed the Seleucid throne and he instantly proved a dynamic leader determined to restore Seleucid power and to reverse the losses that the Seleucids had suffered in the Third Syrian War. In 221 BC one year after his accession Antiochus III invaded the Ptolemaic territories in CoeleSyria. He was rebuffed by the Ptolemaic governor of the region Theodotus and forced to turn east as a result of the revolt of his satrap of Media Molon.1314 In spring 219 BC Antiochus III tried again attacking and capturing the key port city and hearth of the Seleucid dynasty Seleucia Pieria which had been under Ptolemaic control since 246 BC. Immediately after this Theodotus who had become unpopular at the Ptolemaic court switched to the Seleucid side bringing Coele Syria and a large portion of the Ptolemaic fleet with him.15 Antiochus III received the surrender of Tyre and Ptolemais Ake but he became bogged down in protracted sieges of Sidon and Dora.1614 In the midst of this there was a revolt in Alexandria led by Cleomenes III of Sparta which Polybius presents as having been a serious threat to Ptolemy IVs regime. Ptolemy III had promised to restore Cleomenes III now living in Alexandria with a force of 3000 mercenaries to the Spartan throne but his death had put an end to these plans. Initially Ptolemy IV and Sosibius had indulged Cleomenes III seeing him as a counter to Ptolemy IVs brother Magas. But after Magas death Ptolemy IVs interest waned and Sosibius had had the Spartan placed under house arrest. In 219 BC while Ptolemy IV was at Canopus Cleomenes III broke free and attempted to lead an armed uprising against Sosibius. He and his followers launched an attack on the main citadel in Alexandria hoping to liberate the men imprisoned within but this attack was unsuccessful and the people of Alexandria did not respond to their call to rise up. Cleomenes III and his followers then committed suicide.1718 The Mediterranean in 218 BC Antiochus IIIs efforts to consolidate his control over Coele Syria lasted for the rest of 219 BC. At the beginning of winter he had to negotiate a ceasefire with Ptolemy IV. Formal peace negotiations followed at Seleucia Pieria but they do not seem to have been undertaken in good faith on either side. Antiochus refused to consider returning Seleucia Pieria to the Ptolemies while Ptolemy IV demanded that Antiochus III recognise Achaeus the de facto ruler of Asia Minor who was considered a rebel by the Seleucid court as a party to the piece.1914 Sosibius and Agathocles used the cease fire to whip the Ptolemaic army into shape while Antiochus III used it to prepare for a new offensive. In early 218 BC the Seleucid king obliterated the Ptolemaic forces at Berytus on land and at sea opening the way for the invasion of Coele Syria. There he captured Philadelphia but was unable to gain the southern Beqaa valley Damascus or Sidon.2014 In 217 BC Ptolemy IV and Arsinoe III led the Egyptian army into the Levant where it met Antiochus IIIs army in battle at Raphia on 22 June 217 BC. This was one of the largest battles of the Hellenistic Age with over 150000 soldiers participating in the melee. At the start of the battle the Ptolemaic elephant forces were routed and Antiochus followed that up by charging in on horseback and breaking the Ptolemaic left wing. Polybius generally hostile to Ptolemy IV represents Ptolemy IVs sudden appearance on the front lines as the decisive turning point in the battle inspiring his troops to fight on and defeat the rest of the Seleucid army which turned and fled while Antiochus III was still chasing the fleeing Ptolemaic soldiers on the left wing. When he discovered what had happened Antiochus III had no choice but to retreat to Antioch.2114 After the battle Ptolemy IV set to work reorganising the situation in Coele Syria and sent Sosibius to negotiate with Antiochus III. At the end of summer he invaded Seleucid Syria forcing Antiochus III to accept a peace treaty. Ptolemy IV retained the territories that he had held at the start of the war except apparently Seleucia Pieria and he received an enormous sum of gold. By 12 October Ptolemy IV had returned to Egypt where the victory was celebrated by a priestly synod at Memphis which issued the Raphia decree. The relatively mild terms of the peace and Ptolemy IVs failure to capitalise on his victory by going on the offensive have caused some surprise among modern scholars the Raphia decree refers rather unclearly to the treachery which the commanders of the troops perpetrated which may be relevant to Ptolemys decision to make peace.2214 Foreign affairs in the later reign 217205 BCedit After the Fourth Syrian War Antiochus III quickly recovered his strength and led successful expeditions against other enemies. Probably as a result Ptolemy IVs interactions with other states all focused on maintaining peaceful relations and preventing warfare. In mainland Greece Ptolemy IV attempted to rebuild the Ptolemaic influence that had suffered a serious setback under Ptolemy III as a result of the Cleomenean War. In 217 BC Ptolemys diplomats helped to broker the Peace of Naupactus which brought an end to the Social War between Antigonid Macedonia and the Aetolian League.23 He had much less success in his attempts to negotiate a peace between the Macedonia and the Roman Republic in the First Macedonian War 215205 BC.24 Ptolemy IV made large financial contributions to a number of Greek cities in order to gain their favour. He was responsible for the city walls at Gortyn in Crete25 Ptolemy was honoured for his benefactions with monuments and cults in his honour at various cities including Rhodes and Oropus2627 In the west Ptolemy maintained friendly neutrality with the Roman Republic and Carthage which were fighting against one another in the Second Punic War 218201 BC. He received a friendly embassy from the Romans in 210 BC requesting a gift of grain to help feed the starving populace. It is unknown how Ptolemy responded to this request.28 Like his predecessors Ptolemy IV maintained particularly close relations with the kingdom of Syracuse under King Hiero II but the accession of Hiero IIs grandson Hieronymus in 215 BC threatened to upset the careful balance that Ptolemy IV had maintained. Hieronymus repeatedly tried to bring the Ptolemies into the Second Punic War on the Carthaginian side.29 The situation was resolved with his assassination in 214 BC.30 Egyptian Revolt and death 206204 BCedit Main article Hugronaphor Sometime after the end of the Fourth Syrian War revolts broke out in Egypt itself. Fighting took place in the north of the country in the Delta and separately in Upper Egypt where fighting led to the interruption of building work on the Temple of Horus at Edfu in 207206 BC.31 The reasons for these revolts are unclear. The Hellenistic historian Polybius argued that they were a natural result of Ptolemy IVs decision to arm the Egyptians during the Fourth Syrian War.32 Gnther Hlbl argues that the fact that the rebels attacked Egyptian temples suggests that it was a rebellion of the lower classes inspired by social injustice that had been exacerbated by the heavy taxation necessary to fund that war.33 In October or November 205 BC the leader of the southern revolt captured the city of Thebes and had himself crowned Pharaoh taking the name Horwennefer rendered in Greek sources as Hugronaphor. Despite Ptolemaic efforts to suppress his regime Horwennefer would retain his independence for nearly twenty years until finally captured in August 186 BC.3435 The revolt meant that Ptolemaic forces were unable to defend southern Egypt from Nubian incursions. Probably in 20706 BC King Arqamani of Meroe seized control of the Dodecaschoenus. A number of the temple building projects that had been undertaken in this region were completed by Arqameni or his successor Adikhalamani. In many cases the work of Ptolemy IV was simply appropriated by erasing his name from inscriptions and replacing it with that of Arqameni.36 In the midst of this conflict in July or August 204 BC Ptolemy IV died in unclear circumstances. A late source John of Antioch mentions a fire in the palace. Arsinoe III also died at this time. According to Justin she had been divorced and murdered by Ptolemy IV under the influence of his mistress Agathoclea shortly before his own death. According to Polybius she was murdered by Sosibius. After a few days during which Ptolemy IVs death was kept secret his sixyearold son Ptolemy V who had been coregent since 210 BC was formally proclaimed king with Sosibius and Agathocleas brother Agathocles as his regents.37230 Regimeedit Ptolemaic dynastic cultedit Ptolemy IV depicted with Montu Like early Ptolemaic monarchs Ptolemy IV was proclaimed to be a deity on his accession to the throne as the Theos Philopator Fatherloving God. Particularly after the Fourth Syrian War he systematised the dynastic cult reinforcing the links between the worship of the reigning king and the cults of Alexander the Great and Dionysus.36 In 216215 BC after the victory celebrations for the Fourth Syrian War Ptolemy IV and his wife as the Theoi Philopatores Fatherloving gods were formally incorporated into the dynastic cult. This meant that they were added to the title of the Priest of Alexander the Great in Alexandria who led the Ptolemaia festival and whose name and titulary was used to name the year in all official and private documents. This followed the pattern that had been laid down by Ptolemy IVs predecessors particularly Ptolemy III whose incorporation into the dynastic cult seems to have formed part of the victory celebrations for the Third Syrian War.2 In order to assert the unity of this dynastic cult Ptolemy IV had the existing tomb of Alexander the Great and the tombs of the individual Ptolemaic kings in Alexandria demolished. A new pyramidal structure was built within the palace district of Alexandria to house the bodies of Alexander and the Ptolemies together. This structure seems to have been consecrated at the Ptolemaia festival of 215214 BC.3836 At the same time Ptolemy IV incorporated the cult of the dynastic founders Ptolemy I and Berenice I as the Theoi Soteres Saviour gods into the main dynastic cult overseen by the priest of Alexandria. Probably also in 215214 BC he instituted a new cult in the Greek city of Ptolemais in southern Egypt dedicated to Ptolemy I and the reigning monarch.36 In 211 BC Ptolemy IV seems to have begun propagating another cult for his deceased mother Berenice II on the model of the earlier cult for Ptolemy IVs grandmother Arsinoe II. A temple for Berenice sozousa Berenice who saves was established in Alexandria by the shore and seems to have been associated with protection of sailors closely paralleling the cult of Arsinoe II. Berenice also received a special priestess the athlophorus prizebearer who marched in the Ptolemaia procession and appeared in official records of the date ahead of the canephorus basketbearer of Arsinoe II. Similar priestesses would be established for later queens in the following reigns.36 Ptolemy IV depicted with a range of divine attributes on a gold octadrachm Ptolemy IV also strongly emphasised the cult of Dionysus and linked the god closely to the dynastic cult. Dionysus was the Greek god of wine and was closely associated with the royal ideal of opulence and luxury known in Greek as tryphe which Ptolemy IV wished to cultivate. Several new festivals of Dionysus were inaugurated in which Ptolemy IV himself led the processions beating on a tympanon.39 He renamed several areas of Alexandria in honour of Dionysus and his attributes. Sometime before 217 BC Ptolemy IV ordered all priests of Dionysus to come to Alexandria to be registered and to submit their holy books and mystery rites to government inspection. This demonstrates a desire to assert his total control of Dionysus worship within his realm. Ptolemy IV himself was referred to as the Neos Dionysos New Dionysus and depicted with attributes of the god in images.36 Equations with other deities were also made in royal imagery one notable set of gold octodrachms depicts the king with the rayed crown of Apollo or Helios the trident of Poseidon and the aegis of Athena Zeus and Alexander. Many Greek cities that were under Ptolemy IVs control or aligned with him also established official cults in his honour during his reign. Greek cities in this period regularly granted such cults to monarchs and other powerful individuals usually in thanks for a specific benefaction. Notable examples are found in Jaffa and other cities of the Levant after the victory at Raphia where Ptolemy even bears the title Great king.4036 Pharaonic ideology and Egyptian religionedit Relief depicting Ptolemy IV making an offering to Montu at Deir elMedina Alexandria Memphis Tanis Kharga Oasis Edfu Medamud Cusae Dakka Thebes Sehel Philae Koptos Tjebu classnotpageimage Sites of construction work under Ptolemy IV Like his predecessors Ptolemy IV presented himself as a typical Egyptian pharaoh and actively supported the Egyptian priestly elite through donations and temple construction. Ptolemy III had introduced an important innovation in 238 BC by holding a synod of all the priests of Egypt at Canopus. Ptolemy IV continued this tradition by holding his own synod at Memphis in 217 BC after the victory celebrations of the Fourth Syrian War. The result of this synod was the Raphia Decree issued on 15 November 217 BC and preserved in three copies. Like other Ptolemaic decrees the decree was inscribed in hieroglyphs Demotic and Koine Greek. The decree records the military success of Ptolemy IV and Arsinoe III and their benefactions to the Egyptian priestly elite. Throughout Ptolemy IV is presented as taking on the role of Horus who avenges his father by defeating the forces of disorder led by the god Set. In return the priests undertook to erect a statue group in each of their temples depicting the god of the temple presenting a sword of victory to Ptolemy IV and Arsinoe III. A fiveday festival was inaugurated in honour of the Theoi Philopatores and their victory. The decree thus seems to represent a successful marriage of Egyptian pharaonic ideology and religion with the Hellenistic Greek ideology of the victorious king and his ruler cult.41 Ptolemy IV also maintained a close and friendly relationship with the priestly elite by supporting and funding construction work at sanctuaries throughout Egypt mostly continuing projects begun earlier in the dynasty. The most notable example of this is the Temple of Horus at Edfu where construction had begun in 237 BC under Ptolemy III but carried on through most of Ptolemy IVs reign until Hugronaphors revolt forced the end of works in 207206 BC. By that time most of the structure had been built and most of the interior decoration had been carved. These inscriptions present Ptolemy IV as an ideal pharaoh emphasising his military victories in Syria and his pious attitude towards the gods. Annual coronation rituals took place in the sanctuary in which the god Horus symbolically received kingship from Ra and Osiris and the reigning Pharaoh received his kingship from Ra and Horus. Ptolemy IV never participated in this ritual personally his role was played by a priest. Support for the sanctuary thus represented the Ptolemaic commitment to a traditional Egyptian theology of kingship.42 Other construction work carried out under Ptolemy IVs auspices included from north to south A shrine of Harpocrates in the Serapeum of Alexandria36 Reconstruction of the Naos of the Temple of Mut Khonsu and Astarte at Tanis4243 The east gate of the Temple of Ptah at Memphis42 A new temple for Hathor at Cusae42 A new temple of Nemty at Tjebu44 Extensions to the Temple of Min and Isis at Koptos4546 Decorative work on the great gateway of the Precinct of Montu and a chapel of KhonsuNeferhotep at Karnak Thebes42 Shrine for Hathor and Maat at Deir elMedina west of Thebes42 Decorative work on the temple of the Theban triad at the Kharga Oasis42 Completion of the Temple of Montu at Medamud42 Decorative work and a sanctuary of Arensnuphis at Philae42 Completion of the temple of Isis on Sehel Island Aswan42 Reconstruction of the temple of Thoth at Dakka42 Literatureedit Ptolemy IV was devoted to orgiastic forms of religion and literary dilettantism.47 He built a temple to Homer in Alexandria48 and financed festivals for the Muses both in Alexandria and in the valley of the Muses in Thespiae in Boeotia. He also composed a tragedy on Adonis on which his courtier Agathocles wrote a commentary.49 Luxuryedit Speculative illustration of the Tessarakonteres with catamaran hulls as proposed by Lionel Casson Ptolemy IV is said to have built a giant ship known as the tessarakonteres fortyrowed a huge galley and possibly the largest humanpowered vessel ever built. This showpiece galley was described by Callixenus of Rhodes writing in the 
3 rd century BC and quoted by Athenaeus in the 
2 nd century AD.50 Plutarch also mentions that Ptolemy Philopator owned this immense vessel in his Life of Demetrios.51 According to these sources the ship was 128 m long and required 4000 oarsmen. The appearance and structure of this ship have been much discussed in modern scholarship. Lionel Casson proposes that it was a catamaran. It is generally agreed that the tessarakonteres served as a pleasure boat not a military vessel.5230 Legacy and receptionedit The main surviving account of Ptolemy IVs life and character is provided by the historian Polybius. He presents Ptolemy IV as the archetypal bad king entirely focused on luxury and court ceremony and completely neglecting of politics foreign affairs and military pursuits which he left entirely to Sosibius. According to Polybius this neglect was the cause of the disasters of his reign including his death.53 Polybius was not a contemporary of Ptolemy IV he probably drew his account from two earlier works which are now lost the Histories of Phylarchus and The Stories about Philopator by Ptolemy of Megalopolis. Both of these also seem to have criticised Ptolemy IV for his luxuriousness. However for contemporaries luxury tryphe was often presented as a virtue which demonstrated a kings ability and willingness to make benefactions. It is possible that the surviving source tradition has taken efforts to advertise this virtue and twisted them into a negative account.30 Ptolemy IV is a major character in the deuterocanonical biblical book 3 Maccabees which was probably written in the first century AD. In this work set after the Battle of Raphia the king is presented as an oppressive tyrant who transgresses divine law by trying to enter the temple at Jerusalem and then launches an attempt to wipe out the Jews by gathering them all in the hippodrome at Alexandria and having them trampled by drunken elephants. These plans are repeatedly thwarted by the divine intervention of Yahweh. In the end Ptolemy IV recants and grants extensive privileges to the Jews. It is not clear that this work indicates the existence of a negative Jewish tradition about Ptolemy. It may simply be using him to make a general moral point about the relative strength of secular and divine authorities. Some scholars argue that Ptolemys character in this work was actually based on the Roman emperor Caligula and his violations of Jewish sensibilities.54 Marriage and issueedit Ptolemy IV married his sister Arsinoe III. Their only son Ptolemy V was born in 210 BC. Ptolemy IV may also have had a shortlived illegitimate son by his mistress Agathoclea in late c. 210 BC. However it has been suggested that this child may actually have been Ptolemy V on the basis of a passage written by the geographer Strabo.552 Notesedit  Numbering the Ptolemies is a modern convention. Older sources may give a number one higher or lower. The most reliable way of determining which Ptolemy is being referred to in any given case is by epithet e.g. Philopator. Referencesedit  Clayton 2006 p. 208.  a b c d e Bennett Chris. Ptolemy IV. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 29 October 2019.  IG IX.1 156 R. Flacelire Fouilles de Delphes III42 no 233 pp 2
75 ff  a b Bennett Chris. Magas. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 30 October 2019.  Plutarch Life of CLeomenes 32  Hlbl 2001 pp. 4354  Polybius 
15.2 
5.2   Bennett Chris. Lysimachus. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 30 October 2019.  Polybius 
15.2 
5.2  Plutarch Life of Cleomenes 33 PseudoPlutarch Proverb. Alexandr. 13  Polybius 
15.2 
5.2 . Cf. Zenobius 
5.9 4.  Hlbl 2001 pp. 127128  Bennett Chris. Arsinoe III. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 30 October 2019.  Polybius 
5.4 546  a b c d e f Hlbl 2001 pp. 128132  Polybius 
5.4 0.  Polybius 
5.6 163 66  Polybius 
5.3 839 Plutarch Life of Cleomenes 3337  Hlbl 2001 p. 128  Polybius 
5.6 7  Polybius 
5.6 871  Polybius 
5.7 987 Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 
30.1   Raphia Decree link to text Polybius 
5.8 7  Polybius 
5.1 00.  Polybius 

11.4.1  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
27.3 0  
28.7 .  Strabo Geography 

10.4.1 1  IG XII.1 37 IG VII 298.  Hlbl 2001 p. 132  Polybius 
9.1 
1 a Livy Ab Urbe Condita 

27.4.1 0  Polybius 

7.2.2  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
24.2 6.  a b c d Hlbl 2001 p. 133  Edfu IV.
8.1 7 VII.
7.5 7.  Polybius 
5.1 
07.1 3  Hlbl 2001 pp. 153154  Hlbl 2001 pp. 154155  Bennett Chris. Horwennefer  Ankhwennefer. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 29 October 2019.  a b c d e f g h Hlbl 2001 pp. 161162  Polybius 
15.2 5
26 a Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 
30.2  John of Antioch FGrH 558 F54  Strabo Geography 

17.1.8  Zenobius 
3.9 4  Eratosthenes FGrH 241 F16  Pfeiffer Stefan 2015. Griechische und lateinische Inschriften zum Ptolemerreich und zur rmischen Provinz Aegyptus. Einfhrungen und Quellentexte zur gyptologie in German. Vol. 9. Mnster Lit. pp. 102104.  Hlbl 2001 pp. 162164  a b c d e f g h i j k Hlbl 2001 pp. 160161  Wilkinson Richard H. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 113. ISBN 9780500283967.  Wilkinson Richard H. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 142. ISBN 9780500283967.  Hlbl 2001 pp. 8687  Wilkinson Richard H. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 151152. ISBN 9780500283967.  Bevan Edwyn 1927. The House of Ptolemy a History of Egypt under the Ptolemaic Dynasty. London Methuen. p. 233.  Aelian Variae Historiae 
13.2 2  Scholia to Aristophanes Thesmophoriazusae 1059  Callixenus FGrH 627 F1  Athenaeus Deipnosophistae V 37.  Demetrius 
43.4 5.  Lionel Casson 1995. Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 108109. ISBN 0801851300.  Polybius 
5.3 4  
14.1 2  Clayton Croy N. 2006. 3 Maccabees Septuagint Commentary Series. Leiden Brill. pp. xiixiii.  Strabo Geography 

17.1.1 1. Bibliographyedit Clayton Peter A. 2006. Chronicles of the Pharaohs the reignbyreign record of the rulers and dynasties of ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500286280. Hlbl Gnther 2001. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire. London  New York Routledge. pp. 143152  181194. ISBN 0415201454. Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Ptolemies . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 22 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 617. External linksedit Ptolemy Philopator I at LacusCurtius  Chapter VII of E. R. Bevans House of Ptolemy 1923 Ptolemy IV  Egyptian Royal Genealogy Ptolemaic Genealogy Possible child of Ptolemy IV The great revolt of the Egyptians205186 BC 2004 Ptolemy IV Philopator entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemaic Dynasty Born Unknown Died 204 BC Preceded by Ptolemy III Pharaoh of Egypt 221204 BC Succeeded by Ptolemy V v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST VIAF 2 3 4 National Germany Israel United States Poland Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePtolemyIVPhilopatoroldid1208472707 Categories Ptolemy IV Philopator 
3 rdcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic dynasty 
3 rdcentury BC births 204 BC deaths 
3 rdcentury BC Egyptian people 
3 rdcentury BC Macedonians People in the deuterocanonical books Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Greeklanguage text Instances of Langel using second unnamed parameter Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 17 February 2024 at 1721 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width