Ptolemy V Epiphanes - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background and early life 
2 Regencies Toggle Regencies subsection 
2.1 Regency of Agathocles 204203 BC 
2.2 Alexandrian revolution 203202 BC 
2.3 Fifth Syrian War 202196 BC 
2.4 The Egyptian Revolt 204196 BC 
3 Personal reign Toggle Personal reign subsection 
3.1 Coronation 
3.2 Peace with Antiochus III 
3.3 End of the Egyptian Revolt 196185 BC 
3.4 Foreign policy after the Fifth Syrian War 1943180 BC 
4 Regime Toggle Regime subsection 
4.1 Ptolemaic dynastic cult 
4.2 Pharaonic ideology and Egyptian religion 
5 Marriage and issue 
6 Notes 
7 References 
8 Bibliography 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy V Epiphanes 52 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca   Catal  etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan  Polski Portugus   Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit  Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia 
5 th Pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt For other uses see Epiphanes disambiguation. Ptolemy V Epiphanes Ancient Greek   Ancient Egyptian Iwa en netjerwy merwy it setep en Ptah User ka Re sekhem ankh Amun12 Tetradrachm issued c. 200 BC Pharaoh King of the Ptolemaic Kingdom Reign JulyAugust 2
04 September 180 BC Predecessor Ptolemy IV Successor Ptolemy VI Royal titulary Horus name wnwmnswrstjt.f Hunu kha em nisu her set it ef The youth who has appeared as king on his fathers throne Nebty name wrptj smntwj snfrtmrj mnjbrnrw Wer pehty Semen tawy Senefer ta meri Menekh ib her netjeru The one great of strength who has established the Two Lands and made Tamery perfect by being efficacious before the gods Golden Horus wnnnmmt nbbwsdmjpt jtymjr Wadj ankh en henmemet Neb hebu sed mi Ptah ity mi Re The one who has made the life of mankind flourish a possessor of Sed festivals like Ptah and a sovereign like Ra Prenomen Praenomen jw.nnrwjmrwjjt stp.npt wsrkr smnnjmn Iwa en netjerwy merwy it setep en Ptah User ka Re sekhem ankh Amun The heir of the two gods who love their father chosen by Ptah the strong one of the ka of Ra the living image of Amun Nomen ptwlmjs ntmrjpth Ptolemys Ankh djet mery ptah Ptolemaios living forever beloved of Ptah Consort Cleopatra I Children Ptolemy VI Ptolemy VIII Cleopatra II Father Ptolemy IV Mother Arsinoe III Born 9 October 210 BC3 Died September 180 BC aged 293 Burial Alexandria Dynasty Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemy V Epiphanes Eucharistosnote 14 Greek    Ptolemaos Epiphans Eucharistos Ptolemy the Manifest the Beneficent 9 October 2
10 September 180 BC was the King of Ptolemaic Egypt from July or August 204 BC until his death in 180 BC. Ptolemy V the son of Ptolemy IV and Arsinoe III inherited the throne at the age of five when his parents died in suspicious circumstances. The new regent Agathocles was widely reviled and was toppled by a revolution in 202 BC but the series of regents who followed proved incompetent and the kingdom was paralysed. The Seleucid king Antiochus III and the Antigonid king Philip V took advantage of the kingdoms weakness to begin the Fifth Syrian War 202196 BC in which the Ptolemies lost all their territories in Asia Minor and the Levant as well as most of their influence in the Aegean Sea. Simultaneously Ptolemy V faced a widespread Egyptian revolt 206185 BC led by the selfproclaimed pharaohs Horwennefer and Ankhwennefer which resulted in the loss of most of Upper Egypt and parts of Lower Egypt as well. Ptolemy V came of age in 196 BC and was crowned as pharaoh in Memphis an occasion commemorated by the creation of the Rosetta Stone. After this he made peace with Antiochus III and married the daughter of Antiochus III Cleopatra I in 1943 BC. This outraged the Romans who had entered into hostilities with Antiochus III partially on Ptolemy Vs behalf and after their victory they distributed the old Ptolemaic territories in Asia Minor to Pergamum and Rhodes rather than returning them to Egypt. However Ptolemaic forces steadily reconquered the south of the country bringing all of Upper Egypt back under Ptolemaic control in 186 BC. In his last years Ptolemy V began manoeuvering for renewed warfare with the Seleucid empire but these plans were cut short by his sudden death in 180 BC allegedly poisoned by courtiers worried about the cost of the war. Ptolemy Vs reign saw greatly increased prominence of courtiers and the Egyptian priestly elite in Ptolemaic political life a pattern that would continue for most of the rest of the kingdoms existence. It also marked the collapse of Ptolemaic power in the wider Mediterranean region. Arthur Eckstein has argued that this collapse sparked the power transition crisis that led to the Roman conquest of the eastern Mediterranean.5 Background and early lifeedit Ptolemy V was the only child of Ptolemy IV and his sisterwife Arsinoe III. The couple had come to power relatively young and ancient historiography remembered Ptolemy IV as being given over to luxury and ceremony while leaving the government of Egypt largely to two courtiers Sosibius and Agathocles the latter being the brother of Ptolemy IVs concubine Agathoclea. In his early reign Ptolemy IV successfully defeated the rival Seleucid empire in the Fourth Syrian War 219217 BC successfully preventing the Seleucid king Antiochus III from seizing Coele Syria for himself. His later reign however was troubled by native Egyptian revolts. Between 206 and 205 BC Ptolemy IV lost control of Upper Egypt to the selfstyled pharaoh Hugronaphor.6 Ptolemy V was born in 210 BC possibly on 9 October. He was made coregent with his father shortly thereafter probably on 30 November.note 27 In July or August of 204 BC when Ptolemy V was five years old his father and mother died in mysterious circumstances. It appears that there was a fire in the palace that killed Ptolemy IV but it is unclear whether Arsinoe III also perished in this fire or was murdered afterwards to prevent her from becoming regent.7 Regenciesedit Regency of Agathocles 204203 BCedit An uncertain amount of time elapsed after the death of Ptolemy IV and Arsinoe III perhaps a week during which Sosibius and Agathocles kept their deaths secret. Some time before September 204 BC3 the royal bodyguard and army officers were gathered at the royal palace and Sosibius announced the death of the ruling couple and presented the young Ptolemy V to be acclaimed as king wrapping the diadem around his head. Sosibius read out Ptolemy IVs will which made Sosibius and Agathocles regents and placed Ptolemy V in the personal care of his mistress Agathoclea and her mother Oenanthe. Polybius thought that this will was a forgery produced by Sosibius and Agathocles themselves and modern scholars tend to agree with him. Sosibius is not heard of again after this event and it is generally assumed that he died. Hlbl suggests that the loss of his acumen was fatal to the regency.89 Agathocles took a number of actions to solidify the new regime. Two months pay were granted to the soldiers in Alexandria. Prominent aristocrats were dispatched overseas  to secure recognition of the succession from foreign powers and to prevent the aristocrats from challenging Agathocles for supremacy at home. Philammon said to have carried out the murder of Arsinoe III was sent to Cyrene as governor in order to assert Ptolemaic rule there. Pelops governor of Cyprus was sent to Antiochus III to ask him to continue to respect the peace treaty made with Ptolemy IV at the end of the Fourth Syrian War. Ptolemy Sosibius son was sent to Philip V of Macedon to attempt to arrange an alliance against Antiochus III and a marriage between Ptolemy V and one of Philip Vs daughters. Ptolemy of Megalopolis was sent to Rome probably seeking support against Aniochus III.10 These missions were failures. Over the following year Antiochus III seized Ptolemaic territory in Caria including the city of Amyzon and by late 203 BC he and Philip V had made a secret agreement to divide the Ptolemaic territories between themselves.119 War with Antiochus III was expected  Agathocles had also sent an embassy under Scopas the Aetolian to hire mercenaries in Greece in preparation for a conflict although Polybius claims that his true purpose was to replace the Ptolemaic troops with mercenaries loyal to him.12 Alexandrian revolution 203202 BCedit Agathocles and Agathoclea had already been unpopular before Ptolemy IVs death. This unpopularity was exacerbated by the widespread belief that they had been responsible for the death of Arsinoe III and a string of extrajudicial murders of prominent courtiers. Opposition crystallised around the figure of Tlepolemus the general in charge of Pelusium whose motherinlaw had been arrested and publicly shamed by Agathocles. In October 203 BC3 when Agathocles gathered the palace guard and army to hear a proclamation in advance of the royal coronation the assembled troops began to insult him and he barely escaped alive.13 Shortly after this Agathocles had Moeragenes one of the royal bodyguards arrested on suspicion of ties to Tlepolemus and had him stripped and tortured. He escaped and convinced the army to go into active revolt. After an altercation with Oenanthe the mother of the regent and his sister at the temple of Demeter the Alexandrian women joined the revolt as well. Overnight the populace besieged the palace calling for the king to be brought to them. The army entered at dawn and Agathocles offered to surrender. Ptolemy V now about seven years old was taken from Agathocles and presented to the people on horseback in the stadium. In response to the crowds demands Sosibius son of Sosibius persuaded Ptolemy V to agree to the execution of his mothers killers. Agathocles and his family were then dragged into the stadium and killed by the mob.14159 Tlepolemus arrived in Alexandria immediately after these events and was appointed regent. He and Sosibius son of Sosibius were also made Ptolemy Vs legal guardians. Popular opinion soon turned against Tlepolemus who was considered to spend too much time sparring and drinking with the soldiers and to have given too much money to embassies from the cities of mainland Greece. Ptolemy son of Sosibius attempted to set his brother Sosibius up in opposition to Tlepolemus but the plan was discovered and Sosibius was dismissed as guardian.16 Fifth Syrian War 202196 BCedit Antiochus III of Syria Philip V of Macedon Main article Fifth Syrian War Since his defeat by Ptolemy IV in the Fourth Syrian War in 217 BC Antiochus III had been waiting for an opportunity to avenge himself. He had begun seizing Ptolemaic territory in western Asia Minor in 203 BC and made a pact with Philip V of Macedon to divide the Ptolemaic possessions between themselves late in that year.11 In 202 BC Antiochus III invaded CoeleSyria and seized Damascus. Tlepolemus responded by sending an embassy to Rome begging for help.17 At some point over the winter Tlepolemus was replaced as regent by Aristomenes a member of the bodyguard who had been instrumental in the seizure of young Ptolemy V from Agathocles.9 In 201 BC Antiochus III invaded Palestine and eventually captured Gaza. The Ptolemaic governor of CoeleSyria Ptolemy defected to Antiochus III bringing his territory with him and remaining its governor. Meanwhile Philip V seized Samos and invaded Caria. This led to conflict with Rhodes and the Attalids who also sent embassies to Rome. In summer 200 BC Philip V conquered the Ptolemaic possessions and independent cities in Thrace and the Hellespont and the Romans intervened starting the Second Macedonian War 200197 BC.18 The Ptolemaic general Scopas led a successful reconquest of Palestine over the winter of 20120019 but Antiochus III invaded again in 200 BC and defeated him decisively at the Battle of Panium.20 A Roman embassy made an ineffectual attempt to broker a peace between Ptolemy V and Antiochus III but largely abandoned the Egyptians to their fate.21 Scopas was besieged at Sidon over the winter but had to surrender at the beginning of summer 199 BC. He was sent off to his homeland of Aetolia to recruit troops in case Antiochus III moved on to attack Egypt itself.22 Instead Antiochus III spent 198 BC solidifying his conquest of CoeleSyria and Judea which would never again return to Ptolemaic control. In 197 BC Antiochus III turned on the Ptolemaic territories remaining in Asia Minor conquering their cities in Cilicia23 as well as several of their cities in Lycia and Ionia notably Xanthos Telmessus and Ephesus.2418 The Egyptian Revolt 204196 BCedit Main articles Hugronaphor and Ankhmakis A revolt had broken out in Upper Egypt under the native pharaoh Hugronaphor Horwennefer in the last years of Ptolemy IVs reign and Thebes had been lost in November 205 BC. The conflict continued throughout the infighting of Ptolemy Vs early reign and during the Fifth Syrian War. Hugronaphor was succeeded by or changed his name to Ankhmakis Ankhwennefer in late 199 BC.2526 Shortly after this Ptolemy V launched a massive southern campaign besieging Abydos in August 199 BC and regaining Thebes from late 199 BC until early 198 BC. The next year however a second group of rebels in the Nile Delta who were linked to Ankhmakis in some way that is not entirely clear captured the city of Lycopolis near Busiris and invested themselves there. After a siege the Ptolemaic forces regained control of the city. The rebel leaders were taken to Memphis and publicly executed on 26 March 196 BC during the feast celebrating Ptolemy Vs coronation as pharaoh.2725 Personal reignedit Coronationedit The Memphis decree inscribed on the Rosetta Stone By 197 BC the dismal Ptolemaic performance in the war against Antiochus III had completely eroded Aristomenes authority as regent. Around October or November 197 BC the Ptolemaic governor of Cyprus Polycrates of Argos came to Alexandria and arranged for Ptolemy V to be declared an adult with a ceremony known as an anacleteria even though he was only thirteen years old. Polybius writes that Ptolemy Vs courtiers thought that the kingdom would gain a certain degree of firmness and a fresh impulse towards prosperity if it were known that the king had assumed the independent direction of the government.28 He was crowned in Memphis by the High Priest of Ptah on 26 March 196. Polycrates now became the chief minister in Alexandria and Aristomenes was forced to commit suicide in the following years.2918 The day after Ptolemy Vs coronation a synod of priests from all over Egypt who had gathered for the event passed the Memphis decree. The decree was inscribed on stelae and two of these stelae survive the Nubayrah Stele and the famous Rosetta Stone. This decree praises Ptolemy Vs benefactions for the people of Egypt recounts his victory over the rebels at Lycopolis and remits a number of taxes on the temples of Egypt. The decree has been interpreted as a reward for the priests support of Ptolemy V against the rebels.30 Gnther Hlbl instead interprets the decree as a sign of the priests increased power. In his view the priests asserted their right to the remission of taxes aware that Ptolemy V was relying more heavily on their support than his predecessors had and he had no choice but to concede.31 Peace with Antiochus IIIedit Modern depiction of Queen Cleopatra I produced from a contemporary relief After the Romans decisively defeated Philip V at the Battle of Cynoscephalae in 197 BC they turned their attention to Antiochus III whose troops had crossed the Hellespont and entered Thrace. In late 196 or early 195 BC Lucius Cornelius Lentulus met with the Syrian king and among other things demanded that Antiochus III return everything he had conquered from Ptolemy V. However Antiochus announced that he had already begun peace negotiations with Egypt and the Romans departed without achieving anything.32 Antiochus then concluded peace with Ptolemy engaging him to his own daughter Cleopatra I. In winter of 194193 BC the sixteenyear old Ptolemy V married Cleopatra I who was somewhere between 14 and 23 years old. Symbolically Antiochus held the wedding that sealed his conquest of CoeleSyria at Raphia the site of his great defeat at the hands of Ptolemy IV.3334 End of the Egyptian Revolt 196185 BCedit In the mid 1
90 s BC Ankhmakis made some sort of agreement with King Adikhalamani of Meroe. In return for the southern Egyptian city of Syene Adikhalamani provided some sort of aid which enabled Ankhmakis to recapture Thebes by autumn 195 BC. Violent battles between the forces of Ptolemy V and Ankhmakis took place around Asyut. In late 191 or early 190 BC papyrus records indicate that Thebes was once again under Ptolemy Vs control. The Ptolemaic general Comanus led this reconquest. In 187 BC Adikhalamani pulled out of Syene and abandoned his support for Ankhmakis. The priests who had supported Ankhmakis accompanied his troops back to Meroe. On 27 August 186 BC Ankhmakis and his son led a lastditch attack on Thebes but were defeated by Comanus. This victory reestablished Ptolemaic rule in Upper Egypt as well as the Triakontaschoinos. In temples in the region inscriptions with the names of the Meroitic kings who had ruled the region since 206 BC were scratched out.25 Ankhmakis was taken to Alexandria and executed on 6 September 186 BC. Soon after an official synod of priests gathered in the city and passed a decree known today as the Philensis II decree in which Ankhmakis was denounced for rebellion and various other crimes against humanity and the gods. A month later on 9 October 186 BC Ptolemy V issued the Amnesty Decree which required all fugitives and refugees to return to their homes and pardoned them for any crimes committed before September 186 BC except temple robbery. This was intended to restore land to cultivation that had been abandoned during the prolonged period of warfare. To prevent further revolts in the south a new military governorship of Upper Egypt the epistrategos was created with Comanus serving in the role from 187 BC. Greek soldiers were settled in villages and cities in the south to act as a garrison force in the event of further unrest.25 The rebels in Lower Egypt still continued to fight on. In 185 BC the general Polycrates of Argos succeeded in suppressing the rebellion. He promised the leaders of the rebellion that they would be treated generously if they surrendered. Trusting this they voluntarily went to Sais in October 185 BC where they were stripped naked forced to drag carts through the city and then tortured to death.35 Whether Polycrates or Ptolemy V was responsible for this duplicitous cruelty is disputed.25 Foreign policy after the Fifth Syrian War 1943180 BCedit After the end of the Fifth Syrian War Ptolemy V made an effort to reassert Ptolemaic power on the world stage and to claw back some of the territories lost to the Seleucids with very little success. When the RomanSeleucid War broke out in 192 BC Ptolemy V sent an embassy to Rome offering financial and military support but the Senate refused it apparently annoyed about the separate peace that Ptolemy V had made with Antiochus III in 1943 BC.36 Another embassy to Rome in 191 BC congratulating the Senate on the Roman victory at the Battle of Thermopylae was entirely ignored.37 At the end of the war in 188 BC when the Romans imposed the Treaty of Apamea on Antiochus III which forced him to give up all his territory in Asia Minor they did not return the former Ptolemaic holdings in the region to Ptolemy V but awarded them to Pergamum and Rhodes instead.3839 When Antiochus III died in 187 BC and was succeeded by his son Seleucus IV Ptolemy V began preparations for a renewed war to recapture CoeleSyria. Ptolemy Vs childhood friend the eunuch Aristonicus was sent to Greece to recruit mercenaries in 185 BC.40 At the same time the king revived the alliances that his grandfather Ptolemy III had maintained with the Achaean League presenting the League with monetary gifts and promising them ships as well.41 To raise his profile in Greece Ptolemy V also entered a chariot team in the Panathenaic Games of 182 BC.42 In the same year Aristonicus led a naval raid on Syria attacking the island of Aradus.39 Ptolemy V died suddenly in September 180 BC not yet thirty years old. The ancient historians allege that he was poisoned by his courtiers who believed that he intended to seize their property in order to fund his new Syrian war.43393 Regimeedit Ptolemaic dynastic cultedit Octadrachm of Ptolemy V wearing the diadem and chlamys of a Hellenistic king as well as a crown of wheat. Ptolemaic Egypt had a dynastic cult which centred on the Ptolemaia festival and the annual priest of Alexander the Great whose full title included the names of all the Ptolemaic monarchs and appeared in official documents as part of the date formula. Probably at the Ptolemaia festival in 199 BC Ptolemy V was proclaimed to be the Theos Epiphanes Eucharistos Manifest Beneficent God and his name was added to the title of the Priest of Alexander. When he married Cleopatra I in 1943 BC the royal couple were deified as the Theoi Epiphaneis Manifest Gods and the Priest of Alexanders full title was modified accordingly.44 Since the death of Ptolemy Vs predecessor Arsinoe II deceased Ptolemaic queens had been honoured with a separate dynastic cult of their own including a separate priestess who marched in religious processions in Alexandria behind the priest of Alexander the Great and whose names also appeared in dating formulae. That trend continued under Ptolemy V with the establishment of a cult for his mother in 199 BC. Unlike the canephore of Arsinoe II and the athlophore of Berenice II Arsinoe IIIs priestess had no special title and served for life rather than a single year.4544 With the loss of most of the Ptolemaic possessions outside Egypt in the Fifth Syrian War Cyprus assumed a much more important role within the Ptolemaic empire and this was asserted by the establishment of a centralised religious structure on the island. The governor strategos of Cyprus was henceforth also the islands high priest archiereus responsible for maintaining a version of the dynastic cult on the island.44 Pharaonic ideology and Egyptian religionedit Like his predecessors Ptolemy V assumed the traditional Egyptian role of pharaoh and the concomitant support for the Egyptian priestly elite. As under the two previous rulers the symbiotic relationship between the king and the priestly elite was affirmed and articulated by the decrees of priestly synods. Under Ptolemy V there were three of these all of which were published on stelae in hieroglyphs Demotic and Greek were published throughout Egypt.46 The first of these decrees was the Memphis decree passed on 27 March 196 BC the day after Ptolemy Vs coronation in which the king is presented as the image of Horus son of Isis and Osiris. The decrees description of Ptolemy Vs victory over the Lycopolis rebels and of his coronation draws heavily on traditional imagery that presented the pharaoh as a new Horus receiving the kingship from his dead father whom he avenges by smiting the enemies of Egypt and restoring order. In honour of his benefactions the priests awarded him religious honours modelled on those granted by the priestly synods to his father and grandfather they agreed to erect a statue of Ptolemy V in the shrine of every temple in Egypt and to celebrate an annual festival on his birthday.46 These honours were augmented in the Philensis II decree passed in September 186 BC on the suppression of Ankhmakis revolt. The priests undertook to erect another statue of Ptolemy V in the guise of Lord of Victory in the sanctuary of every temple in Egypt alongside a statue of the main deity of the temple and to celebrate a festival in honour of Ptolemy V and Cleopatra I every year on the day of Ankhmakis defeat.4746 This decree was revised in the Philensis I decree passed in autumn 185 BC on the enthronement of an Apis bull. This decree reinstated the honours for Arsinoe Philadelphus Arsinoe II and the Theoi Philopatores Ptolemy IV and Arsinoe III in the temples of Upper Egypt which had been abolished during Ankhmakis revolt. It also granted Cleopatra I all the various honours that had been granted to Ptolemy V in the earlier decrees.46 Ptolemy Vs predecessors since the time of Alexander the Great had pursued a wideranging policy of temple construction designed to ensure the support of the priestly elite. Ptolemy V was not able to do this on the same scale as his predecessors. One reason for this was the more difficult financial circumstances of Egypt during his reign. Another was the loss of large sections of the country to the rebels  at the temple of Horus at Edfu for example it had been planned that a large set of doors would be installed in 206 BC but the rebellion meant that this did not actually take place until the late 1
80 s. What construction was carried out under Ptolemy V was focussed in the northern part of the country particularly the sanctuary of the Apis Bull and the temple of Anubis at Memphis. Hlbl interprets this work as part of an effort to build up Memphis as the centre of Egyptian religious authority at the expense of Thebes which had been a stronghold of the Egyptian revolt.48 Marriage and issueedit Ptolemy V married Cleopatra I daughter of the Seleucid king Antiochus III in 194 BC and they had three children who would rule Egypt in various combinations and with a great deal of conflict for most of the rest of the second century BC.49 Name Image Birth Death Notes Ptolemy VI MayJune 186 BC 145 BC Succeeded as King under the regency of his mother in 180 BC coregent and spouse of Cleopatra II from 170 to 164 BC and again 163145 BC. Cleopatra II 186184 BC 6 April 115 BC Coregent and wife of Ptolemy VI from 170 to 145 BC coregent and spouse of Ptolemy VIII from 145 to 132 BC claimed sole rule 132127 BC coregent and spouse of Ptolemy VIII again from 124 to 115 BC coregent with her daughter Cleopatra III and grandson Ptolemy IX from 116 to 115 BC. Ptolemy VIII c.184 BC 26 June 116 BC Coregent with Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II from 169 to 164 BC expelled Ptolemy VI in 164 expelled in turn 163 BC King of Cyrenaica from 163 to 145 BC coregent with Cleopatra II and Cleopatra III from 145 to 132 BC and again from 124 to 116 BC. Notesedit  Numbering the Ptolemies is a modern convention. Older sources may give a number one higher or lower. The most reliable way of determining which Ptolemy is being referred to in any given case is by epithet e.g. Philopator.  The Rosetta decree gives Ptolemy Vs official birthday as 30 Mesore which fell on 9 October in 210 BC. Since this is the date of a major Egyptian festival some scholars have questioned whether it was his actual birthday. The same decree gives his accession date as 17 Phaophi 30 November in 210 BC in the hieroglyphic text but as 17 Mecheir in the demotic text 29 March in 209 BC. Ludwig Koenen has proposed that 30 Mesore was actually Ptolemy Vs accession date Koenen 1977 p. 73 harvnb error no target CITEREFKoenen1977 help. Referencesedit  Clayton 2006 p. 208.  Leprohon Ronald J. 2013. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary. SBL Press. p. 181. ISBN 9781589837362.  a b c d e Bennett Chris. Ptolemy V. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 7 November 2019.  Hlbl Gnther 20130201. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire. Routledge. p. 171. ISBN 9781135119836.  Eckstein Arthur M. 2006. Mediterranean Anarchy Interstate War and the Rise of Rome. Berkeley University of California Press. pp. 2324. ISBN 9780520246188.  Hlbl 2001 pp. 127133  a b Bennett Chris. Ptolemy IV. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 29 October 2019.  Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 
30.2  Polybius 
15.2 
5.3   a b c d Hlbl 2001 pp. 134136  Polybius 
15.2 
5.1 113  a b Polybius 
15.2 0 

16.1.9  
16.1 
0.1  Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 

30.2.8  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
31.1 
4.5  Appian Macedonica 
4.1 .  Polybius 
15.2 
5.1 619  Polybius 
16.2 
5.2 0
27.3   Polybius 
15.2 734  Bevan Chapter 8.  Polybius 
16.2 122  Justin 

30.2.8   a b c Hlbl 2001 pp. 136140  Polybius 
16.3 9 Porphyry FGrH 260 F4546  Polybius 
16.8 19 
22 a  Polybius 
16.2 
7.5  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 

31.2.3   Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
31.4 
3.5 7  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
33.2 
0.4  Porphyry FGrH 260 F46  Polybius 
18.4 
0 a Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
22.2 
8.1  Porphyry FGrH 260 F4546  a b c d e Hlbl 2001 pp. 155157  Bennett Chris. Horwennefer  Ankhwennefer. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 29 October 2019.  Polybius 
22.1 
7.1  Rosetta Stone decree 11  Polybius 
18.5 
5.3 6  Polybius 
18.5 
5.7  Diodorus Bibliotheca 
18.1 4 Plutarch Moralia 
71 cd.  British Museum. History of the World in 100 ObjectsRosetta Stone. BBC.  Hlbl 2001 p. 165  Polybius 
18.4 952 Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
33.3 941 Appian Syriaca 3.  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
33.1 3 Cassius Dio 
19.1 8  Bennett Chris. Cleopatra I. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 6 November 2019.  Polybius 
22.1 
7.3 7  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
36.4 1  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 

37.3.9 11  Polybius 
21.4 
5.8  Livy Ab Urbe Condita 
38.3 9  a b c Hlbl 2001 pp. 141143  Polybius 
22.2 2  Polybius 

22.3.5 9 
22.9   IG II2 2314 line 41 S. V. Tracy  C. Habicht Hesperia 60 1991 219  Diodorus Bibliotheca 
29.2 9 Jerome Commentary on Daniel 
11.2 0  a b c Hlbl 2001 p. 171  Bennett Chris. Arsinoe III. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 7 November 2019.  a b c d Hlbl 2001 pp. 165167  Translated text on attalus.org  Hlbl 2001 p. 162  Chris Bennett. Cleopatra I. Tyndale House. Retrieved September 28 2019. Bibliographyedit Bevan Edwyn Robert 1927. A History of Egypt Under the Ptolemaic Dynasty. Methuen. OCLC 876137911. Hlbl Gnther 2001. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire. London  New York Routledge. pp. 143152  181194. ISBN 0415201454. Clayton Peter A. 2006. Chronicles of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500286280. External linksedit Ptolemy V Epiphanes entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Greek section of Rosetta Stone and Second Philae Decree in English translation Ptolemy V Epiphanes Ptolemaic dynasty Born 209 BC Died 181 BC Preceded by Ptolemy IV Ptolemaic dynasty 204 BC181 BC with Cleopatra I Succeeded by Cleopatra I and Ptolemy VI v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 National France BnF data Germany Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePtolemyVEpiphanesoldid1193553455 Categories 
3 rdcentury BC Pharaohs 
2 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic dynasty Ancient child monarchs 210 BC births 181 BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Harv and Sfn notarget errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Greeklanguage text Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 4 January 2024 at 1141 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width