File:Ptolemy VIII - silver didrachma - líc.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FilePtolemy VIII  silver didrachma  lc.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. PtolemyVIIIsilverdidrachmalc.jpg 320  240 pixels file size 21 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. DescriptionPtolemy VIII  silver didrachma  lc.jpg Silver didrachma of Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II Physcon  obverse Date 16 . 11. 27 Source httpwww.wildwinds.comcoinsgreeceegyptptolemyVIIIt.html Author httpwww.wildwinds.comcoinsgreeceegyptptolemyVIIIt.html Permission Reusing this file Public domain This is a faithful photographic reproduction of a twodimensional public domain work of art. The work of art itself is in the public domain for the following reason Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. You must also include a United States public domain tag to indicate why this work is in the public domain in the United States. Note that a few countries have copyright terms longer than 70 years Mexico has 100 years Jamaica has 95 years Colombia has 80 years and Guatemala and Samoa have 75 years. This image may not be in the public domain in these countries which moreover do not implement the rule of the shorter term. Honduras has a general copyright term of 75 years but it does implement the rule of the shorter term. Copyright may extend on works created by French who died for France in World War II more information Russians who served in the Eastern Front of World War II known as the Great Patriotic War in Russia and posthumously rehabilitated victims of Soviet repressions more information. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse The official position taken by the Wikimedia Foundation is that faithful reproductions of twodimensional public domain works of art are public domain. This photographic reproduction is therefore also considered to be in the public domain in the United States. In other jurisdictions reuse of this content may be restricted see Reuse of PDArt photographs for details. PDArt template without license parameter please specify why the underlying work is public domain in both the source country and the United States Usage PDArt
1 deathyearyear of authors deathcountrysource country where parameter 1 can be PDoldauto PDoldautoexpired PDoldauto1996 PDold100 or similar. See CommonsMultilicense copyright tags for more information. File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2012 16 November 2007 320  240 21 KB Zubosud 89 Information DescriptionSilver didrachma of Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II Physcon  obverse Sourcehttpwww.wildwinds.comcoinsgreeceegyptptolemyVIIIt.html Date16 . 11. 27 Authorhttpwww.wildwinds.comcoinsgreeceegyptptolemyVIIIt.html File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org      145 .        145 . Usage on bar.wikipedia.org 164 v. Kr. Usage on be.wikipedia.org  VIII  Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  VIII Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on de.wikipedia.org 164 v. Chr. 170 v. Chr. Ptolemaios VIII. Usage on es.wikipedia.org Ptolomeo VIII AnexoFaraones de Egipto Harsiesi Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Ptolemaiosten hallitsijasuku Ptolemaios VIII Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Dynastie lagide Ptolme VIII Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org     Usage on hu.wikipedia.org VIII. Ptolemaiosz Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios VIII Physkon Usage on it.wikipedia.org Tolomeo VIII Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  8 Usage on ka.wikipedia.org  VIII Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on la.wikipedia.org Ptolemaeus VIII rex Aegypti Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Ptolemjas VIII Euergetas II Usage on no.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios VIII Fyskon Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  VIII  Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Ptolemej VIII Fiskon 116. pne. Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  VIII  Usage on th.wikipedia.org  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios VIII Physcon Phc bch ti chu Phi Usage on www.wikidata.org UserIvan A. KrestininPortraitsI   . . View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. error 0 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFilePtolemyVIIIsilverdidrachmalc.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width