Ancient Egyptian royal titulary - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Origins 
2 Horus name 
3 Nebty two ladies name 
4 Horus of Gold 
5 Throne name prenomen 
6 Personal name nomen 
7 Examples of the full titulary Toggle Examples of the full titulary subsection 
7.1 Senusret I 
7.2 Hatshepsut 
7.3 Thutmose III 
8 References 
9 Bibliography 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian royal titulary 27 languages Afrikaans  Catal Dansk  Espaol  Franais  Italiano Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus Romn   Simple English Slovenina Svenska   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Naming convention of the pharaohs of ancient Egypt The royal titulary or royal protocol is the standard naming convention taken by the pharaohs of ancient Egypt. It symbolised worldly power and holy might also acting as a sort of mission statement for the duration of a monarchs reign although sometimes it even changed during the reign. The full titulary consisting of five names did not come into standard usage until the Middle Kingdom but remained in use as late as the Roman Empire. Originsedit In order that the pharaoh who held divine office could be linked to the people and the gods special epithets were created for them at their accession to the throne. These titles also served to demonstrate ones qualities and link them to the terrestrial realm. The five names were developed over the centuries beginning with the Horus name.12 This name identified the figure as a representative of the god Horus.3 The Nebty name was the second part of the royal titular43 of Upper and Lower Egypt.2 This name placed the king under the protection of two female deities Nekhbet and Wadjet4 and began sometime towards the end of the First Dynasty as a reference to The one who belongs to Upper and Lower Egypt along with mention of the Two Ladies.2 Beginning sometime in the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt the Gold Falcon name sometimes called the Horus of Gold was created.5 The last two names of the king the prenomen and the nomen were generally depicted within the circular roped cartouche of the king eventually the cartouche would contain all royal names including the queen and the royal children and were known as the Throne name and the Son of Re name.5 Horus nameedit Main article Horus name  Serekh containing the name of Djet and an association with Wadjet on display at the Louvre The Horus name is the oldest form of the pharaohs name originating in prehistoric Egypt. Many of the oldestknown Egyptian pharaohs were known only by this title.6 The Horus name was usually written in a serekh a representation of a palace faade. The name of the pharaoh was written in hieroglyphs inside this representation of a palace. Typically an image of the falcon god Horus was perched on top of or beside it.6 At least one Egyptian ruler the Second Dynasty pharaoh SethPeribsen used an image of the god Set instead of Horus perhaps signifying an internal religious division within the country. He was succeeded by Khasekhemwy who placed the symbols of both Set and Horus above his name. Thereafter the image of Horus always appeared alongside the name of the pharaoh.6 By the time of the New Kingdom the Horus name was often written without the enclosing serekh. Nebty two ladies nameedit Main article Nebty name The Nebty name lit. two ladies was associated with the socalled heraldic goddesses of Upper and Lower Egypt Nekhbet patron deity of Upper Egypt represented by a vulture and Wadjet patron deity of Lower Egypt represented by a cobra. The name is first definitively used by the First Dynasty pharaoh Semerkhet though it only became a fully independent title by the Twelfth Dynasty. This particular name was not typically framed by a cartouche or serekh but always begins with the hieroglyphs of a vulture and cobra resting upon two baskets the dual noun nebty. Horus of Goldedit Also known as the Golden Horus name this form of the pharaohs name typically featured the image of a Horus falcon perched above or beside the hieroglyph for gold. The meaning of this particular title has been disputed. One belief is that it represents the triumph of Horus over his uncle Set as the symbol for gold can be taken to mean that Horus was superior to his foes. Gold also was strongly associated in the ancient Egyptian mind with eternity so this may have been intended to convey the pharaohs eternal Horus name. Similar to the Nebty name this particular name typically was not framed by a cartouche or serekh. Throne name prenomenedit Main article Prenomen Ancient Egypt Praenomen of the Cartouche of Thutmose II preceded by Sedge and Bee symbols Temple of Hatshepsut Luxor The pharaohs throne name the first of the two names written inside a cartouche usually accompanied the title nswbity nswtbjtj traditionally interpreted as He of sedge and bee and often translated for convenience as King of Upper and of Lower Egypt. The sedge and the bee symbolised Upper and Lower Egypt respectively78 although recent research has thrown this interpretation into doubt.910 The epithet nb twy Lord of the Two Lands referring to the valley and delta regions of Egypt often occurs as well.clarification needed Personal name nomenedit Main article Nomen ancient Egypt This was the name given at birth. The name itself was preceded by the title Son of Ra written with the hieroglyph of a duck za a homonym for the word meaning son za adjacent to an image of the sun a hieroglyph for the chief solar deity Ra. It was first introduced to the set of royal titles in the Fourth Dynasty and emphasizes the kings role as a representative of the solar god Ra. For women who became pharaoh the preceding title was interpreted as daughter also. Modern historians typically refer to the ancient kings of Egypt by this name adding ordinals e.g. II III to distinguish between different individuals bearing the same name. Examples of the full titularyedit Senusret Iedit In the Middle Kingdom the full titulary was sometimes written in a single cartouche as in this example from Senusret I from Beni Hasan. Hatshepsutedit The full titulary of Eighteenth Dynasty pharaoh Hatshepsut providing a guide to pronunciation and its equivalent meaning and showing the differences since this pharaoh is a woman is as follows Horus name Wesretkau Mighty of Kas Nebty name Wadjrenput She of the Two Ladies Flourishing of years Golden Horus Netjeretkhau Divine of appearance Netjeret is the feminine form of netery meaning godly or divine and khau appearances Praenomen Maatkare Truth Maat is the Ka of Re Nomen KhnumtAmun Hatshepsut Joined with Amun Foremost of Noble Ladies Thutmose IIIedit serekh or Horus name Nebty name Golden Horus name praenomen or throne name nomen or birth name Thutmose III in hieroglyphs Era New Kingdom 15501069 BC The full titulary of Eighteenth Dynasty pharaoh Thutmose III providing a guide to pronunciation and its equivalent meaning is as follows Horus name Kanakht Khaemwaset Horus Mighty Bull Arising in Thebes Nebty name Wahnesytmireempet He of the Two Ladies Enduring in kingship like Re in heaven Golden Horus Sekhempahtydjeserkhaw Horus of Gold Powerful of strength Sacred of appearance Praenomen Menkheperre He of the Sedge and the Bee Enduring of form is Re Nomen Thutmose Neferkheperu Son of Ra Thutmose beautiful of forms Referencesedit  Toby A.H. Wilkinson 11 September 2002. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge. p. 172. ISBN 9781134664207.  a b c Ronald J. Leprohon 30 April 2013. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary. SBL Press. pp. 115. ISBN 9781589837362.  a b Gnther Hlbl 1 February 2013. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire. Routledge. p. 79. ISBN 9781135119836.  a b Paul D. LeBlanc 1 December 2017. Deciphering the ProtoSinaitic Script Making Sense of the Wadi elHol and Serabit elKhadim Early Alphabetic Inscriptions. Subclass Press. p. 47. ISBN 9780995284401.  a b James P. Allen 2000. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge University Press. pp. 6466. ISBN 9780521774833.  a b c Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 7475.  Sethe Kurt 1911 Das Wort fr Knig von Obergypten in Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde vol. 42 issue 12  Ewa Wasilewska Creation Stories of the Middle East 2000 1
30 f.  Peust Carsten 2007 Zur Bedeutung und Etymologie von nzw Knig in Gttinger Miszellen 213 pp. 5962.  Schenkel Wolfgang 1986 Das Wort fr Knig von Obergypten in Gttinger Miszellen 94 pp. 5773. Bibliographyedit Allen James P. 1999. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. New York Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521774833. Dodson Aidan Mark Dyan Hilton 2004. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Cairo London and New York The American University in Cairo Press and Thames and Hudson. ISBN 9789774248788. Ronald J. Leprohon 2013. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary. Society of Biblical Literature. ISBN 9781589837355. Gardiner Alan Henderson 1957. Egyptian Grammar Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs 
3 rd ed.. Oxford Griffith Institute. Quirke Stephen G. J. 1990. Who Were the Pharaohs A History of Their Names with a List of Cartouches. London British Museum Publications Limited. Schneider Thomas 1993. Zur Etymologie der Bezeichnung Knig von Ober und Untergypten. Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde. 120 2 166181. doi
10.1 5
24 zaes.19
93.1 

20.2.1 66. S
2 CID 193377499. Shaw Garry J. 2012. The Pharaoh Life at Court and on Campaign. London and New York Thames and Hudson. pp. 2021. von Beckerath Jrgen 1999. Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 
2 nd ed.. Mainz am Rhein Verlag Philipp von Zabern. External linksedit The Gold name the Horus name the Royal Titulary the Two Ladies and Thutmose I on Digital Egypt v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Ancient Egyptian titulary Royal titulary Great Royal Wife Khenemetneferhedjet Pharaoh Religious titulary Divine Adoratrice of Amun Gods Wife Gods Wife of Amun High Priest of Amun High Priest of Osiris High Priest of Ptah High Priest of Ra Lector priest Priestess of Hathor Second Prophet of Amun Servant in the Place of Truth Stolist Two Ladies Courtly and administrative titulary Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King Hatya High steward Irypat Khekeretnisut Nomarch Overseer of cattle Overseer of fields Overseer of the treasuries Overseer of Upper Egypt Royal sealer Ancient Egypt Treasurer Viceroy of Kush Vizier Reporter Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientEgyptianroyaltitularyoldid1183175458 Categories Ancient Egyptian titles Ancient Egyptian language Egyptian royal titles Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 This page was last edited on 2 November 2023 at 1706 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width