File:Coin of Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileCoin of Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. CoinofPtolemyVIINeosPhilopator.jpg 238  251 pixels file size 24 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionCoin of Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator.jpg English Coin of Ptolemy VII Date 21 August 2012 Source httpwww.freeegypt.infohttprealhistoryww.comworldhistoryancientGreekPeriod.htm  Author Unknown authorUnknown author Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. You must also include a United States public domain tag to indicate why this work is in the public domain in the United States. Note that a few countries have copyright terms longer than 70 years Mexico has 100 years Jamaica has 95 years Colombia has 80 years and Guatemala and Samoa have 75 years. This image may not be in the public domain in these countries which moreover do not implement the rule of the shorter term. Honduras has a general copyright term of 75 years but it does implement the rule of the shorter term. Copyright may extend on works created by French who died for France in World War II more information Russians who served in the Eastern Front of World War II known as the Great Patriotic War in Russia and posthumously rehabilitated victims of Soviet repressions more information. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 21 August 2012 media type imagejpeg checksum a
9 b
84 a
25 b
6 eebf4550
72 d459
21 d
5 ca2
72 da
8 ccc0 determination method SHA1 data size 24877 byte height 251 pixel width 238 pixel File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1737 21 August 2012 238  251 24 KB Mhmrodrigues File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org          Usage on arz.wikipedia.org         Usage on az.wikipedia.org VII Ptolemey Usage on be.wikipedia.org  VII Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  VII Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Ptolemeu VII Neofiloptor Usage on ceb.wikipedia.org Philopator Usage on el.wikipedia.org     Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Ptolme VII Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org   Usage on hr.wikipedia.org Ptolemej VII. Neos Filopator Usage on hu.wikipedia.org VII. Ptolemaiosz Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Dinastia tolemaica Tolomeo VII Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  Usage on ka.wikipedia.org  VII Usage on ko.wikipedia.org  7 Usage on no.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios VII Neos Filopator Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  VII Usage on si.wikipedia.org     Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Ptolemaj VII. Neos Filopator Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios VII Usage on th.wikipedia.org   7 Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Ptolomeo VII Neos Philopator Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on www.wikidata.org Q39976 UserIvan A. KrestininPortraitsI   . . TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Ptolemy 
7 k Neos Philopator Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileCoinofPtolemyVIINeosPhilopator.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width