Ptolemy X Alexander I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background and early life 
2 Governor and king of Cyprus 116107 BC 
3 King of Egypt 10788 BC Toggle King of Egypt 10788 BC subsection 
3.1 Accession 
3.2 War with Ptolemy IX and intervention in Judaea 
3.3 Reign with Berenice III 
4 Marriage and issue 
5 Ancestry 
6 Notes 
7 References 
8 Bibliography 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy X Alexander I 38 languages   Catal etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Franais   Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus     srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Ptolemy X of Egypt King of Egypt 10788 BC Ptolemy X Alexander I Ptolemy Philometor Soter 109101 BC Ptolemy Philadelphus 10188 BC Pharaoh King of the Ptolemaic Kingdom Reign 10788 BC with Cleopatra III until 101 BC with Berenice III after 101 BC Predecessor Ptolemy IX Soter Successor Ptolemy IX Soter Royal titulary Horus name nrjmt nm.nswpwnrmsnt wnwnfr bnrmrwt sj.nswmwt.frnstjt.f mwjswt jjmsm.fmjrps.fmt Netjeriemkhet Khnumensuhapuankhhermeskhenet Hununeferbenermerutsekhaensumutefhernesetitef Tjemaahuikhasut Itjemsekhemefmirepesdjefemakhet Godlike in his mothers love associated with the living Apis upon his birth the perfect youth pleasant in his popularity who his mother placed upon the throne of his father who is strong in strategy who defeats foreign lands who lights up the horizon with his conquering power like Ra.   Nebty name shrwtwi knt smn Seherutawy Kanakht Sekhemneneh Who pleases the Two Lands the strong bull eternal power  Golden Horus ib mrinrw itybt wti .ftmrimtp Aaib Merynetjeru Itibaqet Heqawadjty Aqeftameryemhotep The greathearted one who is beloved of the Gods Master of Baqet and ruler of the two crowns when he enters The Beloved Land in peace Prenomen Praenomen iwnnrmnnrtmntr stpnpt irimtr znnnnjmn Iwaennetjermenekhenetjeretmenkhetre Setepenptah Irimaatre Senenankhenamun Heir of the potent god and of the potent goddess the daughter of Ra  chosen by Ptah who has accomplished the Maat of Ra the living likeness of Amun Nomen ptlwmis d n.f lksntrs nt mript Petulemis Djed Enef Aleksentres Ankhdjetmeryptah Ptolemaios also called Alexandros living forever beloved of Ptah Consorts Cleopatra Selene Berenice III Children Ptolemy XI Cleopatra V Father Ptolemy VIII Mother Cleopatra III Born 14039 BC1 Died 88 or 87 BC1 Dynasty Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemy X Alexander Inote 1 Greek   Ptolemaos Alxandros was the Ptolemaic king of Cyprus from 114 BC until 107 BC and of Egypt from 107 BC until his death in 88 BC. He ruled in coregency with his mother Cleopatra III as Ptolemy Philometor Sotera until 101 BC and then with his niece and wife Berenice III as Ptolemy Philadelphus.b He was a son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III and younger brother of Ptolemy IX. His birth name was probably Alexander. Ptolemy X was the second son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III. When Ptolemy VIII died in 116 BC Ptolemy IX became king with Cleopatra III as his coregent and Alexander was sent to Cyprus to serve as governor. However in 11413 BC he declared himself king. Cleopatra III quarrelled with Ptolemy IX and arranged for Alexander to return to Egypt in 107 BC and replace his brother as coregent with modern sources calling him Ptolemy X. During his reign Ptolemy X had to fight against his brother Ptolemy IX to maintain control over the Egyptian throne. Cleopatra III and Ptolemy X fought a war against Ptolemy IX in the Hasmonean kingdom 103102 BC in which Ptolemy X successfully prevented his brother from invading Egypt. In 101 BC he had his mother murdered married his niece Berenice III and appointed his new wife as coregent. An Egyptian uprising in 91 BC caused Ptolemy X to lose control of the south of the country. In 88 BC the people expelled him from Alexandria recalling Ptolemy IX to the throne. Ptolemy X raised an army with Roman help and invaded Cyprus but was killed. Background and early lifeedit Wall relief of Cleopatra III her mother Cleopatra II and Ptolemy VIII before Horus at Kom Ombo Ptolemy X born Alexander was a member of the Greek Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt. When King Ptolemy V had died in 180 BC he had left three children Ptolemy VI Cleopatra II and Ptolemy VIII. All three ruled together from 169 BC until 164 BC when Ptolemy VIII expelled his brother from power. In 163 BC he was expelled in turn and forced to withdraw to Cyrene. However when Ptolemy VI died in 145 BC Ptolemy VIII was invited back to Egypt to serve as king marrying his sister Cleopatra II who had previously been married to Ptolemy VI. The relationship between Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II rapidly deteriorated especially when Ptolemy VIII took Cleopatra III the daughter of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II as a second wife. The conflict eventually led to a civil war with Cleopatra II on one side and Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III on the other 132126 BC. Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III were victorious but reconciled with Cleopatra II and restored her as coregent in 124 BC.2 Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III had two sons and three daughters. The eldest son was Ptolemy IX who was born around 1443 BC and became the heir to the throne c.130 BC during the civil war with Cleopatra II. Their second son known as Ptolemy X was born around 140 BC  it is possible that the Horus name that he later assumed indicates that he was born in 14039 BC.1 He is referred to as Ptolemy Alexander in a number of ancient sources but never in documentary sources like papyri. It is likely that Alexander was his birth name. Governor and king of Cyprus 116107 BCedit Probable bust of Ptolemy IX On 28 June 116 Ptolemy VIII died. According to Justin Ptolemy VIIIs will left Cleopatra III in charge of Egypt with the right to choose either her elder son Ptolemy or her younger son Alexander as her coregent. Justin further claims that Cleopatra III wanted to choose Alexander but the people of Alexandria rioted and forced her to choose Ptolemy.3 Pausanias implies that Cleopatra IIIs request to send Ptolemy IX to Cyprus in 117 BC had been intended to get him out of the way in order to enable Ptolemy Xs succession.4 Some historians have found this account plausible.5 Others have argued that it is a false account that was invented by Cleopatra III at a later date.6 At any rate Cleopatra II Cleopatra III and Ptolemy IX became the corulers of Egypt. They are listed together in that order as corulers in surviving papyrus documents from October 116 BC.5 Meanwhile Alexander was sent to Cyprus to serve as governor of the island. Cleopatra II died some time before April 115 BC and at this point Cleopatra III became the dominant force in the government of Egypt. Ptolemy IX was forced to divorce his sisterwife Cleopatra IV who went off and married the Seleucid king Antiochus IX r. 11595 BC whose mother Cleopatra Thea7 was Cleopatra IIIs sister.8 Her new husband was waging a war against his halfbrother Antiochus VIII r. 12596 BC who was married to Cleopatra IVs elder sister Tryphaena. On the way to meet Antiochus IX Cleopatra IV stopped in Cyprus where she recruited an army and seized control of the Cypriot fleet in order to aid Antiochus IX.9 Perhaps as a result of this in 114113 BC Alexander proclaimed himself King of Cyprus openly declaring his opposition to Ptolemy IX.15 In autumn 107 BC a new conflict broke out between Cleopatra III and Ptolemy IX. Pausanias claims that Cleopatra III wounded a number of her own eunuch servants and displayed them to the people as evidence that her son had attempted to have her assassinated causing the Alexandrians to riot and expel Ptolemy IX from the city.1011 King of Egypt 10788 BCedit Accessionedit Head of Ptolemy X from Egypt Ptolemaic period 
2 nd century BC. Neues Museum Germany While this conflict was taking place Alexander had left Cyprus and sailed to Pelusium. Cleopatra III had him brought to Alexandria and placed on the throne as her new coregent in September 107 BC.12 Cleopatra III seems to have dominated the new government even more thoroughly than she had during the reign of Ptolemy IX. Because of the means by which he came to the throne he was given the derisory nickname Pareisactus Greek  paresaktos smuggled in.131 Another nickname given to him ho Cocces the son of Cocce seems to refer to his mothers dominance but the exact meaning of the name thereby given to his mother Cocce is unclear. It may mean cuckoo in which case this nickname too refers to the way in which his mother had brought him to the kingship. Other interpretations are son of the scarlet lady or son of the cunt.1 In general Ptolemy X was slotted into the role that his brother had previously held. He married his brothers wife Cleopatra Selene who was also his sister.14 He assumed the epithet that had previously been borne by his brother Philometor Soter Motherloving Saviour and took his brothers place in the dynastic cult in which he and his mother were worshipped as the Theoi Philometores Soteres Motherloving Saviour Gods.1 Ptolemy X served as the annual Priest of Alexander and the Ptolemies for 107106 BC and 106105 BC  as his brother had for every year since 116 BC.1 In 105104 BC Cleopatra III assumed the priesthood for herself.12 War with Ptolemy IX and intervention in Judaeaedit After his expulsion from Alexandria Ptolemy IX had gone to Cyprus. Forces loyal to Cleopatra III and Ptolemy X expelled him but he mounted another invasion of Cyprus in 106 BC which succeeded in conquering the island.15 Cyrene had initially remained under Ptolemy IXs control but some time after 105 BC and before 100 BC a third brother Ptolemy Apion gained control of the region. Justin claims that the territory had originally been left to Apion in Ptolemy VIIIs will but it is not clear whether this was true or a post facto invention.3 It is unclear whether Apion was aligned with either Ptolemy IX or Ptolemy X. One sign that he was a free agent may be the will which he published. This will left all his territories to Rome in the event that he died without heirs a method which was often used by Hellenistic kings to prevent rivals from attempting to depose or assassinate them. He actually did die without heirs in 96 BC meaning that Rome inherited the territory.1617 In 103 BC the new Hasmonean King of Judaea Alexander Jannaeus attacked Ptolemais Akko. Ptolemy IX responded by invading Judaea.18 Fearing that Ptolemy IX was planning to use Judaea as a springboard for an invasion of Egypt Cleopatra III and Ptolemy X invaded Judaea themselves. Ptolemy X invaded Phoenicia by sea and then marched inland to Damascus while Cleopatra III besieged Ptolemais Akko. Ptolemy IX attempted to slip past them and into Egypt but Ptolemy X managed to rush back and stop him. Ptolemy IX spent the winter encamped at Gaza before deciding to sail back to Cyprus in early 102 BC.17 During this conflict Cleopatra III and Ptolemy X made an alliance with the Seleucid king Antiochus VIII Grypus. He was still waging his own civil war against his brother Antiochus IX Cyzicenus who had previously received support from Ptolemy IX. To seal the alliance with Antiochus VIII Cleopatra forced Ptolemy X to divorce his sisterwife Cleopatra Selene and remarried her to Antiochus.1914 Reign with Berenice IIIedit In September 101 BC Cleopatra disappears from official documents. Justin reports that Ptolemy X had her murdered when he realised that she was intending to kill him.19 In October of the same year Ptolemy married his niece Berenice III daughter of Ptolemy IX and Cleopatra Selene and appointed her coregent.1 Ptolemy X changed his own epithet to Philadelphos Siblinglover and the couple were brought into the dynastic cult as the Theoi Philadelphoi Siblingloving gods.2017 In 91 BC a rebellion broke out in Upper Egypt. This rebellion was the latest in a series of native Egyptian uprisings in the region following those of Hugronaphor 205185 BC and Harsiesi 131130 BC. It is unknown what the name of the rebellions leader was or whether he claimed the title of Pharaoh as earlier rebel leaders had. The rebels gained control of Thebes and were supported by the Theban priests. Their forces are also attested in Latopolis and Pathyris. The rebellion also meant that the Ptolemies lost contact with the Triacontaschoenus region Lower Nubia. Meroe took control of the region and retained it until the Roman period.21 Around May 88 BC Alexandrians and the army turned against Ptolemy X and expelled him. Porphyry reports that the rebellion was a result of anger at Ptolemys friendliness with the Jews.22 Strabo says that Ptolemy X was expelled because he melted down the golden sarcophagus of Alexander the Great and replaced it with one made out of glass.23 The Alexandrians invited Ptolemy IX to return to Alexandria and retake the throne which he did. Ptolemy X and Berenice gathered a naval force to recapture the kingdom but were defeated in battle. Ptolemy X recruited a second force at Myra invaded Cyprus and was killed.24125 In the process of recruiting this final force Ptolemy X had taken out a loan from the Roman Republic. It seems that providing collateral for this loan involved producing a will which left Egypt to the Roman Republic in the event of his death without an heir.26 The Romans chose not to take advantage of this will after Ptolemys death but did not outright reject it either. The possibility of Roman intervention hung over Ptolemy XII for the rest of his reign and forced him to adopt a highly deferential posture with the Romans.25 Marriage and issueedit Ptolemy X probably married his sister Cleopatra Selene on taking the throne in 109 BC. She had previously been married to Ptolemy IX. They probably had one son Ptolemy XI before she was remarried to Antiochus VIII in 10302 BC.2714 After he murdered Cleopatra III Ptolemy X married Berenice III who was probably the daughter of Ptolemy IX and Cleopatra Selene thus Ptolemy Xs stepdaughter and niece in October 101 BC.28 They probably had one daughter Cleopatra V.20 Name Image Birth Death Notes Ptolemy XI c.105 BC April 80 BC Coregent with his mother Berenice III for a few days in April 80 BC. Cleopatra V c. 10095 BC 57 BC Married her cousin Ptolemy XII and coregent with him from 7969 BC coregent with her daughter Berenice IV 5857 BC. Ancestryedit Ancestors of Ptolemy X Alexander I 8. Ptolemy IV Philopator 4. Ptolemy V Epiphanes29 9. Arsinoe III of Egypt 2. Ptolemy VIII Physcon29 10. Antiochus III the Great 5. Cleopatra I of Egypt29 11. Laodice III 1. Ptolemy IX Lathyros 12. 4. Ptolemy V Epiphanes29 6. Ptolemy VI Philometor29 13. 5. Cleopatra I of Egypt29 3. Cleopatra III of Egypt29 14. 412. Ptolemy V Epiphanes29 7. Cleopatra II of Egypt29 15. 513. Cleopatra I of Egypt29 Notesedit  Numbering the Ptolemies is a modern convention. Older sources may give a number one higher or lower. The most reliable way of determining which Ptolemy is being referred to in any given case is by epithet e.g. Philopator.  lit. Ptolemy motherloving savior  lit. Ptolemy siblinglover Referencesedit  a b c d e f g h i j Bennett Chris. Ptolemy X. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 13 November 2019.  Hlbl 2001 pp. 172203  a b Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 

39.3.1   Pausanias 

1.9.1   a b c Hlbl 2001 pp. 204205  Bennett Chris. Cleopatra II. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Antiochus IX at Livius.org  Ptolemy VI Philometor and Cleopatra II at Livius.org  Justin 

39.3.2   Justin historian Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 

39.4.1  Pausanias 

1.9.2   Hlbl 2001 pp. 206207  a b Bennett Chris. Cleopatra III. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Strabo Geography 

17.1.8   a b c Bennett Chris. Cleopatra Selene. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Diodorus Bibliotheca 34
35.3 
9 a Justin 

39.4.1 2  Bennett Chris. Ptolemy Apion. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  a b c Hlbl 2001 pp. 207210  Josephus Antiquities of the Jews 
13.3 24364  a b Justin 

39.4.1 2  a b Bennett Chris. Berenice III. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Pausanias 

1.9.3   Porphyry FGrH 260 F
2.9   Strabo Geography 

17.1.8   Porphyry FGrH 260 F
2.8 9 Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 
39.5  Pausanias  a b Hlbl 2001 p. 211  Cicero Agr. 
1.1  
2.4 142  C. J. Bennett Anc. Soc. 28 1997 39 55  Porphyry 165  a b c d e f g h i j Aidan Dodson Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt 2004 Bibliographyedit Hlbl Gnther 2001. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire. London  New York Routledge. pp. 143152  181194. ISBN 0415201454. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ptolemy X. Ptolemy X Alexander entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Ptolemy X Alexander I Ptolemaic dynasty Born  Died ca. 88 BC Regnal titles Preceded by Ptolemy IX Pharaoh of Egypt 110 BC109 BC with Cleopatra III Succeeded by Ptolemy IX Pharaoh of Egypt 107 BC88 BC with Cleopatra III and Berenice III v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePtolemyXAlexanderIoldid1213872954 Categories 
2 ndcentury BC births 88 BC deaths 
2 ndcentury BC Pharaohs 
1 stcentury BC Pharaohs Matricides Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemaic governors of Cyprus Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greeklanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 15 March 2024 at 1656 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width