Sulla - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family and youth 
2 Early career Toggle Early career subsection 
2.1 Jugurthine War 107106 BC 
2.2 Cimbrian War 104101 BC 
2.3 Cilician governorship 9693 BC 
2.4 Social War 
3 First consulship 88 BC Toggle First consulship 88 BC subsection 
3.1 Sulpicius 
3.2 First march on Rome 
3.3 Aftermath 
4 Proconsular command and Civil War Toggle Proconsular command and Civil War subsection 
4.1 First Mithridatic War 

4.1.1 Sack of Athens 

4.1.2 Boeotian battles 

4.1.3 Peace with Mithridates 
4.2 Civil war 
5 Dictatorship and constitutional reforms Toggle Dictatorship and constitutional reforms subsection 
5.1 Proscription 
5.2 Dictator 
5.3 Reforms 
6 Retirement and death 
7 Legacy 
8 Cultural references 
9 Marriages and children 
10 Appearance and character 
11 Chronology 
12 See also 
13 References Toggle References subsection 
13.1 Citations 
13.2 Modern sources 
13.3 Ancient sources 
14 External links Toggle the table of contents Sulla 66 languages Afrikaans  Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy    Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Ozbekcha    Polski Portugus Romn  Seeltersk Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   tatara Trke  Ting Vit Winaray    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman general and dictator 13878 BC This article is about the Roman dictator. For other uses see Sulla disambiguation. Sulla Portrait of Sulla on a denarius minted in 54 BC by his grandson Pompeius Rufus1 Born 138 BC2345 Died 78 BC aged 60 Puteoli Italy Nationality Roman Notable credit Constitutional reforms of Sulla Office Legate during Social War 9089 BC Consul 88 BC Proconsul against Mithridates 8784 BC Dictator 8280 BC6 Consul 80 BC7 Opponent Gaius Marius Spouses Julia Ilia Aelia Cloelia Caecilia Valeria Children Lucius Cornelius Sulla Cornelia Faustus Cornelius Sulla Cornelia Fausta Cornelia Postuma Military career Service years 10782 BC Wars Jugurthine War Cimbrian War Social War First Mithridatic War Sullas civil war Awards Grass Crown Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix8 sl 13878 BC commonly known as Sulla was a Roman general and statesman. He won the first largescale civil war in Roman history and became the first man of the Republic to seize power through force. Sulla had the distinction of holding the office of consul twice as well as reviving the dictatorship. A gifted and innovative general he achieved numerous successes in wars against foreign and domestic opponents. Sulla rose to prominence during the war against the Numidian king Jugurtha whom he captured as a result of Jugurthas betrayal by the kings allies although his superior Gaius Marius took credit for ending the war. He then fought successfully against Germanic tribes during the Cimbrian War and Italian allies during the Social War. He was awarded the Grass Crown for his bravery at the Battle of Nola. Sulla was closely associated with Venus9 adopting the title Epaphroditos meaning favored of AphroditeVenus.10 Sulla played an important role in the long political struggle between the optimates and populares factions at Rome. He was a leader of the optimates which sought to maintain senatorial supremacy against the populist reforms advocated by the populares headed by Marius. In a dispute over the command of the war against Mithridates initially awarded to Sulla by the Senate but withdrawn as a result of Marius intrigues Sulla marched on Rome in an unprecedented act and defeated Marian forces in battle. The populares nonetheless seized power once he left with his army to Asia. He returned victorious from the east in 82 BC marched a second time on Rome and crushed the populares and their Italian allies at the Battle of the Colline Gate. He then revived the office of dictator which had been inactive since the Second Punic War over a century before. He used his powers to purge his opponents and reform Roman constitutional laws to restore the primacy of the Senate and limit the power of the tribunes of the plebs. Resigning his dictatorship in 79 BC Sulla retired to private life and died the following year. Later political leaders such as Julius Caesar would follow precedent set by Sulla and his military coup in attaining political power through force. Family and youthedit Sulla the son of Lucius Cornelius Sulla and the grandson of Publius Cornelius Sulla11 was born into a branch of the patrician gens Cornelia but his family had fallen to an impoverished condition at the time of his birth. Publius Cornelius Rufinus one of Sullas ancestors and also the last member of his family to be consul was banished from the Senate after having been caught possessing more than 10 pounds of silver plate.121314 Sullas family thereafter did not reach the highest offices of the state until Sulla himself.12 His father may have served as praetor but details are unclear his father married twice and Sulla stepmother was of considerable wealth which certainly helped the young Sullas ambitions.15 One story as false as it is charming relates that when Sulla was a baby his nurse was carrying him around the streets until a strange woman walked up to her and said Puer tibi et reipublicae tuae felix which can be translated as The boy will be a source of luck to you and your state.15 After his fathers death around the time Sulla reached adulthood Sulla found himself impoverished. He might have been disinherited though it was more likely that his father simply had nothing to bequeath.16 Lacking ready money Sulla spent his youth among Romes comedians actors lute players and dancers. During these times on the stage after initially only singing he started writing plays Atellan farces a kind of crude comedy.17 Plutarch mentions that during his last marriage to Valeria he still kept company with actresses musicians and dancers drinking with them on couches night and day.18 Sulla almost certainly received a normal education for his class grounded in ancient Greek and Latin classics.15 Sallust declares him wellread intelligent and he was fluent in Greek.19 Regardless by the standards of the Roman political class Sulla was a very poor man.20 His first wife was called either Ilia or Julia. If the latter he may have married into the Julii Caesares. He had one child from this union before his first wifes death. He married again with a woman called Aelia of whom nothing is known other than her name. During these marriages he engaged in an affair with the hetaira Nicopolis who also was older than he.21 The means by which Sulla attained the fortune which later would enable him to ascend the ladder of Roman politics are not clear Plutarch refers to two inheritances one from his stepmother who loved him dearly and the other from his mistress Nicopolis.22 Keaveney 2005 pp. 1011 accepts these inheritances without much comment and places them around Sullas turning thirty years of age. Early careeredit After meeting the minimum age requirement of thirty he stood for the quaestorship in 108 BC. Normally candidates had to have first served for ten years in the military but by Sullas time this had been superseded by an age requirement. He was then assigned by lot to serve under the consul Gaius Marius.23 Jugurthine War 107106 BCedit Denarius minted in Rome portraying Sullas first great victory in which he ended the Jugurthine War. The front depicts Diana wearing a cruciform earring a double necklace of pearls and pendants and jewels in her hair pulled into a knot crescent above lituus behind. The reverse shows Sulla seated on a raised seat with a bound Jugurtha kneeling beside him before him kneels Bocchus offering an olive branch.citation needed The Jugurthine War had started in 112 BC when Jugurtha grandson of Massinissa of Numidia claimed the entire kingdom of Numidia in defiance of Roman decrees that divided it among several members of the royal family. After the massacre of a number of Italian traders who supported one of his rivals indignation erupted as to Jugurthas use of bribery to secure a favourable peace treaty called to Rome to testify on bribery charges he plotted successfully the assassination of another royal claimant before returning home.23 After the war started several Roman commanders were bribed Bestia and Spurius and one Aulus Postumius Albinus was defeated. In 109 Rome sent Quintus Caecilius Metellus to continue the war. Gaius Marius a lieutenant of Metellus returned to Rome to stand for the consulship in 107 BC. Marius was elected consul and through assignment by tribunician legislation took over the campaign.24 Sulla was assigned by lot to his staff.25 When Marius took over the war he entrusted Sulla to organise cavalry forces in Italy needed to pursue the mobile Numidians into the desert. If Sulla had married one of the Julii Caesares this could explain Marius willingness to entrust such an important task to a young man with no military experience as Marius too had married into that family.2627 Under Marius the Roman forces followed a plan very similar to that of Metellus capturing and garrisoning fortified positions in the African countryside.28 Sulla was popular with the men charming and benign he built up a healthy rapport while also winning popularity with other officers including Marius.29 Ultimately the Numidians were defeated in 106 BC due in large part to Sullas initiative in capturing the Numidian king. Jugurtha had fled to his fatherinlaw King Bocchus I of Mauretania a nearby kingdom Marius invaded Mauretania and after a pitched battle in which both Sulla and Marius played important roles in securing victory Bocchus felt forced by Roman arms to betray Jugurtha.30 After the Senate approved negotiations with Bocchus it delegated the talks to Marius who appointed Sulla as envoy plenipotentiary.31 Winning Bocchus friendship and making plain Romes demands for Jugurthas deliverance Sulla successfully concluded negotiations and secured Bocchus capture of Jugurtha and the kings rendition to Marius camp.32 The publicity attracted by this feat boosted Sullas political career. Years later in 91 BC Bocchus paid for the erection of a gilded equestrian statue depicting Sullas capture of Jugurtha.33 Cimbrian War 104101 BCedit Main article Cimbrian War Depiction of Marius as victor over the invading Cimbri. In 104 BC the Cimbri and the Teutones two Germanic tribes who had bested the Roman legions on several occasions seemed again to be heading for Italy. Marius in the midst of this military crisis sought and won repeated consulships which upset aristocrats in the Senate it is likely however that they acknowledged the indispensability of Marius military capabilities in defeating the Germanic invaders.34 Amid a reorganisation of political alliances the traditionalists in the Senate raised up Sulla  a patrician even if a poor one  as a counterweight against the newcomer Marius.35 Starting in 104 BC Marius moved to reform the defeated Roman armies in southern Gaul. Sulla then served as legate under his former commander and in that stead successfully subdued a Gallic tribe which revolted in the aftermath of a previous Roman defeat.36 The next year Sulla was elected military tribune and served under Marius37 and assigned to treat with the Marsi part of the Germanic invaders he was able to negotiate their defection from the Cimbri and Teutones.38 His prospects for advancement under Marius being stalled however Sulla started to complain most unfairly that Marius was withholding opportunities from him. Demanding transfer to Catulus Marius consular colleague army he received it.38 In 102 BC the invaders returned and moved to force the Alps. Catulus with Sulla moved to block their advance the two men likely cooperated well.38 But Catulus army was defeated in the eastern Alps and withdrew from Venetia and thence to the southern side of the river Po. At the same time Marius had annihilated the Cimbris allies the Teutones at the Battle of Aquae Sextiae. Marius elected again to the consulship of 101 came to Catulus aid Sulla in charge of supporting army provisioning did so competently and was able to feed both armies. The two armies then crossed the Po and attacked the Cimbri.39 After the failure of negotiations the Romans and Cimbri engaged in the Battle of the Raudian Field in which the Cimbri were routed and destroyed.40 Victorious Marius and Catulus were both granted triumphs as the commanding generals.41 Refusing to stand for an aedileship which due to its involvement in hosting public games was extremely expensive Sulla became a candidate for the praetorship in 99 BC. He was however defeated. In memoirs related via Plutarch he claimed this was because the people demanded that he first stand for the aedilate so  due to his friendship with Bocchus a rich foreign monarch  he might spend money on games.42 Whether this story of Sullas defeat is true is unclear.43 Regardless Sulla stood for the praetorship again the next year and promising he would pay for good shows was elected praetor for 97 BC he was assigned by lot to the urban praetorship.44 Cilician governorship 9693 BCedit Socalled Sulla a copy probably from the time of Augustus after a portrait of an important Roman from the second century BC with similarities to the socalled Marius suggesting that both statues were conceived and exhibited together as either siblings or rivals Munich Glyptothek. His term as praetor was largely uneventful excepting a public dispute with Gaius Julius Caesar Strabo possibly his brotherinlaw and his magnificent holding of the ludi Apollinares. The next year 96 BC he was assigned  probably pro consule as was customary  to Cilicia in Asia Minor.4546 While governing Cilicia Sulla received orders from the Senate to restore Ariobarzanes to the throne of Cappadocia. Ariobarzanes had been driven out by Mithridates VI of Pontus who wanted to install one of his own sons Ariarathes on the Cappadocian throne. Despite initial difficulties Sulla was successful with minimal resources and preparation with few Roman troops he hastily levied allied soldiers and advanced quickly into rugged terrain before routing superior enemy forces. His troops were sufficiently impressed by his leadership that they hailed him imperator.47 Sullas campaign in Cappadocia had led him to the banks of the Euphrates where he was approached by an embassy from the Parthian Empire. Sulla was the first Roman magistrate to meet a Parthian ambassador. At the meeting he took the seat between the Parthian ambassador Orobazus and Ariobarzanes seeking to gain psychological advantage over the Parthian envoy by portraying the Parthians and the Cappadocians as equals with Rome being superior.48 The Parthian ambassador Orobazus was executed upon his return to Parthia for allowing this humiliation the Parthians however ratified the treaty reached which established the Euphrates as a clear boundary between Parthia and Rome.49 At this meeting Sulla was told by a Chaldean seer that he would die at the height of his fame and fortune. This prophecy was to have a powerful hold on Sulla throughout his lifetime.5051 In 94 BC Sulla repulsed the forces of Tigranes the Great of Armenia from Cappadocia.52 He may have stayed in the east until 92 BC when he returned to Rome.6 Keaveney places his departure in the year 
93 BC.53 Sulla was regarded to have done well in the east he had restored Ariobarzanes to the throne been hailed imperator by his men and was the first Roman to treat successfully with the Parthians. With military and diplomatic victory his political fortunes seemed positive. However his candidature was dealt a blow when he was brought up on charges of extorting Ariobarzanes. Even though the prosecutor declined to show up on the day of the trial leading to Sullas victory by default Sullas ambitions were frustrated.53 Social Waredit Main article Social War 9187 BC Ruins of the town of Aeclanum in southern Italy conquered in 89 BC by Sulla. Relations between Rome and its allies the socii had deteriorated over the years up to 91 BC. From 133 BC and the start of Tiberius Gracchus land reforms Italian communities were displaced from de jure Roman public lands over which no title had been enforced for generations.54 Various proposals to give the allies Roman citizenship over the decades had failed for various reasons just as the allies also became progressively more aware of the need to cease to be subjects and to share in the exercise of imperial power by acquiring that citizenship.55 The Cimbric war also revived Italian solidarity aided by Roman extension of corruption laws to allow allies to lodge extortion claims.56 When the proItalian plebeian tribune Marcus Livius Drusus was assassinated in 91 BC while trying again to pass a bill extending Roman citizenship the Italians revolted.57 The same year Bocchus paid for the erection of a statue depicting Sullas capture of Jugurtha. This may have been related to Sullas campaign for the consulship. Regardless if he had immediate plans for a consulship they were forced into the background at the outbreak of war.58 At the start of the war there were largely two theatres a northern theatre from Picenum to the Fucine Lake and a southern theatre including Samnium.59 Sulla served as one of the legates in the southern theatre assigned to consul Lucius Julius Caesar.59 In the first year of fighting Roman strategy was largely one of containment attempting to stop the revolting allies from spreading their rebellion into Romancontrolled territory. Sulla in southern Italy operated largely defensively on Lucius Julius Caesars flank while the consul conducted offensive campaigning. Late in the year Sulla cooperated with Marius who was a legate in the northern theatre in the northern part of southern Italy to defeat the Marsi Marius defeated the Marsi sending them headlong into Sullas waiting forces.59 Sulla attempted also to assist Lucius relief of the city of Aesernia which was under siege but both men were unsuccessful.60 The next year 89 BC Sulla served as legate under the consul Lucius Porcius Cato.61 But after Catos death in battle with the Marsi62 Sulla was prorogued pro consule and placed in supreme command of the southern theatre. He brought Pompeii under siege. After one of the other legates was killed by his men Sulla refused to discipline them except by issuing a proclamation imploring them to show more courage against the enemy. While besieging Pompeii an Italian relief force came under Lucius Cluentius which Sulla defeated and forced into flight towards Nola. Killing Cluentius before the citys walls Sulla then invested the town and for his efforts was awarded a grass crown the highest Roman military honour.61 Pompeii was taken some time during the year along with Stabiae and Aeclanum with the capture of Aeclanum Sulla forced the Hirpini to surrender. He then attacked the Samnites and routed one of their armies near Aesernia before capturing the new Italian capital at Bovianum Undecimanorum.63 All of these victories would have been won before the consular elections in October 
89.6 4 Political developments in Rome also started to bring an end to the war. In 89 BC one of the tribunes of the plebs passed the lex Plautia Papiria which granted citizenship to all of the allies with exception for the Samnites and Lucanians still under arms.65 This had been preceded by the lex Julia passed by Lucius Julius Caesar in October 90 BC which had granted citizenship to those allies who remained loyal.66 Buttressed by success against Romes traditional enemies the Samnites and general Roman victory across Italy Sulla stood for and was elected easily to the consulship of 88 BC his colleague would be Quintus Pompeius Rufus.67 First consulship 88 BC edit Sullas election to the consulship successful likely due to his military success in 89 BC was not uncontested. Gaius Julius Caesar Strabo merely an exaedile and one of Sullas longtime enemies had contested the top magistracy. Beyond personal enmity Caesar Strabo may also have stood for office because it was evident that Romes relations with the Pontic king Mithridates VI Eupator were deteriorating and that the consuls of 88 would be assigned an extremely lucrative and glorious command against Pontus.68 Pompey Strabo may have coveted a second consulship for similar reasons.69 The question as to whom to send against Mithridates would be one of the sources of the following domestic crisis.70 Shortly after Sullas election probably in the last weeks of the year Sulla married his daughter to one of his colleague Pompeius Rufus sons. He also divorced his thenwife Cloelia and married Metella widow of the recentlydeceased Marcus Aemilius Scaurus. These marriages helped build political alliances with the influential Caecilii Metelli and the Pompeys.71 He was also assigned by the senate probably with the support of his consular colleague Quintus Pompeius Rufus the Mithridatic command.72 Sulpiciusedit Sulla became embroiled in a political fight against one of the plebeian tribunes Publius Sulpicius Rufus69 on the matter of how the new Italian citizens were to be distributed into the Roman tribes for purposes of voting. Sulla and Pompeius Rufus opposed the bill which Sulpicius took as a betrayal Sulpicius without the support of the consuls looked elsewhere for political allies. This led him to a secret deal with Marius who had for years been coveting another military command according to which Marius would support Sulpicius Italian legislation in exchange for a law transferring Sullas command to Marius.73 Sulpicius attempts to push through the Italian legislation again brought him into violent urban conflict although he offered nothing to the urban plebs... so it continued to resist him.74 The consuls fearful of intimidation of Sulpicius and his armed bodyguards declared a suspension of public business iustitium which led to Sulpicius and his mob forcing the consuls to flee.75 During the violence Sulla was forced to shelter in Marius nearby house later denied in his memoirs. Marius arranged for Sulla to lift the iustitium and allow Sulpicius to bring proposals Sulla in a desperately weak position... received little in return perhaps no more than a promise that Sullas life would be safe. Sulla then left for Capua before joining an army near Nola in southern Italy.75 He may have felt after this political humiliation that the only way to recover his career was to come back from the Mithridatic command victorious.76 First march on Romeedit Bust formerly thought to be of Sulla Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek. Main article March on Rome 88 BC With Sulpicius able to enact legislation without consular opposition Sulla discovered that Marius had tricked him for the first piece of legislation Sulpicius brought was a law transferring the command against Mithridates to Marius. Thus Sulla was presented with a choice. He could acknowledge the law as valid. To do so would mean total humiliation at the hands of his opponents the end of his political career and perhaps even further danger to his life. Or he could attempt to reverse it and regain his command. He can hardly have been in any doubt. Like Caesar he was an outsider in politics totally selfcentred in pursuit of his ambitions always ready to break the rules of the political game to achieve his objective... If Sulla hesitated it can only have been because he was not sure how his army would react.77 Speaking to the men Sulla complained to them of the outrageous behaviour of Marius and Sulpicius. He hinted to them that Marius would find other men to fight Mithridates forcing them to give up opportunities to plunder the East claims which were surely false.78 The troops were willing to follow Sulla to Rome his officers however realised Sullas plans and deserted him except his quaestor and kinsman almost certainly Lucius Licinius Lucullus.7879 They then killed Marcus Gratidius one of Marius legates when Gratidius attempted to effect the transfer of command.80 When the march on Rome started the Senate and people were appalled. The Senate immediately sent an embassy demanding an explanation for his seeming march on the fatherland to which Sulla responded boldly saying that he was freeing it from tyrants.78 Rome having no troops to defend itself Sulla entered the city once there however his men were pelted with stones from the rooftops by common people. Almost breaking before Marius makeshift forces Sulla then stationed troops all over the city before summoning the Senate and inducing it to outlaw Marius Marius son Sulpicius and nine others. He then reinforced this decision by legislation retroactively justifying his illegal march on the city and stripping the twelve outlaws of their Roman citizenship. Of the twelve outlaws only Sulpicius was killed after being betrayed by a slave. Marius and his son along with some others escaped to Africa.81 Aftermathedit Sulla then had Sulpicius legislation invalidated on the grounds that all had been passed by force. According only to Appian he then brought legislation to strengthen the Senates position in the state and weaken the plebeian tribunes by eliminating the comitia tributa as a legislative body and requiring that tribunes first receive senatorial approval for legislation82 some scholars however reject Appians account as mere retrojection of legislation passed during Sullas dictatorship.83 He sent his army back to Capua84 and then conducted the elections for that year which yielded a resounding rejection of him and his allies. His enemy Lucius Cornelius Cinna was elected consul for 87 BC in place of his candidate85 his nephew was rejected as plebeian tribune while Marius nephew was successful.86 Cinna even before the election said he would prosecute Sulla at the conclusion of the latters consular term.87 After the elections Sulla forced the consuls designate to swear to uphold his laws. And for his consular colleague he attempted to transfer to him the command of Gnaeus Pompeius Strabos army. The law was vetoed by one of the tribunes but when Quintus Pompeius Rufus went to Pompey Strabos army to take command under the Senates authority he was promptly assassinated after his arrival and assumption of command almost certainly on Strabos orders. No action was taken against the troops nor any action taken to relieve Pompey Strabo of command.88 He then left Italy with his troops without delay ignoring legal summons and taking over command from a legate in Macedonia.89 Sullas ability to use military force against his own countrymen was in many ways a continuation of the Social War... a civil war between former allies and friends developed into a civil war between citizens... what was eroded in the process was the fundamental distinction between Romans and foreign enemies.90 Political violence in Rome continued even in Sullas absence. Cinna violently quarrelled with his coconsul Gnaeus Octavius.91 After Octavius induced the senate to outlaw Cinna Cinna suborned the army besieging Nola and induced the Italians again to rise up. Marius offering his services to Cinna helped levy troops.92 By the end of 87 BC Cinna and Marius had besieged Rome and taken the city killed consul Gnaeus Octavius massacred their political enemies and declared Sulla an outlaw they then had themselves elected consuls for 86 BC.93 Proconsular command and Civil Waredit First Mithridatic Waredit Main article First Mithridatic War Asia Minor just before the First Mithridatic War During the close of the Social War in 89 BC Mithridates VI Eupator of Pontus invaded Roman Asia.94 In the summer of 88 he reorganised the administration of the area before unsuccessfully besieging Rhodes.95 News of these conquests reached Rome in the autumn of 89 BC leading the Senate and people to declare war actual preparations for war were however delayed after Sulla was given the command it took him some eighteen months to organise five legions before setting off Rome was also severely strained financially.96 While Rome was preparing to move against Pontus Mithridates arranged the massacre of some eighty thousand Roman and Italian expatriates and their families  known today as the Asiatic vespers  and confiscated their properties.97 Mithridates successes against the Romans incited a revolt by the Athenians against Roman rule. The Athenian politician Aristion had himself elected as strategos epi ton hoplon and established a tyranny over the city. Hind 1994 p. 150 dismisses claims in Plutarch and Vellius Paterclus of Athens being forced to cooperate with Mithridates as very hollow and apologia.98 Rome defended Delos unsuccessfully from a joint invasion by Athens and Pontus. They were however successful in holding Macedonia then governed by propraetor Gaius Sentius and his legate Quintus Bruttius Sura.99 Sack of Athensedit Main article Siege of Athens and Piraeus 8786 BC Further information Roman Greece Early in 87 BC Sulla transited the Adriatic for Thessaly with his five legions. Upon his arrival Sulla had his quaestor Lucullus order Sura who had vitally delayed Mithridates advances into Greece to retreat back into Macedonia.100 He separately besieged Athens and Piraeus the Long Walls had since been demolished. Threatened by the Pontic navy Sulla sent his quaestor Lucullus to scrounge about for allied naval forces. At the same time Mithridates attempted to force a land battle in northern Greece and dispatched a large army across the Hellespont. These sieges lasted until spring of 86 BC.101 Discovering a weak point in the walls and popular discontent with the Athenian tyrant Aristion Sulla stormed and captured Athens except the Acropolis on 1 March 86 BC. The Acropolis was then besieged. Athens itself was spared total destruction in recognition of its glorious past but the city was sacked.102 In need of resources Sulla sacked the temples of Epidaurus Delphi and Olympia after a battle with the Pontic general Archelaus outside Piraeus Sullas forces forced the Pontic garrison to withdraw by sea. Capturing the city Sulla had it destroyed.102 Boeotian battlesedit Main articles Battle of Chaeronea 86 BC and Battle of Orchomenus In the summer of 86 BC two major battles were fought in Boeotia. The Battle of Chaeronea was fought in early summer around the same time the Athenian Acropolis was taken. The later battlethet Orchomenus was fought in high summer but before the start of the autumn rains.102 The Pontic casualties given in Plutarch and Appian the main sources for the battles are exaggerated Sullas report that he suffered merely fifteen losses is not credible.103 Sulla decamped his army from Attica toward central Greece. Having exhausted available provisions near Athens doing so was both necessary to ensure the survival of his army and also to relieve a brigade of six thousand men cut off in Thessaly. He declined battle with Pontus at the hill Philoboetus near Chaeronea before manoeuvring to capture higher ground and build earthworks. After some days both sides engaged in battle. The Romans neutralised a Pontic charge of scythed chariots before pushing the Pontic phalanx back across the plain.104 According to the ancient sources Archelaus commanded between 60000 and 120000 men105 in the aftermath he allegedly escaped with only 100
00.1 06 After the Battle of Chaeronea Sulla learnt that Cinnas government had sent Lucius Valerius Flaccus to take over his command. Sulla had officially been declared an outlaw and in the eyes of the Cinnan regime Flaccus was to take command of an army without a legal commander.107 Sulla moved to intercept Flaccus army in Thessaly but turned around when Pontic forces reoccupied Boetia. Turning south he engaged the Pontic army  allegedly 90000103  on the plain of Orchomenus. His troops prepared the ground by starting to dig a series of three trenches which successfully contained Pontic cavalry.106 When the Pontic cavalry attacked to interrupt the earthworks the Romans almost broke Sulla on foot personally rallied his men and stabilised the area.108 Roman forces then surrounded the Pontic camp. Archelaus tried to break out but was unsuccessful Sulla then annihilated the Pontic army and captured its camp. Archelaus then hid in the nearby marshes before escaping to Chalcis.109 Peace with Mithridatesedit In the aftermath of the battle Sulla was approached by Archelaus for terms. With Mithridates armies in Europe almost entirely destroyed Archelaus and Sulla negotiated a set of relatively cordial peace terms which were then forwarded to Mithridates. Mithridates was to give Asia and Paphlagonia back to Rome. He was to return the kingdoms of Bithynia and Cappadocia to Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes respectively. Mithridates would also equip Sulla with seventy or eighty ships and pay a war indemnity of two or three thousand talents. Sulla would ratify Mithridates position in Pontus and have him declared a Roman ally.109 Mithridates still in Asia was faced with local uprisings against his rule.110 Adding to his challenges was Lucullus fleet reinforced by Rhodian allies.111 When Flaccus consular army marched through Macedonia towards Thrace his command was usurped by his legate Gaius Flavius Fimbria who had Flaccus killed before chasing Mithridates with his army into Asia itself.111 Faced with Fimbrias army in Asia Lucullus fleet off the coast and internal unrest Mithridates eventually met with Sulla at Dardanus in autumn 85 BC and accepted the terms negotiated by Archelaus.112 After peace was reached Sulla advanced on Fimbrias forces which deserted their upstart commander. Fimbria then committed suicide after a failed attempt on Sullas life. Sulla then settled affairs  reparations rewards administrative and financial arrangements for the future  in Asia staying there until 84 BC. He then sailed for Italy at the head of 1200 ships.113 The peace reached with Mithridates was condemned in ancient times as a betrayal of Roman interests in favour of Sullas private interest in fighting and winning the coming civil war. Modern sources have been somewhat less damning as the Mithridatic campaigns later showed that no quick victory over Pontus was possible as long as Mithridates survived.114 However this and Sullas delay in Asia are not enough to absolve him of the charge of being more concerned with revenge on opponents in Italy than with Mithridates.115 The extra time spent in Asia moreover equipped him with forces and money later put to good use in Italy.115 Civil waredit Further information Sullas civil war Sulla crossed the Adriatic for Brundisium in spring of 83 BC with five legions of Mithridatic veterans capturing Brundisium without a fight. Sullas arrival in Brundisium induced defections from the Senate in Rome Marcus Licinius Crassus who had already fled from the Cinnan regime raised an army in Spain and departed for Africa to join with Metellus Pius who also joined the Sullans joined Sulla even before his landing in Italy. Pompey the son of Pompey Strabo raised a legion from his clients in Picenum and also joined Sulla Sulla treated him with great respect and addressed him as imperator before dispatching him to raise more troops. Even those whom Sulla had quarrelled with including Publius Cornelius Cethegus whom Sulla had outlawed in 88 BC defected to join his side.116 The general feeling in Italy however was decidedly antiSullan many people feared Sullas wrath and still held memories of his extremely unpopular occupation of Rome during his consulship. The Senate moved the senatus consultum ultimum against him and was successful in levying large amount of men and materiel from the Italians.117 Sulla buoyed by his previous looting in Asia was able to advance quickly and largely without the ransacking of the Italian countryside.118 Advancing on Capua he met the two consuls of that year  Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus and Gaius Norbanus  who had dangerously divided their forces. He defeated Norbanus at the Battle of Mount Tifata forcing the consul to withdraw. Continuing towards Scipios position at Teanum Sidicinum Sulla negotiated and was almost able to convince Scipio to defect. Negotiations broke down after one of Scipios lieutenants seized a town held by Sulla in violation of a ceasefire. The breakdown allowed Sulla to play the aggrieved party and place blame on his enemies for any further bloodshed. Scipios army blamed him for the breakdown in negotiations and made it clear to the consul that they would not fight Sulla who at this point appeared the peacemaker. Sulla hearing this feigned an attack while instructing his men to fraternise with Scipios army. Scipios men quickly abandoned him for Sulla finding him almost alone in his camp Sulla tried again to persuade Scipio to defect. When Scipio refused Sulla let him go.119 Sulla attempted to open negotiations with Norbanus who was at Capua but Norbanus refused to treat and withdrew to Praeneste as Sulla advanced. While Sulla was moving in the south Scipio fought Pompey in Picenum but was defeated when his troops again deserted.120 For 82 BC the consular elections returned Gnaeus Papirius Carbo in his third consulship with the younger Gaius Marius the son of the seventime consul who was then twentysix.121122 The remainder of 83 BC was dedicated to recruiting for the next years campaign amid poor weather Quintus Sertorius had raised a considerable force in Etruria but was alienated from the consuls by the election of Gaius Marius son rather than himself and so left to his praetorian province of Hispania Citerior Sulla repudiated recognition of any treaties with the Samnites whom he did not consider to be Roman citizens due to his rejection of Marius and Cinnas deal in 87 BC.123 Fighting in 82 BC began with reverses for Sullas opponents their governors in Africa and Sardinia were deposed. When the campaign in Italy started two theatres emerged with Sulla facing the younger Marius in the south and Metellus Pius facing Carbo in the north.124 Marius buttressed by Samnite support fought a long and hard battle with Sulla at Sacriportus that resulted in defeat when five of his cohorts defected. After the battle Marius withdrew to Praeneste and was there besieged.125 After the younger Marius defeat Sulla had the Samnite war captives massacred which triggered an uprising in his rear. He left one of his allies Quintus Lucretius Afella to maintain the siege at Praeneste and moved for Rome. At the same time the younger Marius sent word to assemble the Senate and purge it of suspected Sullan sympathisers the urban praetor Lucius Junius Brutus Damasippus then had four prominent men killed at the ensuing meeting.126 The purge did little to strengthen resolve and when Sulla arrived at Rome the city opened its gates and his opponents fled. Sulla had his enemies declared hostes probably from outside the pomerium and after assembling an assembly where he apologised for the ongoing war left to fight Carbo in Etruria.127 Carbo who had suffered defeats by Metellus Pius and Pompey attempted to redeploy so to relieve his coconsul Marius at Praeneste. Skilfully withdrawing to Clusium he delegated to Norbanus command of troops to hold Metellus Pius. There Sulla attacked him in an indecisive battle. Pompey ambushed eight legions sent to relieve Praeneste but an uprising from the Samnites and the Lucanians forced Sulla to deploy south as they moved also to relieve Praeneste or join with Carbo in the north.128 Sullas specific movements are very vaguely described in Appian but he was successful in preventing the Italians from relieving Praeneste or joining with Carbo.129 In the north at the same time Norbanus was defeated and fled for Rhodes where he eventually committed suicide. After another attempt to relieve Praeneste failed Carbo lost his nerve and attempted to retreat to Africa his lieutenants attempted again to relieve Praeneste but after that again failed marched on Rome to force Sulla from his welldefended positions. Sulla hurried in full force towards Rome and there fought the Battle of the Colline Gate on the afternoon of 1 November 82 BC.129 Sulla himself was defeated and forced to flee into his camp but his lieutenant Crassus on the right wing was victorious. Sullas wing fled to the gates of Rome but were met with a closed gate forcing them to stand and fight eventually winning in the night.130131 With Crassus pursuing the enemy as far into the countryside and victory at the Colline Gate Sullas forces had won the Samnite and antiSullan commanders were then hunted down as for all intents and purposes the civil war in Italy was over.132 Dictatorship and constitutional reformsedit After the battle at the Colline Gate Sulla summoned the Senate to the temple of Bellona on the Campus Martius. There while giving a speech he had three or four thousand Samnite prisoners butchered to the shock of the attending senators. Sulla marched to Praeneste and forced its siege to a close with the younger Marius dead from suicide before its surrender.133 Sulla had his stepdaughter Aemilia daughter of princeps senatus Marcus Aemilius Scaurus married to Pompey although she shortly died in childbirth. Pompey was then dispatched to recover Sicily. With the capture and execution of Carbo who had fled Sicily for Egypt both consuls for 82 BC were now dead.134 Proscriptionedit Main article Sullas proscription In total control of the city and its affairs Sulla instituted a proscription a program of executing and confiscating the property of those whom he perceived as enemies of the state. Plutarch states in his Life of Sulla that Sulla now began to make blood flow and he filled the city with deaths without number or limit further alleging that many of the murdered victims had nothing to do with Sulla though Sulla killed them to please his adherents. Sulla immediately proscribed 80 persons without communicating with any magistrate. As this caused a general murmur he let one day pass and then proscribed 220 more and again on the third day as many. In an harangue to the people he said with reference to these measures that he had proscribed all he could think of and as to those who now escaped his memory he would proscribe them at some future time. The proscriptions are widely perceived as a response to similar killings that Marius and Cinna had implemented while they controlled the Republic during Sullas absence. Proscribing or outlawing every one of those whom he perceived to have acted against the best interests of the Republic while he was in the east Sulla ordered some 1500 nobles i.e. senators and equites executed although as many as 9000 people were estimated to have been killed.135 The purge went on for several months. Helping or sheltering a proscribed person was punishable by death while killing a proscribed person was rewarded with two talents. Family members of the proscribed were not excluded from punishment and slaves were not excluded from rewards. As a result husbands were butchered in the arms of their wives sons in the arms of their mothers.136 The majority of the proscribed had not been enemies of Sulla but instead were killed for their property which was confiscated and auctioned off. The proceeds from auctioned property more than made up for the cost of rewarding those who killed the proscribed filling the treasury. Possibly to protect himself from future political retribution Sulla had the sons and grandsons of the proscribed banned from running for political office a restriction not removed for over 30 years. The teenaged Gaius Julius Caesar as Cinnas soninlaw became one of Sullas targets and fled the city. He was saved through the efforts of his relatives many of whom were Sullas supporters. Sulla later noted in his memoirs that he regretted sparing the boys life in light of the grown mans notorious ambition. Historian Suetonius records that when agreeing to spare Caesar Sulla warned those who were pleading his case that he would become a danger to them in the future saying In this Caesar there are many Mariuses.137138 Dictatoredit At the end of 82 BC or the beginning of 81 BC139 the Senate appointed Sulla dictator legibus faciendis et reipublicae constituendae causa dictator for the making of laws and for the settling of the constitution. The assembly of the people subsequently ratified the decision with no limit set on his time in office. Sulla had total control of the city and Republic of Rome except for Hispania which Marius general Quintus Sertorius had established as an independent state. This unusual appointment used hitherto only in times of extreme danger to the city such as during the Second Punic War and then only for 
6 month periods represented an exception to Romes policy of not giving total power to a single individual. Sulla can be seen as setting the precedent for Julius Caesars dictatorship and for the eventual end of the Republic under Augustus.citation needed Reformsedit Main article Constitutional reforms of Lucius Cornelius Sulla Sulla who opposed the Gracchian popularis reforms was an optimate though his coming to the side of the traditional Senate originally could be described as atavistic when dealing with the tribunate and legislative bodies while more visionary when reforming the court system governorships and membership of the Senate. As such he sought to strengthen the aristocracy and thus the Senate. Sulla retained his earlier reforms which required senatorial approval before any bill could be submitted to the Plebeian Council the principal popular assembly and which had also restored the older more aristocratic Servian organization to the Centuriate Assembly assembly of soldiers. Sulla himself a patrician thus ineligible for election to the office of Plebeian Tribune thoroughly disliked the office. As Sulla viewed the office the tribunate was especially dangerous and his intention was to not only deprive the Tribunate of power but also of prestige Sulla himself had been officially deprived of his eastern command through the underhanded activities of a tribune. Over the previous 300 years the tribunes had directly challenged the patrician class and attempted to deprive it of power in favor of the plebeian class. Through Sullas reforms to the Plebeian Council tribunes lost the power to initiate legislation. Sulla then prohibited extribunes from ever holding any other office so ambitious individuals would no longer seek election to the tribunate since such an election would end their political career. Finally Sulla revoked the power of the tribunes to veto acts of the Senate although he left intact the tribunes power to protect individual Roman citizens. Sulla then increased the number of magistrates elected in any given year and required that all newly elected quaestores gain automatic membership in the Senate. These two reforms were enacted primarily to allow Sulla to increase the size of the Senate from 300 to 600 senators. This also removed the need for the censor to draw up a list of senators since more than enough former magistrates were always available to fill the Senate. To further solidify the prestige and authority of the Senate Sulla transferred the control of the courts from the equites who had held control since the Gracchi reforms to the senators. This along with the increase in the number of courts further added to the power that was already held by the senators. Sulla also codified and thus established definitively the cursus honorum which required an individual to reach a certain age and level of experience before running for any particular office. Sulla also wanted to reduce the risk that a future general might attempt to seize power as he himself had done. To this end he reaffirmed the requirement that any individual wait for 10 years before being reelected to any office. Sulla then established a system where all consuls and praetors served in Rome during their year in office and then commanded a provincial army as a governor for the year after they left office. Finally in a demonstration of his absolute power Sulla expanded the Pomerium the sacred boundary of Rome unchanged since the time of the kings.140 Sullas reforms both looked to the past often repassing former laws and regulated for the future particularly in his redefinition of maiestas treason laws and in his reform of the Senate. At the start of his second consulship in 80 BC with Metellus Pius Sulla resigned his dictatorship.6 He also disbanded his legions and through these gestures attempted to show the reestablishment of normal consular government. He dismissed his lictores and walked unguarded in the Forum offering to give account of his actions to any citizen.14114 In a manner that the historian Suetonius thought arrogant Julius Caesar later mocked Sulla for resigning the dictatorship.142 Retirement and deathedit As promised when his tasks were complete Sulla returned his powers and withdrew to his country villa near Puteoli to be with his family. Plutarch states in his Life of Sulla that he retired to a life spent in dissolute luxuries and he consorted with actresses harpists and theatrical people drinking with them on couches all day long. From this distance Sulla remained out of the daytoday political activities in Rome intervening only a few times when his policies were involved e.g. the execution of Granius shortly before his own death.143144 Sullas goal now was to write his memoirs which he finished in 78 BC just before his death. They are now largely lost although fragments from them exist as quotations in later writers. Ancient accounts of Sullas death indicate that he died from liver failure or a ruptured gastric ulcer symptomized by a sudden hemorrhage from his mouth followed by a fever from which he never recovered possibly caused by chronic alcohol abuse.145144146147148 Accounts were also written that he had an infestation of worms caused by the ulcers which led to his death.149 His public funeral in Rome in the Forum in the presence of the whole city was on a scale unmatched until that of Augustus in AD 14. Sullas body was brought into the city on a golden bier escorted by his veteran soldiers and funeral orations were delivered by several eminent senators with the main oration possibly delivered by Lucius Marcius Philippus or Hortensius. Sullas body was cremated and his ashes placed in his tomb in the Campus Martius.150 An epitaph which Sulla composed himself was inscribed onto the tomb reading No friend ever served me and no enemy ever wronged me whom I have not repaid in full.151 Plutarch claims he had seen Sullas personal motto carved on his tomb on the Campus Martius. The personal motto was no better friend no worse enemy. Legacyedit Sulla is generally seen as having set the precedent for Caesars march on Rome and dictatorship. Cicero comments that Pompey once said If Sulla could why cant I152153 Sullas example proved that it could be done therefore inspiring others to attempt it in this respect he has been seen as another step in the Republics fall. Sulla attempted to mitigate this by passing laws to limit the actions of generals in their provinces and although these laws remained in effect well into the imperial period they did not prevent determined generals such as Pompey and Julius Caesar from using their armies for personal ambition against the Senate a danger of which Sulla was intimately aware. While Sullas laws such as those concerning qualification for admittance to the Senate reform of the legal system and regulations of governorships remained on Romes statutes long into the principate much of his legislation was repealed less than a decade after his death. The veto power of the tribunes and their legislating authority were soon reinstated ironically during the consulships of Pompey and Crassus.154 Sullas descendants continued to be prominent in Roman politics into the imperial period. His son Faustus Cornelius Sulla issued denarii bearing the name of the dictator155 as did a grandson Quintus Pompeius Rufus. His descendants among the Cornelii Sullae would hold four consulships during the imperial period Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 5 BC Faustus Cornelius Sulla in AD 31 Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix in AD 33 and Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix in 52 AD he was the son of the consul of 31 and the husband of Claudia Antonia daughter of the emperor Claudius. His execution in AD 62 on the orders of emperor Nero made him the last of the Cornelii Sullae. His rival Gnaeus Papirius Carbo described Sulla as having the cunning of a fox and the courage of a lion  but that it was his cunning that was by far the most dangerous. This mixture was later referred to by Machiavelli in his description of the ideal characteristics of a ruler.156 Cultural referencesedit The dictator is the subject of four Italian operas two of which take considerable liberties with history Lucio Silla by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Silla by George Frideric Handel. In each he is portrayed as a bloody womanizing ruthless tyrant who eventually repents his ways and steps down from the throne of Rome. Pasquale Anfossi and Johann Christian Bach also wrote operas on this subject. Sulla is a character in Taylor Caldwells novel A Pillar Of Iron157 in it he has Marcus Tullius Ciceros injured brother Quintus recovering in his home as Quintus is a soldier under his command. He is shown as cold calculating and ruthless yet a devoted leader to his men and sternly wedded to his personal ideals for Rome. Sulla is a central character in the first three Masters of Rome novels by Colleen McCullough. Sulla is depicted as ruthless and amoral very selfassured and personally brave and charming especially with women. His charm and ruthlessness make him a valuable aide to Gaius Marius. Sullas desire to move out of the shadow of aging Marius eventually leads to civil war. Sulla softened considerably after the birth of his son and was devastated when the boy died at a young age. The novels depict Sulla full of regrets about having to put aside his homosexual relationship with a Greek actor to take up his public career. Sulla is played by Richard Harris in the 2002 miniseries Julius Caesar. Lucius Cornelius Sulla is also a character in the first book of the Emperor novels by Conn Iggulden which are centered around the lives of Gaius Julius Caesar and Marcus Junius Brutus. Sulla is a major character in Roman Blood the first of the Roma Sub Rosa mystery novels by Steven Saylor. Sulla is the subject of The Sword of Pleasure a novel by Peter Green published in the UK in 1957. The novel is in the form of an autobiography. Marriages and childrenedit His first wife was Ilia according to Plutarch. If Plutarchs text is to be amended to Julia then she is likely to have been one of the Julias related to Julius Caesar most likely Julia Caesaris Caesars first cousin once removed.158 They had two children The first was Cornelia who first married Quintus Pompeius Rufus the Younger and later Mamercus Aemilius Lepidus Livianus giving birth to Pompeia third wife of Julius Caesar with the former. The second was Lucius Cornelius Sulla who died young. His second wife was Aelia. His third wife was Cloelia whom Sulla divorced due to sterility. His fourth wife was Caecilia Metella with whom he also had three children They had twins Faustus Cornelius Sulla who was a quaestor in 54 BC and Fausta Cornelia who first married Gaius Memmius praetor in 58 BC then later Titus Annius Milo praetor in 54 BC. Faustas son from her first marriage was Gaius Memmius suffect consul in 34 BC. A son who died young shortly before his mothers own death.159 His fifth and last wife was Valeria with whom he had only one child a daughter Cornelia Postuma who was born after Sullas death. Appearance and characteredit Sulla was redblond160 and blueeyed and had a deadwhite face covered with red marks.161 Plutarch notes that Sulla considered that his golden head of hair gave him a singular appearance.162 He was said to have a duality between being charming easily approachable and able to joke and cavort with the most simple of people while also assuming a stern demeanor when he was leading armies and as dictator. An example of the extent of his charming side was that his soldiers would sing a ditty about Sullas one testicle although without truth to which he allowed as being fond of a jest.163 This duality or inconsistency made him very unpredictable and at the slightest pretext he might have a man crucified but on another occasion would make light of the most appalling crimes or he might happily forgive the most unpardonable offenses and then punish trivial insignificant misdemeanors with death and confiscation of property.164 His excesses and penchant for debauchery could be attributed to the difficult circumstances of his youth such as losing his father while he was still in his teens and retaining a doting stepmother necessitating an independent streak from an early age. The circumstances of his relative poverty as a young man left him removed from his patrician brethren enabling him to consort with revelers and experience the baser side of human nature. This firsthand understanding of human motivations and the ordinary Roman citizen may explain why he was able to succeed as a general despite lacking any significant military experience before his 
30 s.23 The historian Sallust fleshes out this character sketch of Sulla He was well versed both in Greek and Roman literature and had a truly remarkable mind. He was devoted to pleasure but more devoted to glory. He never allowed his debaucheries to interfere with his duties but he devoted all his leisure time to them. He was both eloquent and clever and he made friends easily. When it came to hiding his intentions his mind was incredibly unfathomable yet with all else he was extremely generous especially with money.19 Chronologyedit circa 138 BC Born in Rome 110 BC Marries first wife 107105 BC Quaestor and pro quaestore to Gaius Marius in the war with Jugurtha in Numidia 106 BC End of Jugurthine War 104 BC Legatus to Marius serving his second consulship in Gallia Transalpina 103 BC Tribunus militum in the army of Marius serving his third consulship in Gallia Transalpina 102101 BC Legatus to Quintus Lutatius Catulus who was consul at the time and pro consule in Gallia Cisalpina 101 BC Took part in the defeat of the Cimbri at the Battle of Vercellae 97 BC Praetor urbanus 96 BC Propraetor of the province of Cilicia pro consule 9089 BC Senior officer in the Social War as legatus pro praetore 88 BC Holds the consulship for the first time with Quintus Pompeius Rufus as colleague Invades Rome and outlaws Marius 87 BC Commands Roman armies to fight King Mithridates of Pontus 86 BC Participates in the sack of Athens the battle of Chaeronea and the battle of Orchomenus. 85 BC Liberates the provinces of Macedonia Asia and Cilicia from Pontic occupation 84 BC Reorganizes the province of Asia 83 BC Returns to Italy and undertakes civil war against the factional Marian government 8382 BC Enters war with the followers of Gaius Marius the Younger and Cinna 82 BC Obtains victory at the battle of the Colline Gate 8281 BC Appointed dictator legibus faciendis et rei publicae constituendae causa 80 BC Holds the consulship for the second time. His colleague was Metellus Pius. Resigned the dictatorship at the beginning of the year165 79 BC Retires from political life refusing the post consulatum provincial command of Gallia Cisalpina he was allotted as consul but retaining the curatio for the reconstruction of the temples on the Capitoline Hill. 78 BC Dies perhaps of an intestinal ulcer with funeral held in Rome See alsoedit Apellicon of Teos  politician and collector of books from ancient AthensPages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback Referencesedit Citationsedit  Crawford 1974 pp. 456457.  Valerius Maximus 

9.3.8   Appian 
1.1 05  Plutarch Life of Sulla 
6.1 0  Velleius Paterculus 
2.1 
7.2   a b c Badian 2012.  For list of offices and years unless otherwise indicated Broughton 1952 p. 557.  The name Felix  the fortunate  was attained later in life as the Latin equivalent of the Greek nickname he had acquired during his campaigns  epaphroditos that is beloved of Aphrodite or Venus to Romans  due to his skill and luck as a general.  The world of Pompeii. John Joseph Dobbins Pedar William Foss. London Routledge. 2007. ISBN 9780415173247. OCLC 74522705.cite book CS1 maint others link  Balsdon J. P. V. D. 1951. Sulla Felix. The Journal of Roman Studies. 41 110. doi
10.2 307298093. ISSN 00754358. JSTOR 298093. S
2 CID 166133294.  Smith William 1870. Sulla. Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology. Vol. 3. Boston Little Brown  Company. p. 933.  a b Keaveney 2005 p. 5.  Smith William ed. 1870. Rufinus. Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology. Vol. 3. Boston Little Brown  Company. p. 665.  a b Keaveney 2005 p. 165  a b c Keaveney 2005 p. 6.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 67.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 810.  Plut. Sull. 36.  a b Sall. Iug. 95.  Keaveney 2005 p. 7.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 89.  Plut. Sull. 2.  a b c Keaveney 2005 p. 11.  Evans 1995 pp. 74 et seq.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 1112.  Keaveney 2005 p. 12.  Evans 1995 p. 184.  Keaveney 2005 p. 13.  Keaveney 2005 p. 14.  Keaveney 2005 p. 16.  Keaveney 2005 p. 18.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 1921.  Keaveney 2005 p. 38.  Keaveney 2005 p. 23.  Keaveney 2005 p. 24.  Keaveney 2005 p. 25.  Broughton 1951 p. 564.  a b c Keaveney 2005 p. 26.  Keaveney 2005 p. 27.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 2728.  Broughton 1951 pp. 570572.  Tatum 2003 p. 206 citing Plut. Sull. 
5.1  Keaveney 2005 pp. 2829.  Tatum 2003 p. 206 calling it revisionary nonsense.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 2829.  Keaveney 2005 p. 30.  Badian 2012 stating merely He was assigned Cilicia pro consule.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 3132.  Keaveney 2005 p. 32.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 3233.  Olbrycht 2009 pp. 174179.  Keaveney 2005 p. 33.  Olbrycht 2009 p. 173.  a b Keaveney 2005 p. 35.  Gabba 1994 p. 104.  Gabba 1994 p. 105.  Gabba 1994 p. 109.  Gabba 1994 pp. 111 114.  Keaveney 2005 p. 40.  a b c Keaveney 2005 p. 41.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 4142.  a b Keaveney 2005 p. 43.  Broughton 1952 p. 32.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 4344.  Gabba 1994 p. 125.  Gabba 1994 p. 126.  Gabba 1994 p. 123.  Keaveney 2005 p. 44.  Seager 1994 pp. 165166.  a b Steel 2013 p. 89.  Steel 2013 p. 88.  Seager 1994 pp. 16567.  Steel 2013 pp. 8889.  Seager 1994 pp. 167168.  Seager 1994 p. 168.  a b Seager 1994 p. 169.  Keaveney 2005 p. 49.  Seager 1994 pp. 169170.  a b c Seager 1994 p. 170.  Levick BM 1982. Sullas March on Rome in 88 B.C. Historia Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte. 31 4 503508. ISSN 00182311. JSTOR 4435825.  Evans 1995 p. 167.  Seager 1994 p. 171.  Keaveney 2005 p. 56 Seager 1994 p. 172.  Seager 1994 p. 172.  Keaveney 2005 p. 57.  Seager 1994 p. 173 Keaveney 2005 p. 59 Badian 2012.  Seager 1994 p. 173.  Keaveney 2005 p. 59.  Keaveney 2005 p. 62 Seager 1994 p. 173.  Seager 1994 p. 173 Badian 2012.  Beard Mary 2015. SPQR a history of ancient Rome 
1 st ed.. New York Liveright Publishing. p. 244. ISBN 9780871404237. OCLC 902661394.  Seager 1994 p. 174.  Seager 1994 p. 175.  Seager 1994 pp. 178179.  Hind 1994 p. 144.  Hind 1994 p. 145.  Hind 1994 p. 148.  Hind 1994 p. 148 noting on the number of victims less credibly 150000.  Hind 1994 citing Plut. Sull. 12 and Vell. Pat. 
2.2 3.  Hind 1994 p. 151 Broughton 1952 pp. 4243.  Hind 1994 p. 151.  Hind 1994 p. 153.  a b c Hind 1994 p. 154.  a b Hind 1994 p. 155.  Hind 1994 p. 156.  Hind 1994 p. 155 referencing Memnon and Appian for 60000 and 120000 respectively.  a b Hind 1994 p. 157.  Seager 1994 p. 181.  Hind 1994 pp. 157158.  a b Hind 1994 p. 158.  Hind 1994 p. 159.  a b Hind 1994 p. 160.  Hind 1994 p. 161.  Hind 1994 p. 162.  Seager 1994 pp. 181182.  a b Seager 1994 p. 182.  Seager 1994 p. 187.  Seager 1994 pp. 187188.  Seager 1994 p. 188. His generosity to his troops in Asia had been such that he was able not only to declare but to enforce a ban on looting.  Seager 1994 p. 190.  Seager 1994 pp. 190191.  Mackay 2009 p. 181 Seager 1994 p. 191.  Seager 1994 p. 191 asserts that Carbo returned to hold the elections. This may be an error.  Seager 1994 p. 191.  Mackay 2009 p. 181 Seager 1994 pp. 191192.  Mackay 2009 p. 181 Seager 1994 p. 192.  Seager 1994 p. 192 Steel 2013 p. 105. The victims were Pompeys fatherinlaw Publius Antistius Gaius Papirius Carbo Arvina Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and  most scandalously  the pontifex maximus Quintus Mucius Scaevola Pontifex. Many source place Scaevolas death at the symbolically important Temple of Vesta.  Seager 1994 p. 193.  Seager 1994 pp. 193194.  a b Seager 1994 p. 194.  Seager 1994 p. 195. The right wing commanded by Crassus won an easy victory but the left under Sullas own command broke... Sulla was forced to take refuge in his camp... when Sullas fleeing troops reached the gates of Rome the veterans dropped the portcullis compelling them to stand and fight. The battle continued well into the night.  Keaveney 2005 pp. 122123.  Seager 1994 p. 195 Keaveney 2005 p. 123.  Mackay 2009 p. 182 continuing those who surrendered at Praeneste were either slaughtered en masse after Sulla tired of holding trials or were divided into Roman and nonRomans with the nonRomans butchered and Romans let go.  Seager 1994 p. 196.  Anthony Everitt Cicero p. 41  Plutarch Roman Lives Oxford University Press 1999 translation by Robin Waterfield. p. 210.  Suetonius The Life of Julius Caesar 1 Archived 20120530 at archive.today  Plutarch The Life of Caesar 1  Davies Mark Swain Hilary 2010. Aspects of Roman history 82 BCAD 14 a sourcebased approach. Taylor  Francis. p. 33. ISBN 9780415496933.  Lacus Curtius Pomerium  Plutarch Life of Sulla p. 34  Suetonius Julius 77 Archived 20120530 at archive.today. ...no less arrogant were his public utterances which Titus Ampius records that the state was nothing a mere name without body or form that Sulla did not know his ABC when he laid down his dictatorship that men ought now to be more circumspect in addressing him and to regard his word as law. So far did he go in his presumption that when a soothsayer once reported direful inwards sic without a heart he said They will be more favorable when I wish it it should not be regarded as a portent if a beast has no heart...  Plutarch Life of Sulla p. 37  a b Valerius Maximus Memorable Deeds and Sayings 

9.3.8   Pliny the Elder on Natural History says that was not the close of his life more horrible than the sufferings which had been experienced by any of those who had been proscribed by him His very flesh eating into itself and so engendering his own punishment.  Plutarch Life of Sulla pp. 3637  Appian Bellum Civile 
1.1 
2.1 05  Keaveney 2005 p. 175.  Plutarch Sulla chapter 36. www.perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 20151209.  Seager 1994 p. 207.  Durant Will 2002. Heroes of History a Brief History of Civilization from Ancient Times to the Dawn of the Modern Age. Simon  Schuster. ISBN 9780743235945.  Cicero Ad Atticum 
9.1 
0.2   Keaveney 2005 p. 228.  Plutarch Life of Pompey 
22.3   Crawford 1974 pp. 449451.  Niccol Machiavelli The Prince chapter XVIII  Caldwell Taylor 1965. A Pillar of Iron. Doubleday. ISBN 0385053037.  Keaveney 2005 p. 8.  Dufallo Basil John 1999. Ciceronian oratory and the ghosts of the past. University of Michigan UCLA. p. 263.  Keaveney 2005 p. 10.  Hildinger Erik 2002. Swords against the Senate the rise of the Roman army and the fall of the Republic. Cambridge MA Da Capo Press. p. 99. ISBN 9780306812798.  Plutarch Life of Sulla. May 2008. Retrieved 20110703.  Keaveney 2005.  Plutarch Roman Lives Oxford University Press 1999 translation by Robin Waterfield. p. 181.  Badian 2012. The date of his formal abdication of the dictatorship... still seems best put at the beginning of 80... the older view that he remained dictator until 79 has been abandoned. Modern sourcesedit Badian Ernst 2016 Published in OCD4 in 2012. Cornelius Sulla Publius. Oxford Classical Dictionary. Oxford University Press. doi
10.1 0
93 acrefore97801993811
35.0 
13.1 877. ISBN 9780199381135. Retrieved 20230406. Broughton Thomas Robert Shannon 1951. The magistrates of the Roman republic. Vol. 1. New York American Philological Association. Broughton Thomas Robert Shannon 1952. The magistrates of the Roman republic. Vol. 2. New York American Philological Association. Crawford Michael 1974. Roman Republican Coinage. Cambridge University Press. Crook John et al. eds. 1994. The last age of the Roman Republic 14643 BC. Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. 9 
2 nd ed.. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521850738. OCLC 121060. Gabba E. Rome and Italy the social war. In CAH2 9 1994 pp. 104128. Hind John GF. Mithridates. In CAH2 9 1994 pp. 12964. Seager Robin. Sulla. In CAH2 9 1994 pp. 165207. Evans Richard John 1995. Gaius Marius a political biography PDF DLitt et Phil thesis. University of South Africa. Retrieved 20190608. Frhlich Franz 1900. Cornelius 392 . Realencyclopdie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft in German. Vol. 7. Stuttgart Butcher. cols. 152266  via Wikisource. Holland Tom 2003. Rubicon The Last Years of the Roman Republic. New York Doubleday. ISBN 9781400078974. Keaveney Arthur 2005 First ed. 1982. Sulla The Last Republican 
2 nd ed.. London Routledge. ISBN 0415336600. Mackay Christopher S 2009. The breakdown of the Roman republic from oligarchy to empire. New York Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521518192. OCLC 270232275. Matyszak Philip 2014. Cataclysm 90 BC The forgotten war that almost destroyed Rome. Barnsley Pen  Sword. ISBN 9781848847897. Olbrycht Marek 2009. Mithradates VI Eupator and Iran. In Hjte Jakob Munk ed.. Mithridates VI and the Pontic Kingdom. Aarhus University Press. pp. 163190. ISBN 9788779344433. Steel Catherine 2013. The end of the Roman republic 149 to 44 BC conquest and crisis. Edinburgh History of Ancient Rome. Edinburgh University Press. doi
10.1 5159780748629022. ISBN 9780748619443. S
2 CID 247651331. Tatum W Jeffrey 2003. Classical Journal. 99 2 203216. ISSN 00098353. JSTOR 3298069.cite journal CS1 maint untitled periodical link Vervaet Frederik Juliaan 2004. The lex Valeria and Sullas empowerment as dictator 8279 BCE. Cahiers du Centre Gustave Glotz. 15 3784. doi
10.3 4
06 ccgg.20
04.8 58. eISSN 21175624. Ancient sourcesedit Plutarch 1916 
2 nd century AD. Life of Sulla. Parallel Lives. Loeb Classical Library. Vol. 4. Translated by Perrin Bernadotte. Harvard University Press. OCLC 40115288  via Perseus Digital Library. Sallust 1921 
1 st century BC. Bellum Iugurthinum. Sallust. Loeb Classical Library. Translated by Rolfe John C. Cambridge Harvard University Press  via LacusCurtius. External linksedit Wikiquote has quotations related to Sulla. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sulla. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Sulla Lucius Cornelius. L. Cornelius 392 L. f. P. n. Sulla Felix Epaphroditus in the Digital Prosopography of the Roman Republic. Plutarchs Life of Sulla Political offices Preceded by Pompeius Strabo L. Porcius Cato Roman consul 88 BC With Q. Pompeius Rufus Succeeded by Gn. Octavius L. Cornelius Cinna Preceded by M. Tullius Decula Gn. Cornelius Dolabella Roman consul 80 BC With Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius Succeeded by P. Servilius Vatia Ap. Claudius Pulcher v t e Sulla Military career Early campaigns Jugurthine War 
2 nd Cirta Cimbrian War Vercellae Social War Nola March on Rome First Mithridatic War Siege of Athens Chaeronea Orchomenus Treaty of Dardanos Civil War Mount Tifata Sacriportus Sena Gallica Clusium Colline Gate Legislative activity Proscription Lex Valeria Constitutional reforms Lex Cornelia de maiestate Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis Lex Cornelia annalis Works Memoirs of Sulla Curia Hostilia Temple of Hercules Custos Family Wives Julia Aelia Cloelia Caecilia Valeria Children Cornelia Faustus Fausta Cornelia Cornelia Postuma Other Nicopolis mistress Metrobius lover Epicadus freedman Chrysogonus freedman Legacy Parallel Lives Sulla Silla Handel Silla Graun Lucio Silla Mozart Masters of Rome The First Man in Rome The Grass Crown Category v t e Works of Plutarch Works Parallel Lives Moralia De genio Socratis On the Malice of Herodotus PseudoPlutarch Lives Alcibiades and Coriolanus1 Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar life Aratus of Sicyon  Artaxerxes and Galba  Otho2 Aristides and Cato the Elder1 Crassus and Nicias1 Demetrius and Antony1 Demosthenes and Cicero1 Dion and Brutus1 Fabius and Pericles1 Lucullus and Cimon1 Lysander and Sulla1 Numa and Lycurgus1 Pelopidas and Marcellus1 Philopoemen and Flamininus1 Phocion and Cato the Younger Pompey and Agesilaus1 Poplicola and Solon1 Pyrrhus and Gaius Marius Romulus and Theseus1 Sertorius and Eumenes1 Agis  Cleomenes1 and Tiberius Gracchus  Gaius Gracchus Timoleon and Aemilius Paulus1 Themistocles and Camillus Translators and editors Jacques Amyot Arthur Hugh Clough John Dryden Philemon Holland Thomas North 1 Comparison extant 2 Four unpaired Lives Authority control databases International FAST ISNI 2 VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 National Norway Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel United States Sweden Latvia Czech Republic Australia Croatia Netherlands Poland Portugal Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other SNAC IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSullaoldid1221012682 Categories Sulla 138 BC births 78 BC deaths 
2 ndcentury BC Romans 
1 stcentury BC Roman augurs 
1 stcentury BC Roman consuls 
1 stcentury BC Roman praetors Ancient Roman dictators Roman Republican generals Cornelii Sullae Leaders who took power by coup Memoirists Optimates Ancient Roman patricians Roman governors of Cilicia Roman governors of Hispania Ancient Romans who received the grass crown Ancient Roman triumphators Hidden categories CS1 maint others Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox military person with embed Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Pages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback via ModuleAnnotated link CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 maint untitled periodical Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with PortugalA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SNACID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 27 April 2024 at 0858 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width