File:Portrait of Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FilePortrait of Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. PortraitofPtolemyXIIITheosPhilopator.jpg 231  340 pixels file size 38 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Lo 
0 oywl Summary DescriptionPortrait of Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator.jpg English An engraving depicting the Ptolemaic ruler Ptolemy XIII of Egypt by French artist lisabeth Sophie Chron 1648  1711 entitled Portrait du Jeune Ptoleme dernier Roi dEgypte tir dun Medaillon Antique from the book Pierres Antiques Graves Tires des Principaux Cabinets de la France published c. 1736. The engraving is based on a medallion of Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator dated to the 
1 st century BC the Hellenistic period of antiquity. Date circa 1736 date QSP173600
00 T0000
00 Z
9 P14
80 Q5727902 Source Giantbomb.com Author lisabeth Sophie Chron 1648  1711 Licensing This is a faithful photographic reproduction of a twodimensional public domain work of art. The work of art itself is in the public domain for the following reason Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse The official position taken by the Wikimedia Foundation is that faithful reproductions of twodimensional public domain works of art are public domain. This photographic reproduction is therefore also considered to be in the public domain in the United States. In other jurisdictions reuse of this content may be restricted see Reuse of PDArt photographs for details. Captions English Ptolemy XIII of Egypt Items portrayed in this file depicts some value Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2338 10 September 2018 231  340 38 KB PericlesofAthens User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Ptolemeus XIII Theos Filopator Usage on ar.wikipedia.org        Usage on arz.wikipedia.org         Usage on az.wikipedia.org XIII Ptolemey Teos Filopator Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Ptolemeu XIII Filoptor Usage on ceb.wikipedia.org Philopator Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios XIII. Theos Filopatr Usage on cy.wikipedia.org Ptolemi XIII Theos Philopator Usage on da.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios 13. af gypten Usage on es.wikipedia.org Dinasta ptolemaica Ptolomeo XIII Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Ptolomeo XIII.a Usage on fa.wikipedia.org   Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org    Usage on hu.wikipedia.org XIII. Ptolemaiosz Usage on hy.wikipedia.org    XIII     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Dinastia tolemaica Tolomeo XIII Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  13 Usage on mg.wikipedia.org Ptlemaisy XIII Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Ptolemaeus XIII Theos Philopator Usage on no.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios XIII av Egypt Usage on pl.wikipedia.org WikipedystaAikuTwrczo Dumasa Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  XIII Usage on simple.wikipedia.org Cultural icon Ptolemy XIII Pharaoh Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  XIII   Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios XIII Filopator Filadelfos Usage on ta.wikipedia.org   Usage on th.wikipedia.org   13 Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi XIII. Ptolemaios Usage on uk.wikipedia.org   XIII Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q39938 TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Ptolemy 
13 k Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFilePortraitofPtolemyXIIITheosPhilopator.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width