File:Ptolemy XIV.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FilePtolemy XIV.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. PtolemyXIV.jpg 150  143 pixels file size 9 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. DescriptionPtolemy XIV.jpg Ptolemy XIV. Inscribed ivory game counter with a portrait of Cleopatras brother. C. 30 BCAD 70. Provenance unknown. Diameter 
2.7  cm. Paris Bibliotheque Nationale Cabinet des Medailles Formerly Dutuit Collection Bibliography W. Froehner Collection Dutuit 1901 151 M. Rostovzeff Revue Archeologique V 1905 11024 esp. 121 E. AlfoldiRosenbaum Ruler portraits on Roman Game Counters from Alexandria Eikones. Festschrift Hans Jucker 1980 29 no. 1 with pl. 
7.1  p. 35. Date 21 November 2007 Source scanned from S. Walker  P. Higgs Cleopatra of Egypt 2001 p. 316. Author Unknown authorUnknown author Permission Reusing this file public domain This is a faithful photographic reproduction of a twodimensional public domain work of art. The work of art itself is in the public domain for the following reason Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. You must also include a United States public domain tag to indicate why this work is in the public domain in the United States. Note that a few countries have copyright terms longer than 70 years Mexico has 100 years Jamaica has 95 years Colombia has 80 years and Guatemala and Samoa have 75 years. This image may not be in the public domain in these countries which moreover do not implement the rule of the shorter term. Honduras has a general copyright term of 75 years but it does implement the rule of the shorter term. Copyright may extend on works created by French who died for France in World War II more information Russians who served in the Eastern Front of World War II known as the Great Patriotic War in Russia and posthumously rehabilitated victims of Soviet repressions more information. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse The official position taken by the Wikimedia Foundation is that faithful reproductions of twodimensional public domain works of art are public domain. This photographic reproduction is therefore also considered to be in the public domain in the United States. In other jurisdictions reuse of this content may be restricted see Reuse of PDArt photographs for details. PDArt template without license parameter please specify why the underlying work is public domain in both the source country and the United States Usage PDArt
1 deathyearyear of authors deathcountrysource country where parameter 1 can be PDoldauto PDoldautoexpired PDoldauto1996 PDold100 or similar. See CommonsMultilicense copyright tags for more information. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 21 November 2007 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1725 21 November 2007 150  143 9 KB Zubosud 89 Information DescriptionPtolemy XIV. Sourcescanned from S. Walker  P. Higgs Cleopatra of Egypt 2001 Date21. 11. 27 Authorunknown Permissionpublic domain otherversions  PDArt File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemy XII Auletes Ptolemy XIV Philopator UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Ptolemeus XIV Filopator Usage on an.wikipedia.org Ptolomeu XIV Usage on ar.wikipedia.org           Usage on arz.wikipedia.org              Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  XIV Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Ptolemeu XIV Filoptor Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Ptolemaios XIV. Theos Filopatr II. Usage on el.wikipedia.org    Usage on es.wikipedia.org Dinasta ptolemaica AnexoFaraones de Egipto Ptolomeo XIV Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Ptolomeo XIV.a Usage on fa.wikipedia.org   Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Ptolemaiosten hallitsijasuku Ptolemaios XIV Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Dynastie lagide Ptolme XIV Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on he.wikipedia.org    Usage on hu.wikipedia.org XIV. Ptolemaiosz Usage on hy.wikipedia.org      XIV Usage on is.wikipedia.org Ptolemajarki Usage on it.wikipedia.org Dinastia tolemaica Tolomeo XIV Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  14 Usage on ka.wikipedia.org  XIV Usage on kn.wikipedia.org   Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Ptolemjas XIV Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Ptolemaeus XIV Theos Philopator II Usage on no.wikipedia.org Ptolemeerdynastiet Ptolemaios XIV av Egypt Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Ptolemeusz XIV Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Ptolemeu XIV Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Ptolemeu al XIVlea al Egiptului Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   XIV View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. error 0 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFilePtolemyXIV.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width