Caesarion - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Pharaoh 
3 Death 
4 Depictions 
5 Egyptian names 
6 See also 
7 Notes 
8 References 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Caesarion 54 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  Basa Bali  Bosanski Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa  Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn   Simple English   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Last pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt from 44 to 30 BC For the Rome episode see Caesarion Rome. Not to be confused with Caesarean section. Caesarion Theos Philopator Philometor Granite head attributed to Caesarion hosted in Bibliotheca Alexandrina Antiquities Museum Egypt Pharaoh King of the Ptolemaic Kingdom Reign 2 September 44 BC  late August 30 BC with Cleopatra VII until 12 August 30 BC Predecessor Ptolemy XIV and Cleopatra VII Successor Position abolisheda Royal titulary Father Julius Caesar reputedly Mother Cleopatra VII Born 23 June 47 BC Ptolemaic Kingdom Died 29 August 30 BC aged 
17 citation needed Alexandria Roman Egypt Dynasty Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemy XV Caesarb tlmi Greek   Ptolemaios Kaisar 23 June 47 BC  29 August 30 BC nicknamed Caesarion Greek  Kaisarn Little Caesar was the last pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt reigning with his mother Cleopatra VII from 2 September 44 BC until her death by 12 August 30 BC then as sole ruler until his death was ordered by Octavian who would become the first Roman emperor as Augustus. Caesarion was the eldest son of Cleopatra and the only known biological son of Julius Caesar after whom he was named. He was the last sovereign member of the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt. Early lifeedit Left reliefs of Cleopatra and Caesarion at the Temple of Dendera Right a limestone stela of the High Priest of Ptah bearing the cartouches of Cleopatra and Caesarion Egypt Ptolemaic Period the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Ptolemy Caesar was born in Egypt on 23 June 47 BC. His mother Cleopatra gave him the royal names Theos Philopator Philometorc lit. fatherloving motherloving God and insisted that he was the son of Roman politician and dictator Julius Caesar.3 While he was said to have inherited Caesars looks and manner4 Caesar did not officially acknowledge him.56 All accusations of bastardy against Caesarion were cast from a Roman perspective their intention was not to portray Caesarion as inappropriate for the throne of Egypt but rather to deny that he was Julius heir by Roman law.7 One of Caesars supporters Gaius Oppius even wrote a pamphlet which attempted to prove that Caesar could not have fathered Caesarion. Nevertheless Caesar may have allowed Caesarion to use his name.8 The matter became contentious when Caesars adopted son Octavian came into conflict with Cleopatra.9 Caesarion spent two of his infant years from 46 to 44 BC in Rome where he and his mother were Caesars guests at his villa Horti Caesaris. Cleopatra hoped that her son would eventually succeed his father as the head of the Roman Republic as well as of Egypt. After Caesars assassination on 15 March 44 BC Cleopatra and Caesarion returned to Egypt. Caesarion was named coruler by his mother on 2 September 44 BC at the age of three10 although he was pharaoh in name only with Cleopatra keeping actual authority. Cleopatra compared her relationship to her son with that of the Egyptian goddess Isis and her divine child Horus.811 There is no historical record of Caesarion between 44 BC until the Donations of Antioch in 36 BC. Two years later he also appears at the Donations of Alexandria. Cleopatra and Antony staged both Donations to donate lands dominated by Rome and Parthia to Cleopatras children Caesarion the twins Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene II and Ptolemy Philadelphus the last three were his maternal halfsiblings fathered by Mark Antony. Octavian gave public approval to the Donations of Antioch in 36 BC which have been described as an Antonian strategy to rule the East making use of Cleopatras unique royal Seleucid lineage in the regions donated.12 Pharaohedit In 34 BC Antony granted further eastern lands and titles to Caesarion and his own three children with Cleopatra in the Donations of Alexandria. Caesarion was proclaimed to be a god a son of a god and King of Kings.13 This grandiose title was unprecedented in the management of Roman clientking relationships and could be seen as threatening the greatness of the Roman people.14 Antony also declared Caesarion to be Caesars true son and heir. This declaration was a direct threat to Octavian whose claim to power was based on his status as Julius Caesars grandnephew and adopted son. These proclamations partly caused the fatal breach in Antonys relations with Octavian who used Roman resentment over the Donations to gain support for war against Antony and Cleopatra.15 Deathedit Roman painting from Pompeii early 
1 st century AD most likely depicting Cleopatra VII wearing her royal diadem taking poison in an act of suicide while Caesarion also wearing a royal diadem stands behind her16 After the defeat of Mark Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC Cleopatra seems to have groomed Caesarion to take over as sole ruler without his mother.8 She may have intended to go into exile perhaps with Antony who may have hoped that he would be allowed to retire as Lepidus had. Caesarion reappears in the historical record in 30 BC when Octavian invaded Egypt and searched for him. Cleopatra may have sent Caesarion 17 years old at the time to the Red Sea port of Berenice for safety possibly as part of plans for an escape to India.9 Plutarch does say that Caesarion was sent to India but also that he was lured back by false promises of the kingdom of Egypt Caesarion who was said to be Cleopatras son by Julius Caesar was sent by his mother with much treasure into India by way of Ethiopia. There Rhodon another tutor like Theodorus persuaded him to go back on the ground that Octavian Caesar invited him to take the kingdom.17 Octavian captured the city of Alexandria on 1 August 30 BC the date that marks the official annexation of Egypt to the Roman Republic. Around this time Mark Antony and Cleopatra died traditionally said to be by suicide though murder has been suggested.18 Octavian may have temporarily considered permitting Caesarion to succeed his mother and rule Egypt though now a smaller and weaker kingdom however he is supposed to have had Caesarion executed in Alexandria on 29 August 30 BC following the advice of his companion Arius Didymus who said Too many Caesars is not good19 a pun on a line in Homer.2021 Surviving information on the death of Caesarion is scarce.20 Octavian then assumed absolute control of Egypt. The year 30 BC was considered the first year of the new rulers reign according to the traditional chronological system of Egypt.citation needed Depictionsedit This mid
1 st century AD Roman wall painting in Pompeii Italy showing Venus holding a cupid is most likely a depiction of Cleopatra VII of Ptolemaic Egypt as Venus Genetrix with her son Caesarion as the cupid222324 One of two statues of the falcon god Horus behind a smaller depiction of Caesarion at the Temple of Edfu in Edfu Upper Egypt25 A coin depicting Cleopatra VII with her son Caesarion as an infant British museum.26 Few images of Caesarion survive. He is thought to be depicted in a partial statue found in the harbor of Alexandria in 1997 and is also portrayed twice in relief as an adult pharaoh with his mother on the Temple of Hathor at Dendera. His infant image appears on some bronze coins of Cleopatra.27 Egyptian namesedit In addition to his Greek name and nicknames Caesarion also had a full set of royal names in the Egyptian language28 Iwapanetjer entynehem  Heir of the god who saves Setepenptah  Chosen of Ptah Irmaatenre  Carrying out the rule of Ra or Sun of righteousness Sekhemankhamun  Living image of Amun See alsoedit Caesareum of Alexandria Julia gens Reign of Cleopatra List of unsolved murders Notesedit  The Ptolemaic Kingdom was annexed by the Roman Empire in 30 BC and hence the office of pharaoh ceased to exist. However due to the pharaohs central position in Egyptian religion the local people recognized Augustus and all subsequent Roman emperors as pharaohs for the sake of continuity no emperor ever bore or recognized the title. See Roman pharaoh  Later full name Ptolemy Caesar Theos Philopator Philometor Greek     .12  Greek    Referencesedit  RE Ptolemaios 37  Oxford Classical Dictionary Ptolemy XV Caesar  Hornblower Simon Spawforth Antony Eidinow Esther 29 March 2012. The Oxford Classical Dictionary. OUP Oxford. p. 1236. ISBN 9780199545568.  Sergeant Philip 28 January 2024. Cleopatra of Egypt Antiquitys Queen of Romance. p. 94.  Brooks Polly 28 January 1995. Cleopatra goddess of Egypt enemy of Rome. p. 64.  Cleopatra 1996 by Green Robert p.24  Ogden Daniel 22 May 2023. Polygamy Prostitutes and Death The Hellenistic Dynasties. Classical Press of Wales. p. 102. ISBN 9781914535406.  a b c Duane W. Roller Cleopatra A Biography Oxford University Press US 2010 pp. 7073  a b GrayFow Michael April 2014. What to Do With Caesarion. Greece  Rome. Second Series. 61 1 62. doi
10.1 0
17 S0017383513000235. JSTOR 43297487. S
2 CID 154911628. Retrieved 25 October 2022.  King Arienne. Caesarion. World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 29 August 2020.  Tyldesley Joyce A Joyce 2008. Cleopatra  last queen of Egypt. New York NY  Basic Books. p. 64.  Rolf Strootman 2010. Queen of Kings Cleopatra VII and the Donations of Alexandria. In M. Facella T. Kaizer eds.. Kingdoms and Principalities in the Roman Near East. Occidens et Oriens. Vol. 19. Stuttgart Franz Steiner Verlag. pp. 139158.  Meyer Reinhold 2002. Studies in Classical History and Society. US Oxford University Press. p. 58.  Meyer Reinhold 2002. Studies in Classical History and Society. US Oxford University Press. p. 58.  Burstein Stanley Mayer 2007. The Reign of Cleopatra. University of Oklahoma Press. p. 29.  Roller Duane W. 2010. Cleopatra A Biography. Oxford Oxford University Press. pp. 178179. ISBN 9780195365535.  Plutarch Life of Antony. As found in the Loeb Classical Library Plutarchs Lives With an English Translation by Bernadotte Perrin. Volume 9. p. 321.  Pat Brown 2013. The Murder of Cleopatra Historys Greatest Cold Case. Prometheus Books. pp. 1518. ISBN 9781616146504.  Draycott Jane 23 May 2023. Cleopatras Daughter From Roman Prisoner to African Queen. Liveright Publishing. ISBN 9781324092605.  a b Powell Anton 31 December 2013. Hindsight in Greek and Roman History. Classical Press of Wales. p. 194. ISBN 9781910589120.  David Braund et al Myth History and Culture in Republican Rome Studies in Honour of T.P. Wiseman University of Exeter Press 2003 p. 305. The original line was    ouk agathon polukoiranie too many leaders are not good or the rule of many is a bad thing. Homers Iliad Book II. vers 204205 In Greek    ouk agathon polukaisarie is a variation on    ouk agathon polukoiranie.  Caesar replacing  meaning leader.  The wallpainting of Venus Genetrix is similar in appearance to the nowlost statue of Cleopatra erected by Julius Caesar in the Temple of Venus Genetrix within the Forum of Caesar. The owner of the House at Pompeii of Marcus Fabius Rufus walled off the room with this painting most likely in immediate reaction to the execution of Caesarion on orders of Augustus in 30 BC when artistic depictions of Caesarion would have been considered a sensitive issue for the ruling regime.  Roller Duane W. 2010. Cleopatra A Biography. Oxford Oxford University Press. p. 175. ISBN 9780195365535.  Walker Susan 2008. Cleopatra in Pompeii. Papers of the British School at Rome. 76 3546 345348. doi
10.1 0
17 S0068246200000404. S
2 CID 62829223.  Fletcher Joann 2008 Cleopatra the Great The Woman Behind the Legend New York Harper pp. 219 image plates and caption between 246247 ISBN 9780060585587  Stuart Reginald L Poole 1883. BMC Greek Ptolemies  Catalogue of Greek coins the Ptolemies kings of Egypt. The Trustees. p. 122.  Sear. Greek Coins and Their Values. Vol. II.  Clayton Peter 1 October 1994. Chronicle of the Pharaohs. p. 213. ISBN 0500050740. External linksedit Ptolemy XV Caesarion Archived 4 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Caesarion Ptolemaic dynasty Born 47 BC Died 30 BC Preceded by Cleopatra VII Philopator Pharaoh of Egypt 4430 BCE with Cleopatra VII Egypt annexed by Rome v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Julius Caesar Major life events Early life and career First Triumvirate Gallic wars Caesars civil war Crossing the Rubicon Assassination Military campaigns Mytilene Gallic Wars Arar Bibracte Vosges Axona Sabis Atuatuci Octodurus Morbihan Invasions of Britain Ambiorixs revolt Avaricum Gergovia Alesia Uxellodunum Civil War Corfinium Brundisium Ilerda Dyrrhachium Pharsalus Alexandrian war Siege Battle of the Nile Zela Ruspina Corduba Thapsus Munda Planned invasion of the Parthian Empire Legislation Lex Julia de maiestate Lex Roscia Constitutional reforms Dictator perpetuo Works Laudatio Iuliae amitae Anticato Commentarii de Bello Civili Commentarii de Bello Gallico De analogia Poems by Julius Caesar Quotes Alea iacta est Veni vidi vici Ut est rerum omnium magister usus Last words Buildings Forum of Caesar Curia Julia Basilica Julia Temple of Venus Genetrix Caesars Rhine bridges Portraits Tusculum portrait Chiaramonti Caesar Green Caesar Arles bust Family Wives Cossutia disputed Cornelia Pompeia Calpurnia Children Julia Caesarion Augustus adopted Other Gaius Julius Caesar father Aurelia mother Julia Major sister Julia Minor sister Legacy Life of Caesar by Plutarch Cultural depictions of Julius Caesar Temple of Caesar Caesars Comet Caesarism JulioClaudian dynasty Caesar title Related Julia gens Mark Antony Cleopatra Servilia Marcus Junius Brutus Curia of Pompey Category Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States Poland People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCaesarionoldid1214440407 Categories 30 BC deaths 47 BC births 
1 stcentury BC executions 
1 stcentury BC Pharaohs Caesarion Children of Cleopatra Children of Julius Caesar Executed ancient Egyptian people Executed children Executed monarchs Missing person cases in Egypt People executed by the Roman Republic People murdered in Egypt Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic dynasty Sons of queens regnant People of the War of Actium Hidden categories Articles containing Greeklanguage text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles using infobox templates with no data rows All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 19 March 2024 at 0001 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width