Affair - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Romantic affair 
2 Extramarital affair 
3 Online affair 
4 Famous affairs 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Further reading 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Affair 16 languages   Dansk Eesti Espaol Esperanto Franais   Lingla Nederlands Portugus Simple English Svenska   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Secret or unapproved attachment outside a relationship For other uses see Affair disambiguation. This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Affair  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR April 2022 Learn how and when to remove this message Part of a series on Love Redoutline heart icon Types of love Affection Bonding Broken heart Compassionate love Conjugal love Courtly love courtship troubadours Falling in love Friendship crosssex romantic zone Interpersonal attraction Interpersonal relationship Intimacy Limerence Love addiction Love at first sight Love triangle Lovesickness Lovestruck Obsessive love Passion Platonic love Puppy love Queerplatonic relationship Romance Selflove Amour de soi Unconditional love Unrequited love Social views Anarchist Free love Patriotism Chinese Ren Yuanfen French Amourpropre Greek words for love Agape Eros Ludus Mania Philautia Philia Philos Pragma Storg Xenia Indian Kama Bhakti Maitr Islamic Ishq Jewish Chesed Latin Amor Caritas Portuguese Saudade Yaghan Mamihlapinatapai Concepts Color wheel theory of love Bhakti yoga Biological basis Love letter Love of Christ Love of God in Christianity Love magic Valentines Day Philosophy Religious views love deities Mereexposure effect Sacred Heart Similarity Physical attractiveness Triangular theory of love v t e Relationships Outline Types Genetic or adoptive Kinship Family Parent father mother Grandparent Sibling Cousin By marriage Spouse Husband Wife Open marriage Polygamy Polyandry Polygyny Group marriage Mixedorientation Partners Significant other Boyfriend Girlfriend Cohabitation Samesex Life partner Friendship romantic  crosssex  zone Intimate and sexual Casual Monogamy Nonmonogamy Mutual monogamy Polyamory Polyfidelity Cicisbeo Concubinage Courtesan Mistress Activities Bonding Courtship Dating Engagement Bachelors Day Mating Meet market Romance Singles event Wedding Endings Breakup Legalmarital separation Annulment Divorce Widowhood Emotions and feelings Affinity Attachment Intimacy Jealousy Limerence Love Platonic Unconditional Passion Sexuality Practices Bride price dower dowry service Hypergamy Infidelity Sexual activity Transgression Repression Abuse Child Dating Domestic Elderly Narcissistic parent Power and control Stalking v t e An affair is a sexual relationship romantic friendship or passionate attachment in which at least one of its participants has a formal or informal commitment to a third person who may neither agree to such relationship nor even be aware of it. Romantic affairedit The Stolen Kiss by JeanHonor Fragonard A romantic affair also called an affair of the heart may refer to a sexual liaison or more emotional relationship between two people who may have sex without expecting a more formal romantic relationship an affair is by its nature romantic.1 The term affair may also describe part of an agreement within an open marriage or open relationship such as swinging dating or polyamory in which some forms of sex with ones nonprimary partners are permitted and other forms are not. Participants in open relationships including unmarried couples and polyamorous families may consider sanctioned affairs the norm but when a nonsanctioned affair occurs it is described as infidelity and maybe experienced as adultery or a betrayal both of trust and integrity even though to most people it would not be considered illicit. When romantic affairs lack both overt and covert sexual behavior yet exhibit intense or enduring emotional intimacy it may also be referred to as an emotional affair platonic love or a romantic friendship. Extramarital affairedit Main articles Infidelity Legitimacy family law Adultery and Extramarital sex Extramarital affairs are relationships outside of marriage where an illicit romantic or sexual relationship or a romantic friendship or passionate attachment occurs.2 An affair can continue in one form or another for years even as one of the partners in that affair passes through marriage divorce and remarriage. This could be considered the primary relationship with the marriage secondary to it. Several people claim the reason for an extramarital affair is their unsuccessful marriage where both spouses fail to please each other. This may be serial polygamy or other forms of nonmonogamy.3 The ability to pursue serial and clandestine extramarital affairs while safeguarding other secrets and conflict of interest inherent in the practice requires skill in deception and duplicitous negotiation. Even to hide one affair requires a degree of skill or malicious gaslighting. All these behaviors are more usually called lying.4 Deception can be defined as the covert manipulation of perception to alter thoughts feelings or beliefs. The presence of deception may indicate the degree to which the deceiver has breached fundamental conditions of fidelity reciprocal vulnerability and transparency. Sometimes these are explicit or assumed preconditions of a committed intimate relationship.5 Individuals having affairs with married men or women can be prosecuted for adultery in some jurisdictions and can be sued by the jilted spouses in others or named as corespondents in divorce proceedings. As of 2009 eight U.S. states permitted such alienation of affections lawsuits.6 Affairs with the consent of their significant others may not be considered infidelity or adultery.citation needed Online affairedit The appearance of computermediated communication introduces a new type of communication and consequently a new type of affair. There are various kinds of computermediated communication that differ in some significant aspects onetoone or group communication formats interrelating with anonymous or identified people and communicating in synchronous or asynchronous formats.7 Online affairs combine features of close and remote relationships. Ben Zeef argues that an online affair is a unique kind of affairtermed detached attachment or just detachmentthat includes opposing features whose presence in a facetoface affair would be paradoxical. Like direct facetoface affairs online affairs can be spontaneous and casual and show intensive personal involvement. However online affairs can also be more of a planned discourse than spontaneous talk like written letters online messages can be stored and thus have a permanent presence which is absent from facetoface affairs.8 People participating in online affairs may be strangers to each other in the sense that they have never actually met each other. However they are also close to each other since they share intimate information. In online affairs people try to enjoy the benefits of both close and remote affairs while avoiding their flaws. People enjoy the highly valued products of close affairs while paying the low cost of remote affairs. As one woman wrote He constantly told me that he can not provide me with what I would want and I would always respond with Im not asking anything from you but simply enjoy your company.9 Famous affairsedit See also Political scandal and Sex scandal Affair of the Diamond Necklace HamiltonReynolds affair Eulenburg affair Haijby scandal Iris Robinson scandal ClintonLewinsky scandal The Makropulos Affair play The Makropulos Affair opera Munsinger affair Profumo affair Eliot Spitzer prostitution scandal John Edwards extramarital affair Mark Sanford extramarital affair See alsoedit Ashley Madison Courtly love Crime of passion Family therapy Onagain offagain relationship Polysexuality Scandal Love triangle Adultery Referencesedit  Whats An Emotional Affair How To Recognize One. askdougandchris.com. Retrieved 20170812.  Definition of EXTRAMARITAL. www.merriamwebster.com. Retrieved 20161013.  Strean Herbert S. 1980. The Extramarital Affair. Free Press. ISBN 9780765702470. Retrieved 18 November 2015.  Mendelsohn Robert August 2014. Collusive Infidelity Projective Identification and Clinical Technique. The Psychoanalytic Review. 101 4 517546. doi
10.1 5
21 prev.20
14.1 

01.4.5 17. ISSN 00332836. PMID 25102184.  Schler Julia Job Veronika Frhlich Stephanie M. Brandsttter Veronika September 2008. A high implicit affiliation motive does not always make you happy A corresponding explicit motive and corresponding behavior are further needed. Motivation and Emotion. 32 3 231242. doi
10.1 0
07 s1103100890
96 y. ISSN 01467239.  Appel Jacob M. 20091007. Hate the Husband Sue the Mistress. Huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved 20100301.  Zeev 2004. Flirting On and Offline PDF. International Journal of Research in to New Media Technologies. 10 24.  Lea  Spears 1995. Love at first Byte. Understudied Relationships 211.  Cyberlove101.com story 39. An Enchanting Belgian gentleman. cite journal Cite journal requires journal helpCS1 maint numeric names authors list link Further readingedit Schmitt D. P. et al. 2004. Patterns and universals of mate poaching across 53 nations The effects of sex culture and personality on romantically attracting another persons partner. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 86 560584. External linksedit Look up affair in Wiktionary the free dictionary. United States Conference of Catholic Bishops Infidelity Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAffairoldid1196277212 Categories Politics by issue Sexual fidelity Extramarital relationships Hidden categories CS1 errors missing periodical CS1 maint numeric names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Chamorrolanguage text Articles containing Frenchlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Sanskritlanguage text Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Articles containing Hebrewlanguage text Articles containing Latinlanguage text Articles containing Portugueselanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with GND identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 17 January 2024 at 0040 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width