Portal:Monarchy - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk PortalMonarchy 9 languages  Azrbaycanca etina Franais  Polski Portugus Svenska  Edit links Portal Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Portal maintenance status June 2018 This portals subpages have been checked by an editor and are needed. Please take care when editing especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal Wikipedia portal for content related to Monarchy The Monarchy Portal The WeldBlundell Prism is inscribed with the Sumerian King List The heraldic crown for the King of Norway 1905 pattern Shortcut PMONARCH A monarchy is a form of government in which a person the monarch is head of state for life or until abdication. The political legitimacy and authority of the monarch may vary from restricted and largely symbolic constitutional monarchy to fully autocratic absolute monarchy and can span across executive legislative and judicial domains. The succession of monarchs has mostly been hereditary often building dynasties. However elective and selfproclaimed monarchies have also often occurred throughout history. Aristocrats though not inherent to monarchies often serve as the pool of persons from which the monarch is chosen and to fill the constituting institutions e.g. diet and court giving many monarchies oligarchic elements. Monarchs can carry various titles such as emperor empress king and queen. Monarchies can form federations personal unions and realms with vassals through personal association with the monarch which is a common reason for monarchs carrying several titles. Monarchies were the most common form of government until the 
20 th century by which time republics had replaced many monarchies. Today fortythree sovereign nations in the world have a monarch including fifteen Commonwealth realms that share King Charles III as their head of state. Other than that there is a range of subnational monarchical entities. Most of the modern monarchies are constitutional monarchies retaining under a constitution unique legal and ceremonial roles for the monarch exercising limited or no political power similar to heads of state in a parliamentary republic. Full article... Refresh with new selections below purge Featured articles  load new batch Featured articles are displayed here which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Portrait by George Dawe 1817 Princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales 7 January 1796  6 November 1817 was the only child of George Prince of Wales later George IV and Caroline of Brunswick. She was expected to ascend the British throne after the deaths of her grandfather George III and her father but died in childbirth at the age of 21 predeceasing them both. Charlottes parents disliked each other from before their arranged marriage and soon separated. The Prince of Wales left most of Charlottes care to governesses and servants only allowing her limited contact with Caroline who eventually left the country. As Charlotte grew to adulthood her father pressured her to marry William Hereditary Prince of Orange later King of the Netherlands. After initially accepting him Charlotte soon broke off the intended match. This resulted in an extended contest of wills between her and her father who finally permitted her to marry Leopold of SaxeCoburgSaalfeld later King of the Belgians. After a year and a half of happy marriage Charlotte died after delivering a stillborn son. Full article... Image 2 Ab Muammad Abd Allh ibn Ysuf ibn alfi Arabic         11511171 better known by his regnal name alid liDn Allh Arabic    lit.Strengthener of Gods Faith was the fourteenth and last caliph of the Fatimid dynasty and the twentyfourth imam of the Hafizi Ismaili branch of Shia Islam reigning from 1160 to 1171. Like his two immediate predecessors alAdid came to the throne as a child and spent his reign as a puppet of various strongmen who occupied the vizierate. He was a mostly helpless bystander to the slow collapse of the Fatimid Caliphate. Talai ibn Ruzzik the vizier who had raised alAdid to the throne fell victim to a palace plot in 1161 and was replaced by his son Ruzzik ibn Talai. Ruzzik was in turn overthrown by Shawar in 1163 but the latter lasted only a few months in office before being overthrown by Dirgham. The constant power struggles in Cairo enfeebled the Fatimid state allowing both the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem and the Sunni ruler of Syria Nur alDin to advance their own designs on the country. The Crusaders repeatedly invaded Egypt extracting tribute and ultimately aiming to conquer it in turn Nur alDin supported Shawars bid to retake the vizierate from Dirgham and sent his general Shirkuh to counter the Crusaders. For a while Shawar played the Crusaders and Syrians against one another but in January 1169 Shirkuh overthrew Shawar occupied Cairo and became vizier. When Shirkuh died shortly after he was succeeded by his nephew Saladin. Full article... Image 3 Coat of arms of John Hastings John Hastings 
2 nd Earl of Pembroke 29 August 1347  16 April 1375 was a fourteenthcentury English nobleman and soldier. He also held the titles of Baron Abergavenny and Lord of Wexford. He was born in Sutton Valence the son of Lord Hastings and Agnes Mortimer. His father died when John Hastings was around one year old and he became a ward of King Edward III while remaining in his mothers care. The King arranged for John to marry Edwards daughter Margaret in 1359 which drew John into the royal family. However Margaret died two years later. John Hastings inherited his fathers earldom subsidiary titles and estates in 1368. The same year he made a second marriage to Anne daughter of Walter Lord Mauny. The following year Pembroke began the career in royal service that continued for the rest of his life. The Hundred Years War had recently resumed in France and in 1369 Pembroke journeyed to Aquitaine. There he took part in a sequence of raids sieges and countermeasures against the French with both notable successes and failures. The latter were compounded by his apparent inability to work alongside the famed soldier Sir John Chandos who although head of the Kings forces there was far below Pembroke in rank. He was however far above Pembroke in ability and his subsequent death led to even more problems for Pembroke in France. A couple of years later the Earl was summoned to Parliament and returned to England. There perhaps exasperated by the political failures of the Kings ecclesiastical ministers or by their selfindulgence in office he was responsible for forcing them from power. Full article... Image 4 Caxias in 1878 Lus Alves de Lima e Silva Duke of Caxias  pronounced kai.s 25 August 1803  7 May 1880 nicknamed the Peacemaker and the Iron Duke was an army officer politician and monarchist of the Empire of Brazil. Like his father and uncles Caxias pursued a military career. In 1823 he fought as a young officer in the Brazilian War for Independence against Portugal then spent three years in Brazils southernmost province Cisplatina as the government unsuccessfully resisted that provinces secession in the Cisplatine War. Though his own father and uncles renounced Emperor Dom Pedro I during the protests of 1831 Caxias remained loyal. Pedro I abdicated in favor of his young son Dom Pedro II whom Caxias instructed in swordsmanship and horsemanship and eventually befriended. During Pedro IIs minority the governing regency faced countless rebellions throughout the country. Again breaking with his father and other relatives sympathetic to the rebels from 1839 to 1845 Caxias commanded loyalist forces suppressing such uprisings as the Balaiada the Liberal rebellions of 1842 and the Ragamuffin War. In 1851 under his command the Brazilian army prevailed against the Argentine Confederation in the Platine War a decade later Caxias as army marshal the armys highest rank led Brazilian forces to victory in the Paraguayan War. As a reward he was raised to the titled nobility becoming successively a baron count and marquis finally becoming the only person created duke during Pedro IIs 
58 year reign. Full article... Image 5 The figure of the Old Testament King David shown killing a lion on the St Andrews Sarcophagus is thought to represent King engus. The figure is dressed as a Roman emperor of Late Antiquity and wears a fibula like that of the Emperor Justinian on the mosaic at San Vitale Ravenna. engus son of Fergus Pictish Onuist map Vurguist Old Irish engus mac Fergusso lit.Angus son of Fergus died 761 was king of the Picts from 732 until his death in 761. His reign can be reconstructed in some detail from a variety of sources. The unprecedented territorial gains he made from coast to coast and the legacy he left mean engus can be considered the first king of what would become Scotland. Wresting power from his rivals engus became the chief king in Pictland following a period of civil war in the late 7
20 s. Full article... Image 6 Statue of Simeon I in Vidin Tsar Simeon also Symeon I the Great Church Slavonic     romanized csar Smeon prv Velik Bulgarian   I  romanized Simeon I Veliki simn prvi vliki Greek     romanized Sumen prtos ho Mgas ruled over Bulgaria from 893 to 927 during the First Bulgarian Empire. Simeons successful campaigns against the Byzantines Magyars and Serbs led Bulgaria to its greatest territorial expansion ever making it the most powerful state in contemporary Eastern and Southeast Europe. His reign was also a period of unmatched cultural prosperity and enlightenment later deemed the Golden Age of Bulgarian culture. During Simeons rule Bulgaria spread over a territory between the Aegean the Adriatic and the Black Sea. The newly independent Bulgarian Orthodox Church became the first new patriarchate besides the Pentarchy and Bulgarian Glagolitic and Cyrillic translations of Christian texts spread all over the Slavic world of the time. It was at the Preslav Literary School in the 8
90 s that the Cyrillic alphabet was developed. Halfway through his reign Simeon assumed the title of Emperor Tsar having prior to that been styled Prince Knyaz. Full article... Image 7 Maximian Latin Marcus Aurelius Valerius Maximianus c.250  c.July 310 nicknamed Herculius was Roman emperor from 286 to 305. He was Caesar from 285 to 286 then Augustus from 286 to 305. He shared the latter title with his coemperor and superior Diocletian whose political brain complemented Maximians military brawn. Maximian established his residence at Trier but spent most of his time on campaign. In late 285 he suppressed rebels in Gaul known as the Bagaudae. From 285 to 288 he fought against Germanic tribes along the Rhine frontier. Together with Diocletian he launched a scorched earth campaign deep into Alamannic territory in 288 refortifying the frontier. The man he appointed to police the Channel shores Carausius rebelled in 286 causing the secession of Britain and northwestern Gaul. Maximian failed to oust Carausius and his invasion fleet was destroyed by storms in 289 or 290. Maximians subordinate Constantius campaigned against Carausius successor Allectus while Maximian held the Rhine frontier. The rebel leader was ousted in 296 and Maximian moved south to combat piracy near Hispania and Berber incursions in Mauretania. When these campaigns concluded in 298 he departed for Italy where he lived in comfort until 305. At Diocletians behest Maximian abdicated on 1 May 305 gave the Augustan office to Constantius and retired to southern Italy. Full article... Image 8 King Ine depicted in the Transfiguration Window of Wells Cathedral. Ine or Ini died in or after 726 was King of Wessex from 689 to 726. At Ines accession his kingdom dominated much of what is now southern England. However he was unable to retain the territorial gains of his predecessor Cdwalla who had expanded West Saxon territory substantially. By the end of Ines reign the kingdoms of Kent Sussex and Essex were no longer under West Saxon sway however Ine maintained control of what is now Hampshire and consolidated and extended Wessexs territory in the western peninsula. Ine is noted for his code of laws Ines asetnessa or laws of Ine which he issued in about 694. These laws were the first issued by an AngloSaxon king outside Kent. They shed much light on the history of AngloSaxon society and reveal Ines Christian convictions. Trade increased significantly during Ines reign with the town of Hamwic now Southampton becoming prominent. It was probably during Ines reign that the West Saxons began to mint coins though none have been found that bear his name. Full article... Image 9 Photograph of George I c.1912 George I Greek   Gergios I 24 December 1845  18 March 1913 was King of Greece from 30 March 1863 until his assassination in 1913. Originally a Danish prince he was born in Copenhagen and seemed destined for a career in the Royal Danish Navy. He was only 17 years old when he was elected king by the Greek National Assembly which had deposed the unpopular Otto. His nomination was both suggested and supported by the Great Powers the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland the Second French Empire and the Russian Empire. He married Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia in 1867 and became the first monarch of a new Greek dynasty. Two of his sisters Alexandra and Dagmar married into the British and Russian royal families. Edward VII of the United Kingdom and Alexander III of Russia were his brothersinlaw and George V of the United Kingdom Christian X of Denmark Haakon VII of Norway and Nicholas II of Russia were his nephews. Full article... Image 10 Prince Edward Duke of Windsor and Wallis Duchess of Windsor visited Nazi Germany in October 1937. Edward had abdicated the British throne in December 1936 and his brother George VI had become king. Edward had been given the title Duke of Windsor and married Wallis Simpson in June 1937. He appeared to have been sympathetic to Germany in this period and that September announced his intention to travel privately to Germany to tour factories. His interests officially researching the social and economic conditions of the working classes were against the backdrop of looming war in Europe. The Dukes supporters saw him as a potential peacemaker between Britain and Germany but the British government refused to sanction such a role opposed the tour and suspected that the Nazis would use the Dukes presence for propaganda. Prince Edward was keen for his wife who had been rejected by the British establishment to experience a state visit as his consort. He promised the government to keep a low profile and the tour went ahead between 12 and 23 October 1937. The Duke and the Duchess who were officially invited to the country by the German Labour Front were chaperoned for much of their visit by its leader Robert Ley. The couple visited factories many of which were producing materiel for the rearmament effort and the Duke inspected German troops. The Windsors were greeted by the British national anthem and Nazi salutes. They dined with highranking Nazis such as Joseph Goebbels Hermann Gring Joachim von Ribbentrop and Albert Speer and had tea with Adolf Hitler in Berchtesgaden. The Duke had a long private conversation with Hitler but it is uncertain what they discussed as the minutes of their meeting were lost during the war. The Duchess took afternoon tea with Hitlers deputy Rudolf Hess. Hitler was sympathetic to the Windsors and treated the Duchess like royalty. Full article... Image 11 Portrait by Johann Georg Ziesenis 1763 Frederick II German Friedrich II. 24 January 1712  17 August 1786 was the monarch of Prussia from 1740 until 1786. He was the last Hohenzollern monarch titled King in Prussia declaring himself King of Prussia after annexing Royal Prussia from the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in 1772. His most significant accomplishments include his military successes in the Silesian wars his reorganisation of the Prussian Army the First Partition of Poland and his patronage of the arts and the Enlightenment. Prussia greatly increased its territories and became a major military power in Europe under his rule. He became known as Frederick the Great German Friedrich der Groe and was nicknamed Old Fritz German der Alte Fritz. In his youth Frederick was more interested in music and philosophy than in the art of war which led to clashes with his authoritarian father Frederick William I of Prussia. However upon ascending to the Prussian throne he attacked and annexed the rich Austrian province of Silesia in 1742 winning military acclaim for himself and Prussia. He became an influential military theorist whose analyses emerged from his extensive personal battlefield experience and covered issues of strategy tactics mobility and logistics. Full article... Image 12 Photograph by Mathew Brady c.1876 Dom Pedro II 2 December 1825  5 December 1891 nicknamed the Magnanimous Portuguese O Magnnimo was the second and last monarch of the Empire of Brazil reigning for over 58 years. Pedro II was born in Rio de Janeiro the seventh child of Emperor Dom Pedro I of Brazil and Empress Dona Maria Leopoldina and thus a member of the Brazilian branch of the House of Braganza Portuguese Bragana. His fathers abrupt abdication and departure to Europe in 1831 left the fiveyearold as emperor and led to a lonely childhood and adolescence obliged to spend his time studying in preparation for rule. His experiences with court intrigues and political disputes during this period greatly affected his later character he grew into a man with a strong sense of duty and devotion toward his country and his people yet increasingly resentful of his role as monarch. Full article... Image 13 Ranavalona III  Malagasy pronunciation ranaval 22 November 1861  23 May 1917 was the last sovereign of the Kingdom of Madagascar. She ruled from 30 July 1883 to 28 February 1897 in a reign marked by ultimately futile efforts to resist the colonial designs of the government of France. As a young woman she was selected from among several Andriana qualified to succeed Queen Ranavalona II upon her death. Like both preceding queens Ranavalona entered a political marriage with a member of the Hova elite named Rainilaiarivony who largely oversaw the daytoday governance of the kingdom and managed its foreign affairs in his role as prime minister. Ranavalona tried to stave off colonization by strengthening trade and diplomatic relations with foreign powers throughout her reign but French attacks on coastal port towns and an assault on the capital city of Antananarivo led to the capture of the royal palace in 1895 ending the sovereignty and political autonomy of the centuriesold kingdom. Ranavalona and her court were initially permitted to remain as symbolic figureheads but the outbreak of a popular resistance movement called the menalamba rebellion and the discovery of antiFrench political intrigues at court led the French to exile her to the island of Runion in 1897. Rainilaiarivony died that same year and Ranavalona was relocated to a villa in Algiers along with several members of her family. The queen her family and the servants accompanying her were provided an allowance and enjoyed a comfortable standard of living including occasional trips to Paris for shopping and sightseeing. Ranavalona was never permitted to return home to Madagascar however despite her repeated requests. She died of an embolism at her villa in Algiers in 1917 at age 55. Her remains were buried in Algiers but were disinterred 21 years later and shipped to Madagascar where they were placed within the tomb of Queen Rasoherina on the grounds of the Rova of Antananarivo. Full article... Image 14 Statuette of Neferefre painted limestone Neferefre Isi fl.
25 th century BC also known as Raneferef Ranefer and in Greek as  Chers was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the Fifth Dynasty during the Old Kingdom period. He was most likely the eldest son of pharaoh Neferirkare Kakai and queen Khentkaus II. He was known as prince Ranefer before he ascended to the throne. Neferefre started a pyramid for himself in the royal necropolis of Abusir called Netjeribau Raneferef which means The bas of Neferefre are divine. The pyramid was never finished with a masons inscription showing that works on the stone structure were abandoned during or shortly after the kings second year of reign. Together with the sparsity of attestations contemporaneous with his reign this is taken by Egyptologists as evidence that Neferefre died unexpectedly after two to three years on the throne. Neferefre was nonetheless buried in his pyramid hastily completed in the form of a mastaba by his second successor and presumably younger brother pharaoh Nyuserre Ini. Fragments of his mummy were uncovered there showing that he died in his early twenties. Full article... Image 15 Heln Mongolian  eln jin lit.Lady eln fl.11621210 was a Mongolian noblewoman and the mother of Temjin better known as Genghis Khan. She played a major role in his rise to power as described in The Secret History of the Mongols. Born into the Olkhonud clan of the Onggirat tribe Heln was originally married to Chiledu a Merkit aristocrat she was captured shortly after her wedding by Yesgei an important member of the Mongols who abducted her to be his primary wife. She and Yesgei had four sons and one daughter Temjin Qasar Hachiun Temge and Temlen. After Yesgei was fatally poisoned and the Mongols abandoned her family Heln shepherded all her children through poverty to adulthoodher resilience and organisational skills have been remarked upon by historians. She continued to play an important role after Temjins marriage to Brtetogether the two women managed his camp and provided him with advice. Full article... More featured articles edit Featured picture Nagoya Castle Credit Samuel Louie The main donjon of Nagoya Castle a Japanese castle found in Nagoya Aichi Prefecture. It was destroyed in World War II but the donjon was reconstructed in 1959 with the use of modern materials such as steel beams and concrete. More selected pictures Read more Did you know autogenerated No recent additions edit More Did you know... ... that Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I commissioned the Triumphal Arch pictured a monumental woodcut print over 3 m 11 ft tall and nearly 3 m 10 ft wide printed from 192 separate wood blocks ... that Petubastis III led a revolt in Egypt against Persian rule in circa 522 BCE ... that makers of Chantilly lace were guillotined during the French Revolution because they were seen as protgs of the royals More did you know facts Good articles  load new batch These are Good articles which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 Coin of Hyspaosines as King minted at Charax Spasinu in 1265 BC Hyspaosines also spelled Aspasine was the founder of Characene a kingdom situated in southern Mesopotamia. He was originally a Seleucid satrap installed by king Antiochus IV Epiphanes r.175  164 BC but declared independence in 141 BC after the collapse and subsequent transfer of Seleucid authority in Iran and Babylonia to the Parthians. Hyspaosines briefly occupied the Parthian city of Babylon in 127 BC where he is recorded in records as king arru. In 124 BC however he was forced to acknowledge Parthian suzerainty. He died in the same year and was succeeded by his juvenile son Apodakos. Full article... Image 2 Homage to Baldwin V crowned centre Baldwin V 1177 or 1178  1186 was the king of Jerusalem who reigned together with his uncle Baldwin IV from 1183 to 1185 and after his uncles death as the sole king from 1185 to his death. Baldwin IVs leprosy meant that he could not have children and so he spent his reign grooming various relatives to succeed him. Finally his nephew was chosen and Baldwin IV had him crowned as coking in order to sideline the childs unpopular stepfather Guy of Lusignan. When Baldwin IV died Count Raymond III of Tripoli assumed government on behalf of the child king. Baldwin V died of unknown causes and was succeeded by his mother Sibylla who then made Guy Fulk V king. Full article... Image 3 Lead seal of John Komnenos as kouropalates and Domestic of the Schools John Komnenos Greek   Ianns Komnnos c.1015  12 July 1067 was a Byzantine aristocrat and military leader. The younger brother of Emperor Isaac I Komnenos he served as Domestic of the Schools during Isaacs brief reign 105759. When Isaac I abdicated Constantine X Doukas became emperor and John withdrew from public life until his death in 1067. Through his son Alexios I Komnenos who became emperor in 1081 he was the progenitor of the Komnenian dynasty that ruled the Byzantine Empire from 1081 until 1185 and the Empire of Trebizond from 1204 until 1461. Full article... Image 4 Basarab I fresco in Arge Basarab I  Romanian basarab  also known as Basarab the Founder Romanian Basarab ntemeietorul c. 1270  13511352 was a voivode and later the first independent ruler of Wallachia who lived in the first half of the 
14 th century. Many details of his life are uncertain. Although his name is of Turkic origin 
14 thcentury sources unanimously state that he was a Vlach Romanian. According to two popular theories Basarab either came into power between 1304 and 1324 by dethroning or peacefully succeeding the legendary founder of Wallachia Radu Negru or in 1310 by succeeding his father Thocomerius. A royal charter issued on 26 July 1324 is the first document to reference Basarab. According to the charter he was subject to Charles I of Hungary as the voivode of Wallachia. Basarab became disloyal to the Holy Crown of Hungary in 1325. He seized the Banate of Severin and raided the southern regions of the Kingdom of Hungary. Basarab supported Michael Shishman of Bulgarias attack against the Kingdom of Serbia but their united armies were defeated in the Battle of Velbazhd on 28 July 1330. Soon after Charles I of Hungary invaded Wallachia but the Wallachians ambushed and almost annihilated the royal troops in the Battle of Posada which occurred between 9 and 12 November 1330. Full article... Image 5 Strez Bulgarian and Macedonian  original spelling  fl. 12071214 was a medieval semiindependent Bulgarian sebastokrator. He was a member of the Asen dynasty and a cousin or a brother of Boril of Bulgaria. A major contender for the Bulgarian throne Strez initially opposed the ascension of his close relative Tsar Boril. He fled to Serbia where he accepted the vassalage of Grand Prince Stefan Nemanji and Serbian support helped him establish himself as a largely independent ruler in a large part of the region of Macedonia. However Strez turned against his suzerains to become a Bulgarian vassal and joined forces with his former enemy Boril against the Latins and then Serbia. Strez died amidst a major antiSerbian campaign under unclear circumstances sometimes described as a Serbian plot. Full article... Image 6 A 
12 thcentury painting of St Oswald in Durham Cathedral Oswald  Old English pronunciation ozwd c 604  5 August 641642 was King of Northumbria from 634 until his death and is venerated as a saint of whom there was a particular cult in the Middle Ages. Oswald was the son of thelfrith of Bernicia and Acha of Deira and came to rule after spending a period in exile. After defeating the Welsh Gwyneddian ruler Cadwallon ap Cadfan at the Battle of Heavenfield Oswald brought the two Northumbrian kingdoms of Bernicia and Deira once again under a single ruler and promoted the spread of Christianity in Northumbria. He was given a strongly positive assessment by the historian Bede writing a little less than a century after Oswalds death who regarded Oswald as a saintly king it is also Bede who is the main source for presentday historical knowledge of Oswald. After eight years of rule in which he was the most powerful ruler in Britain Oswald was killed in the Battle of Maserfield while fighting the forces of Penda of Mercia who then himself was defeated by Oswalds brother Oswiu. Full article... Image 7 Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor Sultan Sir Abu Bakar AlKhalil Ibrahim Shah ibni Almarhum Temenggong Seri Maharaja Tun Daeng Ibrahim AlAydarus GCMG KCSI Jawi                  3 February 1833  4 June 1895 was the Temenggong of Johor. He was the 
1 st Sultan of Modern Johor the 
21 st Sultan of Johor and the first Maharaja of Johor from the House of Temenggong. He was also informally known as The Father of Modern Johor as many historians accredited Johors development in the 
19 th century to Abu Bakars leadership. He initiated policies and provided aids to ethnic Chinese entrepreneurs to stimulate the development of the states agricultural economy which was founded by Chinese migrants from Southern China in the 18
40 s. He also took charge of the development of Johors infrastructure administrative system military and civil service all of which were modelled closely along Western lines. Abu Bakar was noted for his diplomatic skills and both the British and Malay rulers had approached him for advice in making important decisions. He was also an avid traveller and became the first Malay ruler to travel to Europe during his first visit to England in 1866. In particular Abu Bakar became a lifetime friend of Queen Victoria in his later years. Abu Bakars friendship with Queen Victoria played an important role in shaping Johors relationships with Britain and was the only state by the end of the 
19 th century in the Peninsular Malaya to maintain autonomy in its internal affairs as the British Colonial Government pushed for greater control over the Malay states by placing a British Resident in the states. He was also an Anglophile and many of his personal habits and decisions were aligned to European ideas and tastes. Full article... Image 8 1802 portrait by Josef Grassi Louise of MecklenburgStrelitz Luise Auguste Wilhelmine Amalie 10 March 1776  19 July 1810 was Queen of Prussia as the wife of King Frederick William III. The couples happy though shortlived marriage produced nine children including the future monarchs Frederick William IV of Prussia and William I German Emperor. Her legacy became cemented after her extraordinary 1807 meeting with French Emperor Napoleon I at Tilsit  she met with him to plead unsuccessfully for favorable terms after Prussias disastrous losses in the War of the Fourth Coalition. She was already well loved by her subjects but her meeting with Napoleon led Louise to become revered as the soul of national virtue. Her early death at the age of thirtyfour preserved her youth in the memory of posterity and caused Napoleon to reportedly remark that the king has lost his best minister. The Order of Louise was founded by her grieving husband four years later as a female counterpart to the Iron Cross. In the 19
20 s conservative German women founded the Queen Louise League. Full article... Image 9 Bust of Ptolemy XII housed at the Department of Greek Etruscan and Roman Antiquities at the Louvre in Paris Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysus Ancient Greek    romanized Ptolemaios Neos Dionysos lit.Ptolemy the new Dionysus c.117  51 BC was a king of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt who ruled from 80 to 58 BC and then again from 55 BC until his death in 51 BC. He was commonly known as Auletes  the Flautist referring to his love of playing the flute in Dionysian festivals. A member of the Ptolemaic dynasty he was a descendant of its founder Ptolemy I a Macedonian Greek general and companion of Alexander the Great. Ptolemy XII was an illegitimate son of Ptolemy IX by an uncertain mother. In 116 BC Ptolemy IX became coregent with his mother Cleopatra III. However he was forced into a civil war against his mother and his brother Ptolemy X leading to his exile in 107 BC. Cleopatra III sent her grandsons to Kos in 103 BC. They were captured by Mithridates VI of Pontus probably in 88 BC around the time Ptolemy IX returned to the Egyptian throne. After their father died in 81 BC Ptolemy XIIs halfsister Berenice III took the throne. She was soon murdered by her husband and coregent Ptolemy XI who was then killed. At this point Ptolemy XII was recalled from Pontus and proclaimed pharaoh while his brother also named Ptolemy was installed as king of Cyprus. Full article... Image 10 Silver dirham issued by Khurshid Khurshid Book Pahlavi hwlyt TabariPersian   Sphbed Khrshd General Khorshid 734761 erroneously designated Khurshid II by earlier scholars was the last Dabuyid ispahbadh of Tabaristan. He succeeded to the throne at an early age and was supervised by his uncle as regent until he reached the age of fourteen. Khurshid tried to assert his independence from his vassalage to the Caliphate supported various rebellions and maintained diplomatic contacts with Tang China. Finally the Abbasids conquered his country in 759760 and captured most members of his family. Khurshid fled to Daylam where he ended his life. Full article... Image 11 Diana in 1997 Diana Princess of Wales born Diana Frances Spencer 1 July 1961  31 August 1997 was a member of the British royal family. She was the first wife of Charles III then Prince of Wales and mother of Princes William and Harry. Her activism and glamour which made her an international icon earned her enduring popularity. Diana was born into British nobility  the Spencer family  and grew up close to the royal family living at Park House on their Sandringham estate. In 1981 while working as a nursery teachers assistant in Pimlico London she became engaged to Charles the eldest son of Elizabeth II. Their wedding took place at St Pauls Cathedral in July 1981 and made her Princess of Wales a role in which she was enthusiastically received by the public. The couple had two sons William and Harry who were then respectively second and third in the line of succession to the British throne. Dianas marriage to Charles suffered due to their incompatibility and extramarital affairs. They separated in 1992 soon after the breakdown of their relationship became public knowledge. Their marital difficulties were widely publicised and the couple divorced in 1996. Full article... Image 12 The Rock relief of Artaxerxes III in Persepolis Ochus Greek  Ochos known by his dynastic name Artaxerxes III Old Persian  Artaxa Greek  was King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire from 35958 to 338 BC. He was the son and successor of Artaxerxes II and his mother was Stateira. Before ascending the throne Artaxerxes was a satrap and commander of his fathers army. Artaxerxes came to power after one of his brothers was executed another committed suicide the last murdered and his father Artaxerxes II died. Soon after becoming king Artaxerxes murdered all of the royal family to secure his place as king. He started two major campaigns against Egypt. The first campaign failed and was followed up by rebellions throughout the western part of his empire. During the second invasion Artaxerxes finally defeated Nectanebo II the Pharaoh of Egypt bringing the country back into the Persian fold after six decades. Full article... Image 13 Teraupoo and his family on Raiatea c.1895 Teraupoo c.1855  23 December 1918 was a Tahitian Maohi resistance leader of the islands of Raiatea and Tahaa who fought off French rule from 1887 to 1897 during the decadelong Leeward Islands War. Born during the decades following the FrancoTahitian War 18441847 Teraupoo was a lesser chief from the village of Avera on the east coast of Raiatea. He grew to resent the French after being mistreated by an officer. After King Tamatoa VI of Raiatea submitted to French annexation Teraupoo refused to surrender and led the native resistance against the French and installed a resistance government under Tuarii as queen at Avera. He and his followers dubbed the Teraupiste included a majority of the natives of Raiatea and Tahaa. They fought off French colonial rule from 1887 until 1897 while attempting to convince the British to support their cause to remain independent. Full article... Image 14 Ragnalls name as it appears on folio 
35 v of British Library Cotton MS Julius A VII the Chronicle of Mann Raignaldum Ragnall mac Somairle also known in Gaelic as Raghnall Raonall Raonull in English as Ranald in Latin as Reginaldus and in Old Norse as Rgnvaldr Rgnvaldr Rgnvaldr died 11911192  c. 12101227 was a significant latetwelfthcentury magnate seated on the western seaboard of Scotland. He was probably a younger son of Somairle mac Gilla Brigte Lord of Argyll and his wife Ragnhildr daughter of lfr Gurarson King of the Isles. The twelfthcentury Kingdom of the Isles ruled by Ragnalls father and maternal grandfather existed within a hybrid NorseGaelic milieu which bordered an everstrengthening and consolidating Kingdom of Scots. In the midtwelfth century Somairle rose in power and won the Kingdom of the Isles from his brotherinlaw. After Somairle perished in battle against the Scots in 1164 much of his kingdom was probably partitioned between his surviving sons. Ragnalls allotment appears to have been in the southern Hebrides and Kintyre. In time Ragnall appears to have risen in power and became the leading member of Somairles descendants the meic Somairle or Clann Somairle. Ragnall is known to have styled himself King of the Isles Lord of Argyll and Kintyre and Lord of the Isles. His claim to the title of king like other members of the meic Somairle is derived through Ragnhildr a member of the Crovan dynasty. Full article... Image 15 Sayyida Shirin Persian   died 1028 also simply known as Sayyida  was a Bavandid princess who was the wife of the Buyid amir ruler Fakhr alDawla r.976980 984997. She was the regent of most of Jibal during the minority of her son Majd alDawla r.9971029 and served as de facto ruler also after her formal regency had ended during the reign of her son. She is notable for securing the governorship of Isfahan to her first cousin Ala alDawla Muhammad thus marking the start of the Kakuyid dynasty. Full article... More good articles edit Featured portrait Charles XIV John of Sweden Credit Joseph Nicolas Jouy A fulllength portrait of thenFrench Marshal Jean Baptiste Bernadotte 17631844 who later became King Charles XIV John of Sweden and Norway. Bernadotte had a long and decorated career in the French Army when he was unexpectedly elected the heir to the childless King Charles XIII. His election was due to two main factors the Swedish Army were in favour of electing a soldier in view of future complications with Russia and he had shown kindness to Swedish prisoners during the recent war with Denmark part of the Napoleonic Wars. Although he never learned to speak Swedish during his reign Sweden and Norway became united and both experienced great material development. More featured portraits Read more edit Selected quote I have read a great deal about Queen Victoria. Still I think her life isnt half as interesting and memorable as mine.  Empress Dowager Cixi To her ladyinwaiting Der Ling More selected quotes More at Wikiquote edit Related portals Politics Heraldry History British Empire Holy Roman Empire General images  load new batch The following are images from various monarchyrelated articles on Wikipedia. Image 
1 The Nine Sovereigns at Windsor for the funeral of King Edward VII photographed on 20 May 1910. Standing from left to right King Haakon VII of Norway Tsar King Ferdinand of the Bulgarians King Manuel II of Portugal and the Algarve Kaiser Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany King George I of the Hellenes and King Albert I of the Belgians. Seated from left to right King Alfonso XIII of Spain King George V of the United Kingdom and King Frederik VIII of Denmark. from Monarch Image 
2 King Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia from Monarch Image 
3 From left to right Japanese Emperor Hirohito Crown Prince Akihito Crown Princess Michiko and Empress Nagako 1959 from Monarch Image 
4 King Frederick II of Prussia the Great from Absolute monarchy Image 
5 Kamehameha IV King of Hawaii from Monarch Image 
6 Joseph II Holy Roman Emperor from Absolute monarchy Image 
7 Francisco Pizarro meets with the Inca emperor Atahualpa 1532 from Monarch Image 
8 The administrative divisions of the British Protectorate of Uganda including five of todays six kingdoms from Nonsovereign monarchy Image 
9 A map of Europe exhibiting the continents monarchies red and republics blue from Monarch Image 
10 Waikato the homeland of the Mori kings from Nonsovereign monarchy Image 
11 Photograph of Tsar Alexander II 187881 from Absolute monarchy Image 
12 Contemporary European monarchies by type of succession Absolute primogeniture Malepreference cognatic primogeniture Agnatic primogeniture Electiveappointed from Monarch Image 
13 The islands that make up Wallis and Futuna from Nonsovereign monarchy Image 
14 Jacques I Emperor of Haiti 1804 from Monarch Image 
15 Mohamoud Ali Shire the 
26 th Sultan of the Somali Warsangali Sultanate from Monarch Image 
16 Elizabeth II was the monarch of independent countries in Europe Asia Africa Oceania and the Americas. from Monarch Image 
17 Sultan Mehmed III of the Ottoman dynasty from Monarch Image 
18 Postcard from 1908 showing nineteen of the worlds reigning monarchs left to rightKing Rama VChulalongkorn of Siam modern Thailand King George I of Greece King Peter I of Serbia King Carol I of Romania Emperor and King Franz Joseph of AustriaHungary Tzar King Ferdinand I of Bulgaria Padishah Emperor Abdul Hamid II of the Ottoman Empire King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy Emperor Nicholas II of the Russia King Edward VII of the United Kingdom Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany King Gustav V of Sweden King Haakon VII of Norway King Frederik VIII of Denmark Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands Guangxu Emperor of China Meiji Emperor of Japan King Manuel II of Portugal and King Alfonso XIII of Spain. from Monarch Image 
19 The constituent states of the German Empire a federal monarchy. Various states were formally suzerain to the emperor whose government retained authority over some policy areas throughout the federation and was concurrently King of Prussia the empires largest state. from Nonsovereign monarchy Image 
20 British India and the princely states within the Indian Empire. The princely states in yellow were sovereign territories of Indian princes who were practically suzerain to the Emperor of India who was concurrently the British monarch whose territories were called British India in pink and occupied a vast portion of the empire. from Nonsovereign monarchy Image 
21 Louis XIV of France from Absolute monarchy Image 
22 Sri Lankan King Devanampiya Tissa Queen consort Anula and Prince Uththiya c.307 BC from Monarch Image 
23 Subdivisions of the United Arab Emirates from Nonsovereign monarchy Image 
24 Dinzulu kaCetshwayo the last king of an independent Zulu state in 1883 from Nonsovereign monarchy Image 
25 Pedro II Emperor of Brazil by Delfim da Cmara from Monarch Image 
26 Ramesses II r. 12791213 BC the third Pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt from Monarch Image 
27 Emperor Naruhito is the hereditary monarch of Japan. The Japanese monarchy is the oldest continuous hereditary monarchy in the world. from Hereditary monarchy edit Featured content Extended content This is a list of recognized content updated weekly by JLBot talk  contribs typically on Saturdays. There is no need to edit the list yourself. If an article is missing from the list make sure it is tagged or categorized e.g. CategoryRoyalty work group articles correctly and wait for the next update. See WPRECOG for configuration options. Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor Abd alMalik ibn Marwan AlAdid edn mac Gabrin lle of Sussex thelbald of Mercia thelbald King of Wessex thelberht King of Wessex thelberht of Kent thelfld thelred I of Wessex thelred of Mercia thelred Lord of the Mercians thelstan thelwold theling thelwulf King of Wessex Afonso Prince Imperial of Brazil Ahmose I Prince Albert Victor Duke of Clarence and Avondale Prince Albert of SaxeCoburg and Gotha Alboin Aldfrith of Northumbria Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Prince Alfred of Great Britain Princess Alice of Battenberg Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna of East Anglia Anne Queen of Great Britain Anne of Denmark Antiochus XII Dionysus Princess Louise Duchess of Argyll King Arthur Atlanersa Attalus I Augustus Basiliscus Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Beorhtwulf of Mercia Pedro lvares Cabral Cdwalla Caroline of Ansbach Catherine de Medici Ceawlin of Wessex Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Constantine II of Scotland Constantine III Western Roman emperor Constantine son of Basil I Constantine son of Theophilos David I of Scotland David son of Heraclius Diocletian Djedkare Isesi Domitian Donnchadh Earl of Carrick Theodore Komnenos Doukas Eadbald of Kent Eadred Eadwig Eardwulf of Northumbria Ecgberht King of Wessex Edgar King of England Edmund I Edward I of England Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Edward the Martyr Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus King of Hanover Demetrius III Eucaerus Antiochus X Eusebes Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Fakhr alDin II Family of Gediminas Frederick the Great Frederick III German Emperor Geoffrey archbishop of York George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Prince William Duke of Gloucester Glycerius Rhys ap Gruffydd AlHafiz Amir Hamzah Princess Helena of the United Kingdom Henry I of England Henry II of England Henry III of England Henry IV Holy Roman Emperor Heln House of Plantagenet Joaquim Jos Incio Viscount of Inhama Ine of Wessex Isabeau of Bavaria James II of England James VI and I John King of England Jovan Vladimir Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Kociuszko Gilbert du Motier Marquis de Lafayette Theodore II Laskaris Honrio Hermeto Carneiro Leo Marquis of Paran Prince Louis of Battenberg Nelson Mandela Marcian Princess Maria Amlia of Brazil Martinus son of Heraclius Marwan I Mary II Mary Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Empress Matilda Maximian Menkauhor Kaiu Muhammad I of Granada Muawiya I AlMutadid AlMutasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj alIkhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Baron Munchausen AlMustali AlMuti Nasr of Granada Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Nizar ibn alMustansir Norodom Ranariddh Nyuserre Ini Prince Octavius of Great Britain Odaenathus engus I Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Andreas Palaiologos Jos Paranhos Viscount of Rio Branco Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso Prince Imperial of Brazil John Hastings 
2 nd Earl of Pembroke Penda of Mercia Pepi I Meryre Philip I Philadelphus Ramesses VI Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Raymond III Count of Tripoli Raynald of Chtillon Richard II of England Sahure Salih ibn Mirdas Sayf alDawla Seleucus VI Epiphanes Domenico Selvo Sennacherib Shepseskaf Shepseskare Sheshi Shunzhi Emperor Lus Alves de Lima e Silva Duke of Caxias Simeon I of Bulgaria Wallis Simpson Siward Earl of Northumbria Manuel Marques de Sousa Count of Porto Alegre Stephen I of Hungary Stephen King of England Sulayman ibn Abd alMalik Tiberius III Thekla daughter of Theophilos Theodosius III Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies Thurisind Tolui Unas Userkaf Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Princess Charlotte of Wales 17961817 AlWalid I Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William III of England William IV William the Conqueror Wadysaw II Jagieo Wulfhere of Mercia Yazid I Yusuf I of Granada Zenobia Featured lists List of monarchs of East Anglia List of Roman emperors List of French monarchs List of current monarchs of sovereign states List of emperors of the Han dynasty List of emperors of the Song dynasty List of longestliving members of the British royal family List of monarchs of the Muhammad Ali dynasty List of sultans of Zanzibar List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire Featured pictures FileAfter Hans Holbein the Younger  Portrait of Henry VIII  Google Art Project.jpg FileAlexander Roslin  King Gustav III of Sweden and his Brothers  Google Art Project.jpg FileAmalia de Llano y Dotres condesa de Vilches Federico de Madrazo.jpg FileAmbrogio de Predis  Bianca Maria Sforza  Google Art Project.jpg FileAntoineFranois Callet  Louis XVI roi de France et de Navarre 17541793 revtu du grand costume royal en 1779  Google Art Project.jpg FileCarle Van Loo  Marie Leszczinska reine de France 17031768  Google Art Project.jpg FileCharles Motte  Rossini et Georges IV  la soire de Brighton.jpg FileCharles Townshend 
2 nd Viscount Townshend by Sir Godfrey Kneller Bt 2.jpg FileCrowning Tribhuvan of Nepal 1911 restoration.jpg FileDeath of King Alfonso XII of Spain.jpg FileFourier2  restoration1.jpg FileFrancisco Goya  Portrait of Ferdinand VII of Spain in his robes of state 1815  Prado.jpg FileFrancoiseMarguerite de Sevigne Roslin 1753.jpg FileGeorge I Gyrgy Rkczi 15931648  Rembrandt van Rijn  Jan Gillisz. van Vliet.jpg FileGeorge Sand by Nadar 1864.jpg FileHans Holbein the Younger Around 14971543  Portrait of Henry VIII of England  Google Art Project.jpg FileHenry Compton by Sir Godfrey Kneller Bt.jpg FileHrh Princess Elizabeth in the Auxiliary Territorial Service April 1945 TR2832.jpg FileHyacinthe Rigaud  Louis de France Dauphin 16611711 dit le Grand Dauphin  Google Art Project.jpg FileJacquesLouis David  Equestrian portrait of Stanisaw Kostka Potocki  Google Art Project.jpg FileJane Digby Lady Ellenborough by William Charles Ross.jpg FileKaiulani in 1897 wearing pearl necklace PPWD1
53.0 16 restored.jpg FileKing Girvan Yuddhavikram Shah 17971816 restoration.jpg FileLa familia de Carlos IV.jpg FileLiliuokalani c. 1891.jpg FileLouise Elisabeth VigeLebrun  MarieAntoinette de LorraineHabsbourg reine de France et ses enfants  Google Art Project.jpg FileMSRra
61 b
1 DM.jpg FileMadame Grand Nol Catherine Vorle 17611835 MET DP320094.jpg FileMaresuke Nogi  1  Photo only.jpg FileMaria I Queen of Portugal  Giuseppe Troni atribudo Turim 17
39 Lisboa 1810  Google Cultural Institute.jpg FileMaria Isabel of Portugal in front of the Prado in 1829 by Bernardo Lpez y piquer.jpg FileMary 15051558 Queen of Hungary.jpg FileNaser alDin Shah Qajar close up with slight smile by Nadar.jpg FilePedro Amrico  D. Pedro II na abertura da Assemblia Geral.jpg FilePedro II of Brazil  BradyHandy.jpg FilePortrait of King Yeongjo  Chae Yong Shin  18501941 Cho Seokjin  18531920 et cropped.jpg FilePortrait of Yi Haeung National Museum of Korea.jpg FilePrince James Francis Edward Stuart by Alexis Simon Belle.jpg FilePrincess Sikhanyiso Dlamini of Eswatini.jpg FileRetrato da D. Amlia de Beauharnais  Google Art Project.jpg FileRosette Titles of Shah Jahan.jpg FileRussian Imperial Family 1913.jpg FileSalote Tupou III of Tonga in 1908.jpg FileSir Anthony Van Dyck  Charles I 160049  Google Art Project.jpg FileTizian  Portrait of Federico II Gonzaga  circa 1525.jpg FileVictor Hugo by tienne Carjat 1876  full.jpg Featured topics Cleopatra edit Topics v t e Monarchies Monarch Imperial royal and noble ranks List of current sovereign monarchs List of current nonsovereign monarchs List of monarchy referendums Type Absolute Constitutional Diarchy Elective Federal Hereditary Nonsovereign Personal union Regency Topics Abdication Abolition of monarchy Aristocracy Criticism of monarchy Democratization Decolonization Dynasty Government Head of state Legitimacy political Oligarchy Order of succession Republicanism Selfproclaimed monarchy Sovereignty Titles Chhatrapati Emperor King Queen regnant Prince regnant Raja khan Tsar Sultan Shah Pharaoh Current Africa Eswatini Lesotho Morocco list Asia Bahrain Bhutan Brunei Cambodia Japan Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Thailand United Arab Emirates list Europe Andorra Belgium Denmark Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden Vatican City Holy See Oceania Tonga Commonwealth realms Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Belize Canada Grenada Jamaica New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Papua New Guinea Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Tuvalu United Kingdom Former Africa Adamawa Ankole Aussa Barotseland Bagirmi Bornu Burundi Central Africa Dahomey Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Gomma Gumma Kaffa Kongo Libya Luba Madagascar Mali Maore Maravi Mwali Ndzuwani Ngazidja Rwanda Shilluk Islands of Refreshment Tunisia Wituland Wassoulou Yeke Zanzibar Zimbabwe and other Americas Araucana Aztec Brazil Haiti Inca Mexico Miskito Suriname Talamanca Trinidad Thirteen Colonies Asia Afghanistan Asir Bengal Bukhara Burma Cebu Chehab China Dapitan Hejaz Indonesia Iran Qajar Iraq Jabal Shammar Kandy Sri Lanka Kathiri Khiva Korea Kumul Kurdistan Laos Maguindanao Mahra Maldives Manchukuo Mongolia Najran Nepal Quaiti Ryukyu Sarawak Shan Sikkim Sip Song Chau Tai Sulu Syria Tibet Taiwan Upper Asir Upper Yafa Vietnam Yemen South Yemen Europe Albania Aragon Asturias Austria AustriaHungary Bavaria Bosnia Brittany Bulgaria Crimea Cilicia Corsica Cyprus Finland France Galicia Georgia Germany Greece Granada Hanover Hungary Iceland Imereti Ireland Italy KartliKakheti Lithuania Majorca Man Moldavia Montenegro Navarre Neuchtel Ottoman Empire Papal States PiedmontSardinia PolandLithuania Portugal Prussia Romania Russia Samos Saxony Savoy Scotland Serbia Tavolara Two Sicilies Tuscany United Baltic Duchy Yugoslavia Valencia Wrttemberg Oceania Abemama Bora Bora Easter Island Kingdom of Fiji Hawaii Huahine Mangareva NiuFekai Nuku Hiva Raiatea Rapa Iti Rarotonga Rimatara Rurutu Tahuata Tahiti Commonwealth realms Barbados Ceylon Sri Lanka Fiji The Gambia Ghana Guyana India British Raj princely states Irish Free State  Ireland Kenya Malawi Malta Mauritius Nigeria Pakistan Rhodesia Sierra Leone South Africa Tanganyika Trinidad and Tobago Uganda edit Categories Category puzzle Select  to view subcategories Monarchy Monarchies Monarchs Monarchyrelated lists Abdication Abolition of monarchy Royal anthems Christ the King Coronation Royal and noble courts Crown land Diarchies Elective monarchy Enlightened absolutism Royal families Royal favourites Fiction about monarchy Royal guards Heirs apparent Hereditary monarchy Historians of monarchy and royalty Royal households Interregnums Lsemajest Royal mistresses Monarchism Monarchy and money Nonsovereign monarchy Personal unions Royal prerogative Privy councils Real unions Monarchy referendums Regalia Regency government Regicides Reigns Restorations politics Royal residences Royal styles Royal Warrant holders Royalty Selfproclaimed monarchy State ritual and ceremonies Succession Tetrarchy Works about monarchy Select  to view subcategories Royalty Royalty by city Royalty by continent Royalty by nationality Royaltyrelated lists Royalty by century Monarchs Royal and noble courts Royal titles LGBT royalty Royalty and nobility with disabilities Fictional royalty Ancient royalty Royal attire Balls dance party Books written by royalty Royal children Christian royal saints Royal consorts Cultural depictions of royal people Deaths and funerals of royalty and nobility Executed royalty Exiled royalty Royal families Female royalty Heirs apparent Heirs to the throne Historians of monarchy and royalty Jewish royalty Kings Lovers of royalty Medieval royalty Royalty and nobility models Royal monuments Murdered royalty Nicknames in royalty Royal Olympic participants Royal family orders Organizations with royal patronage Pretenders Princes Princesses Remarried royal consorts Royal correspondents Royal reburials Royal Warrant holders Royal scandals Titles of royal attendants Royal vehicles Royal visits Royal weddings Works about royalty Royalty stubs Wikipedia categories named after royalty edit WikiProjects WikiProject Royalty and Nobility WikiProject British Royalty WikiProject Biography WikiProject Commonwealth realms WikiProject Politics edit Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention Verify Royal family  When a task is completed please remove it from the list. edit Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject Commons Free media repository Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Freecontent news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Freecontent library Wikiversity Free learning tools Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Discover Wikipedia using portals List of all portals The arts portal Biography portal Current events portal Geography portal History portal Mathematics portal Science portal Society portal Technology portal Random portal WikiProject Portals Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePortalMonarchyoldid1182280156 Categories All portals Monarchy Politics portals Society portals Hidden categories Pages with Portuguese IPA Pages with Bulgarian IPA Pages with Malagasy IPA Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with Romanian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Pages with Old English IPA Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated articleslideshow portals with 201500 articles in article list Random portal component with 610 available image subpages Random portal component with 610 available subpages Automated articleslideshow portals with 5011000 articles in article list Random portal component with 1620 available subpages Random portal component with more available subpages than specified max Portals needing placement of incoming links This page was last edited on 28 October 2023 at 0859 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width