Sacred king - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 Study Toggle Study subsection 
2.1 Frazers interpretation 
3 Examples 
4 In fiction 
5 See also 
6 Notes 
7 References 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Sacred king 7 languages Deutsch Espaol   Italiano   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Monarch with a religious significance This article is about the tradition in general. For the ancient Roman position see Rex Sacrorum. For Western tradition see Divine right of kings. For Sinosphere tradition see Mandate of Heaven. Priest king redirects here. For the sculpture belonging to the Indus Valley Civilization see Priestking sculpture. This article includes a list of general references but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. November 2010 Learn how and when to remove this message Figure of Christ from the Ghent Altarpiece 1432. In many historical societies the position of kingship carries a sacral meaning that is it is identical with that of a high priest and judge. The concept of theocracy is related although a sacred king does not need to necessarily rule through his religious authority rather the temporal position itself has a religious significance behind it. Historyedit Sir James George Frazer used the concept of the sacred king in his study The Golden Bough 18901915 the title of which refers to the myth of the Rex Nemorensis.1 Frazer gives numerous examples cited below and was an inspiration for the myth and ritual school.2 However the myth and ritual or mythritualist theory is disputed3 many scholars now believe that myth and ritual share common paradigms but not that one developed from the other.4 According to Frazer the notion has prehistoric roots and occurs worldwide on Java as in subSaharan Africa with shamankings credited with rainmaking and assuring fertility and good fortune. The king might also be designated to suffer and atone for his people meaning that the sacral king could be the preordained victim in a human sacrifice either killed at the end of his term in the position or sacrificed in a time of crisis e.g. the Blt of Domalde. The Ashanti flogged a newly selected king Ashantehene before enthroning him. So that he might remember what it felt like to suffer as a man to restrain him in his thereafter acquired godlike power as the Auriga reminded the conquering hero returning to Rome in his triumph the crowds ecstatic adulation rolling in waves across his ego that he remained but a mortal and must die. From the Bronze Age in the Near East the enthronement and anointment of a monarch is a central religious ritual reflected in the titles Messiah or Christ which became separated from worldly kingship. Thus Sargon of Akkad described himself as deputy of Ishtarcitation needed just as the modern Catholic Pope takes the role of the Vicar of Christ.5 Kings are styled as shepherds from earliest times e.g. the term applied to Sumerian princes such as Lugalbanda in the 
3 rd millennium BCE. The image of the shepherd combines the themes of leadership and the responsibility to supply food and protection as well as superiority. As the mediator between the people and the divine the sacral king was credited with special wisdom e.g. Solomon or Gilgamesh or vision e.g. via oneiromancy. Studyedit Study of the concept was introduced by Sir James George Frazer in his influential book The Golden Bough 18901915 sacral kingship plays a role in Romanticism and Esotericism e.g. Julius Evola and some currents of Neopaganism Theodism. The school of PanBabylonianism derived much of the religion described in the Hebrew Bible from cults of sacral kingship in ancient Babylonia. The socalled British and Scandinavian culthistorical schools maintained that the king personified a god and stood at the center of the national or tribal religion. The English myth and ritual school concentrated on anthropology and folklore while the Scandinavian Uppsala school emphasized Semitological study. Frazers interpretationedit A sacred king according to the systematic interpretation of mythology developed by Frazer in The Golden Bough published 1890 was a king who represented a solar deity in a periodically reenacted fertility rite. Frazer seized upon the notion of a substitute king and made him the keystone of his theory of a universal panEuropean and indeed worldwide fertility myth in which a consort for the Goddess was annually replaced. According to Frazer the sacred king represented the spirit of vegetation a divine John Barleycorn.citation needed He came into being in the spring reigned during the summer and ritually died at harvest time only to be reborn at the winter solstice to wax and rule again. The spirit of vegetation was therefore a dying and reviving god. Osiris Dionysus Attis and many other familiar figures from Greek mythology and classical antiquity were reinterpreted in this mold. The sacred king the human embodiment of the dying and reviving vegetation god was supposed to have originally been an individual chosen to rule for a time but whose fate was to suffer as a sacrifice to be offered back to the earth so that a new king could rule for a time in his stead. Especially in Europe during Frazers early twentieth century heyday it launched a cottage industry of amateurs looking for pagan survivals in such things as traditional fairs maypoles and folk arts like morris dancing. It was widely influential in literature being alluded to by D. H. Lawrence James Joyce Ezra Pound and in T. S. Eliots The Waste Land among other works. Robert Graves used Frazers work in The Greek Myths and made it one of the foundations of his own personal mythology in The White Goddess and in the fictional Seven Days in New Crete he depicted a future in which the institution of a sacrificial sacred king is revived. Margaret Murray the principal theorist of witchcraft as a pagan survival used Frazers work to propose the thesis that many kings of England who died as kings most notably William Rufus were secret pagans and witches whose deaths were the reenactment of the human sacrifice that stood at the centre of Frazers myth.6 This idea used by fantasy writer Katherine Kurtz in her novel Lammas Night. Examplesedit Chakravartin a righteous king derived from Indian religious thought. Devaraja cult of divine kings in Southeast Asia.7 Germanic kingship Holy Roman Emperor Imperial cult The Omukama of Kitara ruled as a heavenly sovereign. The High King of Ireland according to medieval tradition married the sovereignty goddess. Almamyderived from alImam meaning the one leading the prayer in Arabicregnal title of theocratic monarchs of Futa Toro Futa Jallon and West African rulers. The Eze Nri ruler of the defunct Igbo Nri Kingdom in presentday Nigeria. He was addressed as Igwe meaning heavenly one in the Igbo language and has bequeathed his title to the monarch of a contemporary traditional state of the same name. The Emperor of Japan is known in Japanese as Tenn  heavenly sovereign and was formerly believed to be a living kami. The Kende was the sacred king of the Magyars in the 
9 th century.8 The Khagan Ashina The Kings of Luba became deities after death. The temporal power of the papacy Pharaoh title of Ancient Egyptian rulers. The pharaoh adopted names symbolizing holy might. The last vestige of Athenian monarchy Archon basileus mainly retained the duties of overseeing certain religious rites. King of Rome Rex Sacrorum Pontifex Maximus  a title inherited by the papacy Roman triumph according to legend first enacted by Romulus Augustus Son of Heaven East Asian title Shah and Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist Islamic concepts in Iran The kings of Sparta claimed direct descent from Heracles himself and served as hereditary priests. King of Thailand The precolonial emperors and kings of the Yoruba people the Obas and their contemporary successors Madkhalism in Islam Kings in preChristian Scandinavia and England claimed descent from gods such as Odin House of Wessex House of Kntlinga and Freyr Yngling. Scandinavian kings in preChristian times served as priests at sacrifices. Monarchies carried sacral kingship into the Middle Ages encouraging the idea of kings installed by the Grace of God. See Capetian Miracle Royal touch supernatural powers attributed to the kings of England and France The Serbian Nemanji dynasty910 The Hungarian House of rpd known during the Medieval period as the dynasty of the Holy King The PrinceBishops existing in various European countries in Medieval and later times. In fictionedit Many of Rosemary Sutcliffs novels are recognized as being directly influenced by Frazer depicting individuals accepting the burden of leadership and the ultimate responsibility of personal sacrifice including Sword at Sunset The Mark of the Horse Lord and Sun Horse Moon Horse.11 In addition to its appearance in her novel Lammas Night noted above Katherine Kurtz also uses the idea of sacred kingship in her novel The Quest for Saint Camber.12 See alsoedit Apotheosis glorification of a subject to divine level. Avatar Chakravartin Coronation Dyingandrising god Euhemerism Great Catholic Monarch Great King Greek hero cult Jaguars in Mesoamerican cultures Jesus in comparative mythology Katechon  EschatologicalApocalyptic King Monarchy of Thailand  Ayutthayan period Mythological king PrinceBishop Rajamandala Sceptre Winged sun Notesedit  Frazer James George Sir 1922. The Golden Bough. Bartleby.com New York The Macmillan Co. httpwww.bartleby.com1961.html.cite book CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  R Fraser ed. The Golden Bough Oxford 2009 p. 651  Segal Robert A. 2004. Myth A Very Short Introduction. Oxford Oxford UP. pp. 61. ISBN 9780192803474.  Meletinsky Eleazar Moiseevich 2000. The Poetics of Myth. Routledge. p. 117. ISBN 0415928982.  CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA Vicar of Christ. www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 20170823.  Murray Margaret Alice 1954. The Divine King in England a study in anthropology. British Library London Faber  Faber. ISBN 9780404184285.  Sengupta Arputha Rani Ed. 2005. God and King  The Devaraja Cult in South Asian Art  Architecture. National Museum Institute. ISBN 8189233262. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 14 September 2012.  Gyula Krist 1996. Hungarian History in the Ninth Century. Szegedi Kzpkorsz Mhely. p. 136. ISBN 9789634821137.    2006.           .       . ISBN 9788671790444.  Sima M. Cirkovic 2008. The Serbs. John Wiley  Sons. p. 35. ISBN 9781405142915.  Article about Rosemary Sutcliff at the Historical Novels Info website paragraph 15  Katherine Kurtz The Quest for Saint Camber ISBN 0345300998 Ballantine Books 1986 p 360363. Referencesedit General Ronald Hutton The Pagan Religions of the Ancient British Isles Blackwell 1993 ISBN 0631189467 William Smith D.C.L. LL.D. A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities London 1875 J.F. del Giorgio The Oldest Europeans A.J. Place 2006 Claus Westermann Encyclopdia Britannica s.v. sacred kingship. James George Frazer The Golden Bough 
3 rd ed. 12 vol. 191115 reprinted 1990 A.M. Hocart Kingship 1927 reprint 1969 G. van der Leeuw Religion in Essence and Manifestation 1933 English 1938 1986 Geo Widengren Religionsphnomenologie 1969 pp. 360393. Lily Ross Taylor The Divinity of the Roman Emperor 1931 reprint 1981. David Cannadine and Simon Price eds. Rituals of Royalty Power and Ceremonial in Traditional Societies 1987. Henri Frankfort Kingship and the Gods 1948 1978. Colin Morris The Papal Monarchy The Western Church from 1050 to 1250 1989 J.H. Burns Lordship Kingship and Empire The Idea of Monarchy 14001525 1992. English school S.H. Hooke ed.The Labyrinth Further Studies in the Relation Between Myth and Ritual in the Ancient World 1935. S.H. Hooke ed. Myth Ritual and Kingship Essays on the Theory and Practice of Kingship in the Ancient Near East and in Israel 1958. Scandinavian school Geo Widengren Sakrales Knigtum im Alten Testament und im Judentum 1955. Ivan Engnell Studies in Divine Kingship in the Ancient Near East 
2 nd ed. 1967 Aage Bentzen King and Messiah 
2 nd ed. 1948 English 1970. External linksedit article Rex Sacrificulus in Smiths Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities Sacred Kings an ebook on sacred kingship in different cultures v t e Imperial royal and noble styles Forms of address for popes royalty and nobility Africa Ngus Ngst Nkosi Pharaoh Western Holiness Imperial and Royal Majesty HIRM Imperial and Most Faithful Majesty Imperial Majesty HIM Apostolic Majesty HAM Catholic Monarchs Catholic Majesty HCM Most Christian Majesty HMCM Most Faithful Majesty HFM Orthodox Majesty HOM Britannic Majesty HBM Most Excellent Majesty Most Gracious Majesty Royal Majesty HRM Majesty HM Grace HG Royal Highness HRH Monseigneur Msgr Most Eminent Highness HMEH Exalted Highness HEH Highness HH Serene Highness HSH Illustrious Highness HIll.H Excellency HE Most Excellent Most Illustrious Hochgeboren Hochwohlgeboren Wohlgeboren Much Honoured The Much Hon. Milord Millourt Antiquity Ancient Rome Pater Patriae Augustus Sebastos Dominus Georgia Mepe Middle Ages Imperial and Royal Highness HIRH Imperial Highness HIH Royal Highness HRH Grand Ducal Highness HGDH Highness HH Ducal Serene Highness HDSH Serene Highness HSH Serenity HS Illustrious Highness HIll.H Grace HG Excellency HE Asian Baghatur Duli Yang Maha Mulia Great king Khan Khagan King of Kings Maharaja Mikado Shah Shogun Son of Heaven Islamic Amir alMuminin Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques Hadrat Sharif Sultanic Highness Countries France Georgia Netherlands Portugal Serbia Sweden United Kingdom Canada Scotland See also By the Grace of God Divine right of kings Defender of the Faith Fidei defensor Defender of the Holy Sepulchre Great Catholic Monarch List of current sovereign monarchs List of current constituent monarchs Sacred king Translatio imperii Victory title Don honorific WikipediaWikiProject Royalty and Nobility Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSacredkingoldid1221854019 Categories Anthropology of religion Comparative mythology Monarchy Mythological archetypes Mythological kings Paganism Priests Sacrifice Folk religion William II of England Sargon of Akkad Inanna Hidden categories CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking intext citations from November 2010 All articles lacking intext citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014 This page was last edited on 2 May 2024 at 1126 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width