Horus name - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Heraldic appearance 
2 Symbology 
3 Introduction and history 
4 Special serekhs 
5 See also 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Horus name 26 languages  Asturianu Azrbaycanca  Brezhoneg Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto Euskara Franais Galego Bahasa Indonesia  Occitan Polski Portugus Ripoarisch Romn  Slovenina Slovenina Svenska   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Oldest known crest of ancient Egyptian rulers Horus name Serekh name in hieroglyphs sr serekh facade of the palace Serekh of king Djet with the Horus falcon above Serekh of king Peribsen with the image of Set the god of the desert and a sun disc above The Horus name is the oldest known and used crest of ancient Egyptian rulers. It belongs to the great five names of an Egyptian pharaoh. However modern Egyptologists and linguists are starting to prefer the more neutral term the serekh name. This is because not every pharaoh placed the falcon which symbolizes the deity Horus atop his or in some cases her serekh.1 Heraldic appearanceedit The picture of the Horus name is made of two basic elements A sitting or walking figure of a certain deity holds a rectangular ornamental vignette imitating the floor plan of a palace facade and the royal courtyard. The rectangular vignette is called serekh after the Egyptian word for facade. There are countless variations of the facade decor in the serekh. The complexity and detail of the facade decor varied remarkably depending on the object on which it was present. It seems that no strict artistic rules for the design of the serekh itself existed. The name of the pharaoh was written inside the free space that represents the royal courtyard.234 Symbologyedit A granite fragment with Khufus horus name Medjedu on it. The symbolic meaning of the Horus name is still disputed. It seems obvious at least that the name of a king was addressed straight to the deity on top of the serekh. In most cases it was the falcon of the god Horus. This is based on the Egyptian tradition and beliefcitation needed that a living king was commonlyvague the herald and earthly representative of Horus.3 A good example is the name of 
2 nd Dynasty king Raneb. His name was written with the sign of the sun R and the sign of a basket nb. Altogether the name reads Lord of the sun of Horus thus integrating Horus as the royal patron into the kings name.5 Scholars point to the symbolic and expressive strength of the Horus falcon hovering high in the sky stretching out his wings widely and seemingly looking over all of Egypt this heraldic animal represented omnipresence and an outstretching power. Additionally the names of early dynasty kings show when translated an astonishing aggressiveness which clearly expresses the wish of Egyptian kings to be untouchable and undefeatable thanks to the god Horus. During the 
2 nd Dynasty the serekh names of the kings reveal a rather peaceseeking nature expressing the wish of the pharaohs to rule over an unwavering world full of order and harmony the epitheton of the Horus name of King Sekhemib Perenmaat meaning he who achieves Maat is the clearest early expression of this. As already mentioned most Egyptian kings favored Horus as their dynastic name patron.4 In a few cases especially during the midst of the 
2 nd Dynasty at least two serekh names seem to contradict the Horus tradition. The most prominent example is king SethPeribsen. He first replaced the falcon figure of his serekh by the walking animal of the god Seth. Then his name was written in a plural form thus being addressed to Seth as well as to Horus. The serekh names of his followers Sekhemib and Khasekhemwy were similarly built. Khasekhemwy went even further and placed both divine figures of Horus and Seth above his serekh in an attempt to accentuate the dualism of a serekh name. The remarkable behaviours of the 
2 nd Dynasty kings can possibly be explained by the Egyptian belief that a king represented Horus and Seth in the same ways. Maybe said kings simply wished to express this dualism by willingly changing the appearance of the serekh and replacing divine figures on its top.34 Introduction and historyedit Horus name of Shoshenq V Userpehty incised above Nekhbet and Wadjet. Fragment of a plinth black basalt. From Fayum Egypt. 
22 nd Dynasty. The British Museum London As already mentioned the Horus name is the oldest known and used royal title. Its introduction reaches back to the time of the Naqada II period at 3400 BC and its development can be observed on objects from Naqada II to the 
1 st Dynasty. However at the time of introduction the serekhs of kings were yet anonymous. Later the name of the king was written beside the serekh or omitted completely. In many cases the serekh lacks the Horus falcon and in other cases such as the serekh of king Ka the serekh seems to be held by Horus upsidedown.1 During the middle and late Naqada III period 32003030 BC. kings started to write their name inside their serekhs. Some of the bestknown early examples are the names of Scorpion II and Ka. Under these kings the serekh was introduced in its final form.3 During the 
1 st Dynasty an odd fashion can be observed On several clay seals from the Abydene tombs of king HorAha Qaa and queen Meritneith the Horus names of all archaeologically detected kings from Narmer to Qaa are listed in one single and smooth row. All of these Horus names are missing a serekh. The exact reason for this is unknown but it demonstrates complexity within the tradition of royal titulary which is not fully understood even today.1 Special serekhsedit During the introduction and development of the serekh names three examples of special serekhs are of very special interest to Egyptologists and historians. The first example is the serekh of a protodynastic king known as Double Falcon. The serekh of this particular king has a top that is sharply bent inwards at the very middle. The inside of the serekh is filled with a great many little dots. This makes the upper part of the serekh look like the hieroglyphic sign of a twotopped mountain the sign for desert or foreign land. A further curiosity of Double Falcons serekh are the two falcon figures each one resting on one corner atop the bent serekh and facing each other. Egyptologists and historians are convinced that this unusual kings name has a deeper meaning. Most possibly it points to Lower Egypt and Sinai since Double Falcons name has been found only at these two sites.6 A second unusual serekh is that of King HorAha. It shows the Horus falcon reaching into the serekh with his claws and holding a mace and a shield forming the word Aha meaning fighter of Horus. The arrangement is intriguing because normally the Horus falcon and the hieroglyphs inside the serekh were out of reach and independent of one another. The motive and deeper meaning of Ahas serekh are unknown. The third examples of unusual serekhs are those of several queens including the serekh of queen Meritneith. For a long time it was believed by scholars that the royal title of a serekh was reserved for male rulers only. For this reason it was long thought that Meritneith was a man until mud seal impressions revealed the female title mwt nesw mother of the king. The tomb stela of Meritneith also proved the true gender of this queen. Thus queen Meritneith was the first Egyptian female ruler who was allowed to use the serekh. However her serekh is surmounted by the standard of the goddess Neith not by a falcon figure. A similar case is that of the famous queen Hatshepsut of the 
18 th Dynasty. She also used a serekh and like queen Meritneit had long been thought by scholars to have been a man.78 Another queen Sobekneferu of 
12 th Dynasty also used a serekh. She was the first female pharaoh to use the full royal titulary.9 Another possible female pharaoh might have been queen Khentkaus I of 
4 th Dynasty. Nonetheless these cases show that exceptions in the gender allocation of the serekh as a royal title were always possible. In fact the Ancient Egyptians seemed to have no bigger problems with being ruled by a woman.78 See alsoedit Nebty name Serekh Referencesedit  a b c Laurel Bestock The Development of Royal Funerary Cult at Abydos Two Funerary Enclosures from the Reign of Aha  Menes Studien zur Kultur und Sprache der gyptischen Frhzeit und des Alten Reiches vol.6. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2009 ISBN 3447058382 p. 610.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen. Mnchner gyptologische Studien. Bd. 49. Philipp von Zabern Mainz 1999 ISBN 3805325916 p. 79.  a b c d Rolf Gundlach Horus in the Palace The centre of State and Culture in pharaonic Egypt. In Rolf Gundlach John H. Taylor Egyptian royal Residences 4. Symposium zur gyptischen Knigsideologie 
4 th edition London 2004. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2009 ISBN 9783447058889 p. 4568.  a b c Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Strategy Society and Security. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 5657 201202.  Jochem Kahl Ra is my Lord. Searching for the Rise of the Sun God at the Dawn of Egyptian History. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2007 ISBN 3447055405. page 414.  EvaMaria Engel Ein weiterer Beleg fr den Doppelfalken auf einem Serech. In Bulletin of the Egyptian Museum vol. 2 Cairo 2005 p. 6569.  a b Silke Roth Die Knigsmtter des Alten gypten. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2001 ISBN 3447043687 p. 1823.  a b Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 7475.  Michel Valloggia Remarques sur les noms de la reine SbekKaR Nferou Sbek  Revue dgyptologie vol. 16 Paris 1964. p. 4553. v t e Ancient Egyptian titulary Royal titulary Great Royal Wife Khenemetneferhedjet Pharaoh Religious titulary Divine Adoratrice of Amun Gods Wife Gods Wife of Amun High Priest of Amun High Priest of Osiris High Priest of Ptah High Priest of Ra Lector priest Priestess of Hathor Second Prophet of Amun Servant in the Place of Truth Stolist Two Ladies Courtly and administrative titulary Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King Hatya High steward Irypat Khekeretnisut Nomarch Overseer of cattle Overseer of fields Overseer of the treasuries Overseer of Upper Egypt Royal sealer Ancient Egypt Treasurer Viceroy of Kush Vizier Reporter Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHorusnameoldid1220721221 Categories Ancient Egyptian titles Ancient Egyptian language Egyptian mythology Horus Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2018 This page was last edited on 25 April 2024 at 1430 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width