Prenomen (Ancient Egypt) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Title 
2 Use 
3 Introduction and history 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Prenomen Ancient Egypt 19 languages  Asturianu Azrbaycanca Brezhoneg Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto Euskara Franais Galego Nederlands Occitan Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian regnal name dual king in hieroglyphs nswtbjtj He of the Sedge and the Bee Early example of the nswtbjtj crest Pharaoh Nubnefer Second Dynasty. The prenomen also called cartouche name or throne name1 Ancient Egyptian  nswtbjtj of the Sedge and Bee of ancient Egypt was one of the five royal names of pharaohs. The first pharaoh to have a Sedge and Bee name was Den during the First Dynasty.1 Most Egyptologists believe that the prenomen was a regnal name. The first part of the title nisu seems to have referred to the eternal institution of kingship itself. It was in fact the word for king in expressions. The word bjt on the other hand more properly referred to the ephemeral holder of the position. In this way both the divine and the mortal were referenced in the phrase along with the obvious dual division of the northern and southern lands. For these reasons the translation Dual King is preferred today.1 Others think that it originally represented the birth name of the rulers.2 The term of the Sedge and Bee3 is written by the hieroglyphs representing a sedge representing Upper Egypt  Gardiner M23 and a bee representing Lower Egypt  L2 each combined with the feminine ending t  X1 read as nsw.t and bj.t respectively the adjectival nisba ending j is not represented in writing.24 During the first three dynasties the prenomen was depicted either alone or in pair with the Nebty name. Semerkhet was the first pharaoh who devoted his prenomen to the Two Ladies. From Pharaoh Huni the probable last king of the Third Dynasty onward the prenomen was encircled by the cartouche the elongated form of the shen ring.2 Titleedit The nswtbjtj title is recorded from the time of the First Dynasty. It is conventionally paraphrased as Dual King or King of Upper and Lower Egypt but its literal interpretation would be He of sedge and bee. The t hieroglyph X1 is archaically read as tj so that in Old Egyptian the transliteration of the title would be nsw.tjbj.tj. The spelling sw.t.n in the Old Kingdom was initially interpreted as representing swtn or stn now deprecated. Kurt Sethe later proposed the interpretation of nswtj as belonging to the Sutplant. The prepositional n is omitted in the spelling sw.tj. The term nswt is used in reference to the king but not as a title placed before a royal name.5 A rare variant form spells nswt as nzw. In the Amarna Period an Akkadian cuneiform transliteration of the title is recorded as insibiya representing a Late Egyptian pronunciation of approximately nsija. Schenkel 1986 cites a reconstruction of an older Egyptian form based on the cuneiform as jinsiwbjVt where V is an unknown vowel.6 This would seem to cast doubt on the widespread reading of njsw.t bj.tj because a t in this position is preserved in Coptic and would not have been omitted in cuneiform.7 Schenkel and Peust 20078 have also questioned the derivation of nswt from swt sedge considering the swtgraph to be a borrowed sound rather than the emblem of Upper Egypt. In this case nswtbjtj would simply be a combination of two words meaning king. Kahl 2008 attempts a symbolological interpretation of the sedge and the bee as representing Upper and Lower Egypt respectively. According to Kahl the seal of the sprouting reed reveals a rather maternal and protecting function of the king and the seal of the defensive bee represents a rather power and strength seeking character.4 The earliest instances of the use of bjt date back to the time period corresponding to queen Merneiths possible rule between the reigns of Djet and Den in the mid First Dynasty.9 Honey was used in Ancient Egypt as food medicine table offering in temples and shrines and as an important trade ware.10 Additionally the bee sign might have had the meaning of wealth affluence. This might explain as to why the bjtj crest is used when describing offices that were responsible for economic duties such as the Khetemtybity for seal bearer of the bjtjking.11 A military interpretation depicting the bee in reference to its sting has also been proposed.2 The strongest evidence supporting this conclusion comes from the pyramid texts of king Unas and Teti of the late Fifth and early Sixth Dynasty. In these texts the goddess Nut is described as a swarm of bees encircling and devouring the kings enemy.12 Useedit Nswtbjtj crest combined with the nbtj crest top row here king Semerkhet of 
1 st dynasty. Later example of the nswtbjtj crest here introducing a cartouche name Thutmose II Three different uses for the nswtbjtj group of signs are known. First they represented the highest level of command for the king himself as well for his subjects. Thus every title of an official containing the nswt or bjt signs gave the holder the highest executive authority. Examples of such titles are swtjbjtj and swtjnswt. Despite using the bjt and nswt group of signs both titles actually mean sealbearer of the king. However when used separately and in mere economic contexts the titles could have a more specific meaning for example swtjbjtj can be read as sealbearer of the king of Lower Egypt and swtjnswt as seal bearer of the king of Upper Egypt. A unique case seems to be the birth name of the Third Dynasty king Huni his name contains the nswt crest beside the signs for w meaning utterance or appointment or wj for smiting or beating.24 Secondly both sign groups could be used either alone or together to designate the personal property of the pharaoh or an order of him. The former usage is similar to that of the hieroglyph of the sitting falcon while an example of the latter is found in a rock inscription in Sinai dating to the Second Dynasty. The inscription which names the administrator of the desert and general Ankhenity further reads wpwt nswt meaning commissioned by order of the nswt king.2 A similar factum is found in words describing royal actions. The word w nswt for example means royal decree.1 A third symbolic and also practical meaning of nswt lies in its use to express and accentuate relationships in the royal family. Originally the nswt crest expressed a direct blood link with the pharaoh for example in the titles snswt for son of the king and mwtnswt for mother of the king. At some point during the Fifth Dynasty however the titles for son or daughter of the king became honorific and were given to high officials and courtiers alike. Indirect kinships and mere acquaintances with the king were expressed with titles such as smrnswt meaning friendcourtier of the king and rnswt for favorite of the king.2 This kind of expression dates back to the First Dynasty with the titles mry nsw beloved of the king and nmrrnsw living for and beloved by the king appearing during the reign of Djet. Both titles are rare and might point to elite positions held by the title bearers.13 Finally similarly to the nswt crest the bjt crest also expressed royal authority. For example a sealbearer of the bjtking was  alongside the direct relatives of the king  the only one allowed to touch count and seal the personal possessions of the pharaoh.14 When used singly or combined with other symbols nswt and bjt received advanced meanings in Egyptian heraldry especially when connected with administrative andor economic institutions. The sign group prnswt for example meaning house of the king represented the royal household andor the palace of the king.21516 Semerkhet the seventh ruler of the First Dynasty introduced the famous Nebty name as a complementary counterpart to the nswtbjtj crest. Semerkhets predecessor Anedjib had introduced the nbwj name as a heraldic emendation. But nbwj meaning the two lords seemed to include the wrong gender. Semerkhet seemed to seek for a female crest and thus changed the nbwj name into the nbtj name the crest of the Two Ladies Nekhbet and Wadjet. From Semerkhet to Nynetjer the third ruler of the Second Dynasty the nswtbjtj crest appeared in pair with the Nebty name. SethPeribsen possibly Nynetjers direct successor was the first to separate the crests and use the nswtbjtj crest alone again. He used the nbtj crest separately too but peculiarly the name Peribsen was used in all crests.17 Introduction and historyedit The final form of the title nswtbjtj was introduced during the reign of king Horus Den the fifth ruler of the First Dynasty and was then adopted by all subsequent kings. At the time of the introduction of the nswtbjtj crest both groups were already in use separately. The single sign group nsw.t was already in use under king Djer the third king of the dynasty and maybe even under king HorAha his predecessor. The sign group bj.t appeared slightly later during the reign of Den. An interestingcitation needed background is the symbolic implementation of nswt with the White Crown of Upper Egypt and bjt with the Red Crown of Lower Egypt.24 King Djedefre the third ruler of the Fourth Dynasty combined the nswtbjtj crest for the first time with the title SaR Egyptian zr son of R. This title followed the cartouche as an emendation of the birth name.2 King Neferirkare Kakai the third ruler of the Fifth Dynasty was the first who separated the nswtbjtj and the sar crest and turned them into two different independent names nomen and prenomen. Now the title sar introduced the new name and it was also placed in a cartouche. During later times pharaohs often used both names prenomen and nomen in cartouches which sometimes led to confusion amongst Egyptologists in the past. The reason for the confusion was differences between the royal names presented by the ancient historian Manetho and the Ramesside king lists such as the Abydos King List the Saqqara Table and the Turin Canon. Whilst Manetho referred to the nomen the Ramesside king lists used the prenomen. Another reason is that many rulers of later periods used the cartouche versions of their nomen and prenomen separately in different inscriptions. Only in inscriptions that depict both names side by side is it obvious that the two names belong to the same king.18 Referencesedit  a b c d Leprohon Ronald J. 2013. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary. SBL Press. p. 17. ISBN 9781589837362.  a b c d e f g h i j Wilkinson Toby 2002. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge. pp. 63 163 171 1767. ISBN 9781134664207.  Rainer Hannig Groes Handwrterbuch gyptischDeutsch 2800  950 v. Chr. 2006 p. 261.  a b c d Jochem Kahl Nsw und Bit  Die Anfnge. In EvaMaria Engel Vera Mller and others Zeichen aus dem Sand Streiflichter aus gyptens Geschichte zu Ehren von Gnter Dreyer  Menes Series vol. 5. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2008 ISBN 3447058161 p. 315340  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 1999 p. 4.  Wolfgang Schenkel Das Wort fr Knig von Obergypten 1986. University of Heidelberg p. 64.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 1999 p. 16.  Peust Carsten Zur Bedeutung und Etymologie von nzw Knig in Gttinger Miszellen 2007 213 pp. 5962  Kahl 2008324.  Gene Kritsky The Quest for the Perfect Hive A History of Innovation in Bee Culture. University Press Oxford UK 2010 ISBN 0199798958 p.13  Kahl 2008325327.  Jochem Kahl Nsw und Bit  Die Anfnge. In EvaMaria Engel Vera Mller and others Zeichen aus dem Sand Streiflichter aus gyptens Geschichte zu Ehren von Gnter Dreyer  Menes Series vol. 5. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2008 ISBN 3447058161 p. 338340.  Jochem Kahl Nsw und Bit  Die Anfnge. in Engel Evamaria Mller Vera Hartung Ulrich 2008. Zeichen aus dem Sand Streiflichter aus gyptens Geschichte zu Ehren von Gnter Dreyer. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 314. ISBN 9783447058162.  Jochem Kahl Nsw und Bit  Die Anfnge. In Engel Evamaria Mller Vera Hartung Ulrich 2008. Zeichen aus dem Sand Streiflichter aus gyptens Geschichte zu Ehren von Gnter Dreyer. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 325. ISBN 9783447058162.  Jochem Kahl Nsw und Bit. In Engel Evamaria Mller Vera Hartung Ulrich 2008. Zeichen aus dem Sand Streiflichter aus gyptens Geschichte zu Ehren von Gnter Dreyer. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. pp. 307
27 ff. ISBN 9783447058162.  Gardiner Alan 1961. Egypt of the Pharaohs An Introduction. Clarendon Press. p. 52. ISBN 9780195002676.  Wilkinson Toby 2002. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge. pp. 112 174 176. ISBN 9781134664207.  Alan Henderson Gardiner Egypt of the Pharaohs An Introduction  Galaxy books vol. 165. Clarendon Press Oxford UK 1961 ISBN 0195002679 p. 5051. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePrenomenAncientEgyptoldid1182094746 Categories Ancient Egyptian titles Ancient Egyptian language Egyptian mythology Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 This page was last edited on 27 October 2023 at 0240 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width