Wars of Alexander the Great - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Historical campaigns Toggle Historical campaigns subsection 
1.1 Background 
1.2 Balkan campaign 
1.3 Persia 

1.3.1 Asia Minor 

1.3.1 .
1 Battle of the Granicus River 

1.3.1 .
2 Alexander consolidates support in Asia Minor 

1.3.1 .
3 Siege of Halicarnassus 

1.3.2 Syria 

1.3.2 .
1 Battle of Issus 

1.3.2 .
2 Siege of Tyre 

1.3.3 Egypt 

1.3.3 .
1 Siege of Gaza 

1.3.4 Mesopotamia 

1.3.4 .
1 Battle of Gaugamela 

1.3.5 Persis 

1.3.6 Battle of the Persian Gate 
1.4 Siege of the Sogdian Rock 

1.4.1 Bactria 
1.5 Indian campaign 
1.6 Return from India 
2 Battle record 
3 See also 
4 References 
5 Bibliography 
6 Further reading 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wars of Alexander the Great 26 languages Alemannisch    Deutsch  Espaol  Franais   Bahasa Indonesia      Polski Portugus    srpski Svenska    Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Conflicts of Alexander The Great Wars of Alexander the Great Alexander depicted with his horse Bucephalus fighting Persian king Darius III from the Alexander Mosaic of Pompeii Naples National Archaeological Museum Italy Date 336323 BC 13 years Location Greece Illyria Thrace Danube Delta Anatolia Syria Phoenicia Israel Palestine Egypt Mesopotamia Babylonia Persia Afghanistan Sogdia Bactria India Result Macedonian victory Macedonian Empire spans from the Balkans and Egypt in the west to Central Asia and India in the east Beginning of the Hellenistic period Belligerents Macedonian Empire League of Corinth Achaemenid Empire In Balkans Illyrians Thracians Greek Citystates In Western and Central Asia Uxiians Sogdia In India Pauravas Indian tribes and kingdoms Commanders and leaders Alexander the Great Parmenion Antipater Ptolemy Hephaestion Craterus Philotas Cleitus the Black Perdiccas Coenus Lysimachus Antigonus Nearchus Cassander Seleucus Darius III Bessus Arsites Memnon of Rhodes Azemilcus Batis Ariobarzanes Madates Agis III Spitamenes Porus v t e Campaigns of Alexander the Great Balkans Mount Haemus 335 BC Pelium 335 BC Thebes 335 BC Persia Granicus 334 BC Miletus 334 BC Halicarnassus 334 BC Issus 333 BC Tyre 332 BC Gaza 332 BC Gaugamela 331 BC Uxian Defile 331 BC Persian Gate 330 BC Cyropolis 329 BC Jaxartes 329 BC Gabai 328 BC Sogdian Rock 327 BC Indian subcontinent Cophen 327 BC Aornos 326 BC Hydaspes 326 BC Mallian campaign 326 BC v t e Alexanders Balkan campaign Mount Haemus 335 BC Pelium 335 BC Thebes 335 BC v t e Alexanders Persian campaigns Granicus 334 BC Miletus 334 BC Halicarnassus 334 BC Issus 333 BC Tyre 332 BC Gaza 332 BC Gaugamela 331 BC Uxian Defile 331 BC Persian Gate 330 BC Cyropolis 329 BC Jaxartes 329 BC Gabai 328 BC Sogdian Rock 327 BC v t e Alexanders Indian campaign Cophen 327 BC Aornos 326 BC Hydaspes 326 BC Mallian Campaign 326 BC The wars of Alexander the Great Greek     were a series of conquests that were carried out by Alexander III of Macedon from 336 BC to 323 BC. They began with battles against the Achaemenid Persian Empire then under the rule of Darius III of Persia. After Alexanders chain of victories against Achaemenid Persia he began a campaign against local chieftains and warlords that stretched from Greece to as far as the region of Punjab in South Asia. At the time of his death he ruled over most regions of Greece and the conquered Achaemenid Empire including much of Persian Egypt he did not however manage to conquer the Indian subcontinent in its entirety according to his initial plan. Despite his military accomplishments Alexander did not provide any stable alternative to the rule of the Achaemenid Empire1 and his untimely death threw the vast territories he conquered into a series of civil wars commonly known as the Wars of the Diadochi. Alexander assumed kingship over ancient Macedonia following the assassination of his father Philip II of Macedon r.359336 BC. During his two decades on the throne Philip II had unified2 the poleis Greek citystates of mainland Greece with Macedonian hegemony under the League of Corinth.3 Alexander proceeded to solidify Macedonian rule by quashing a rebellion that took place in the southern Greek citystates and also staged a short but bloody excursion against the citystates to the north. He then proceeded east in order to carry out his plans to conquer the Achaemenid Empire. His campaign of conquests from Greece spanned across Anatolia Syria Phoenicia Egypt Mesopotamia Persia Afghanistan and India. He extended the boundaries of his Macedonian Empire as far east as the city of Taxila in modernday Pakistan. Prior to his death Alexander had also made plans for a Macedonian military and mercantile expansion into the Arabian Peninsula after which he planned to turn his armies to Carthage Rome and the Iberian Peninsula in the west. However the Diadochi his political rivals abandoned these plans after he died instead within a few years of Alexanders death the Diadochi began a series of military campaigns against each other and divided the territories of the Macedonian Empire among themselves4 triggering 40 years of warfare during the Hellenistic period. Historical campaignsedit Backgroundedit The Kingdom of Macedon in 332 BC In 336 Philip II was assassinated by the captain of his bodyguard Pausanias.5 Philips son and previously designated heir Alexander was proclaimed king by the Macedonian noblemen and army.6 He also succeeded his father as head of the League of Corinth a confederation of Greek states that were under the hegemony of Macedonia in order to combat the Achaemenid Empire.7 News of Philips death roused many states into revolt including Thebes Athens Thessaly as well as the Thracian tribes to the north of Macedon. When news of the revolt reached Alexander he took quick action. Although his advisers recommended the use of diplomacy Alexander ignored the advice and instead proceeded to gather his Macedonian cavalry of 3000 men. Together the army rode south towards Thessaly Macedons immediate neighbor to the south. When he found the Thessalian army blocking the pass between Mount Olympus and Mount Ossa he had his men ride over Mount Ossa. When the Thessalians awoke they found Alexander at their rear. The Thessalians quickly surrendered and their cavalry was added to Alexanders force. He then proceeded south towards the Peloponnese.8 Alexander stopped at Thermopylae where he was recognized as the leader of the Sacred League before heading south to Corinth. Athens sued for peace and Alexander received the envoy and pardoned anyone involved with the uprising. At Corinth he was given the title Hegemon of the Greek forces against the Persians. Whilst at Corinth he heard the news of a Thracian uprising in the north.9 Balkan campaignedit Main article Alexanders Balkan campaign Before crossing to Asia Alexander wanted to safeguard his northern borders and in the spring of 335 BC he advanced into Thrace to deal with the revolt which was led by the Illyrians and Triballi. At Mount Haemus the Macedonian army attacked and defeated a Thracian garrison manning the heights. The Macedonians were then attacked in the rear by the Triballi who were crushed in turn. Alexander then advanced on to the Danube encountering the Getae tribe on the opposite shore. The Getae army retreated after the first cavalry skirmish leaving their town to the Macedonian army.10 News then reached Alexander that Cleitus King of Illyria and King Glaukias of the Taulantii were in open revolt against Macedonian authority. Alexander defeated each in turn forcing Cleitus and Glaukias to flee with their armies leaving Alexanders northern frontier secure.11 While he was triumphantly campaigning north the Thebans and Athenians rebelled once more. Alexander reacted immediately but while the other cities once again hesitated Thebes decided to resist with the utmost vigor. This resistance was useless however as the city was razed to the ground amid great bloodshed and its territory divided between the other Boeotian cities. The end of Thebes cowed Athens into submission leaving all of Greece at least outwardly at peace with Alexander.12 Persiaedit See also Chronology of the expedition of Alexander the Great into Asia Asia Minoredit In 334 BC Alexander crossed the Hellespont into Asia. It took over one hundred triremes triplebanked galleys to transport the entire Macedonian army but the Persians decided to ignore the movement.13 In these early months Darius still refused to take Alexander seriously or mount a serious challenge to Alexanders movements. Memnon of Rhodes the Greek mercenary who aligned himself with the Persians advocated for a scorched earth strategy. He wanted the Persians to destroy the land in front of Alexander which he hoped would force Alexanders army to starve and then to turn back. The satraps in Anatolia rejected this advice considering it their duty to defend their land.14 Eventually with Alexander advancing deeper into Persian territory Darius ordered all five satraps of the Anatolian provinces to pool their military resources together and confront Alexander. This army was guided by Memnon while absolute command was split among the five satraps.15 Battle of the Granicus Riveredit Map of what would become Alexanders empire The Battle of the Granicus River in May 334 BC was fought in Northwestern Asia Minor modernday Turkey near the site of Troy. After crossing the Hellespont Alexander advanced up the road to the capital of the Satrapy of Phrygia. The various satraps of the Persian Empire gathered their forces at the town of Zelea and offered battle on the banks of the Granicus River. Alexander ultimately fought many of his battles on a river bank. By doing so he was able to minimize the advantage the Persians had in numbers. In addition the deadly Persian chariots were useless on a cramped muddy river bank.citation needed Arrian Diodorus and Plutarch all mention the battle with Arrian providing the most detail. The Persians placed their cavalry in front of their infantry and drew up on the right east bank of the river. The Macedonian line was arrayed with the heavy Phalanxes in the middle Macedonian cavalry led by Alexander on the right and allied Thessalian cavalry led by Parmenion on the left.16 The Persians expected the main assault to come from Alexanders position and moved units from their center to that flank.citation needed Hellenistic marble bust of Alexander dating from 
2 nd
1 st century BC possibly from Alexandria Egypt now at the British Museum Alexanders secondincommand Parmenion suggested crossing the river upstream and attacking at dawn the next day but Alexander attacked immediately. He ordered a small group of cavalry and light infantry to attack from the Macedonian right to draw the Persians off the bank and into the river. Seeing that he had broken the Persian line Alexander led his horse companions in oblique order further to the right in order to outflank the Persians and buy time for his infantry to cross the river.16 Several highranking Persian nobles were killed by Alexander himself or his bodyguards although Alexander was stunned by an axeblow from a Persian nobleman named Spithridates. Before the noble could deal a deathblow however he was killed by Cleitus the Black. The Macedonian cavalry opened a hole in the Persian line as the Macedonian infantry advanced forcing the enemy back and eventually breaking their center. The Persian cavalry turned and fled the battlefield and the Greek mercenary infantry they held in reserve were encircled by the Macedonians and slaughtered only around twothousand of which survived and were sent back to Macedonia for labor.17 Alexander consolidates support in Asia Minoredit After the battle Alexander buried the dead Greeks and Persians and sent the captured Greek mercenaries back to Greece to work in the mines as an abject lesson for any Greek who decided to fight for the Persians. He sent some of the spoils back to Greece including three hundred panoplies complete Persian suits of armor back to Athens to be dedicated in the Parthenon with the inscription Alexander son of Philip and the Greeks Lacedaemonians Spartans excepted these spoils from the barbarians who dwell in Asia.18 Antipater whom Alexander had left in charge of Macedon in his absence had been given a free hand to install dictators and tyrants wherever he saw fit in order to minimize the risk of a rebellion. As he moved deeper into Persia however the threat of trouble seemed to grow. Many of these towns had been ruled for generations by heavy handed tyrants so in these Persian towns he did the opposite of what he did in Greece. Wanting to appear to be a liberator he freed the population and allowed selfgovernment. As he continued marching into Persia he saw that his victory at Granicus had been lost on no one. Town after town seemed to surrender to him. The satrap at Sardis as well as his garrison was among the first of many satraps to capitulate.citation needed As these satraps gave up Alexander appointed new ones to replace them and claimed to distrust the accumulation of absolute power into anyones hands. There appeared to be little change from the old system. Alexander however appointed independent boards to collect tribute and taxes from the satrapies which appeared to do nothing more than improve the efficiency of government. The true effect however was to separate the civil from the financial function of these satrapies thus ensuring that these governments while technically independent of him never truly were. Otherwise he allowed the inhabitants of these towns to continue as they always had and made no attempt to impose Greek customs on them. Meanwhile ambassadors from other Greek cities in Asia Minor came to Alexander offering submission if he allowed their democracies to continue. Alexander granted their wish and allowed them to stop paying taxes to Persia but only if they joined the League of Corinth. By doing so they promised to provide monetary support to Alexander.citation needed Siege of Halicarnassusedit Map of Halicarnassus at the time of the siege The Siege of Halicarnassus was undertaken in 334 BC. Alexander who had a weak navy was constantly being threatened by the Persian navy. It continuously attempted to provoke an engagement with Alexander who would have none of it. Eventually the Persian fleet sailed to Halicarnassus in order to establish a new defense. Ada of Caria the former queen of Halicarnassus had been driven from her throne by her usurping brother. When he died Darius had appointed Orontobates satrap of Caria which included Halicarnassus in its jurisdiction. On the approach of Alexander in 334 BC Ada who was in possession of the fortress of Alinda surrendered the fortress to him. Alexander and Ada appear to have formed an emotional connection. He called her mother finding her more amicable than his megalomaniacal snakeworshiping mother Olympias. In return for his support Ada gave Alexander gifts and even sent him some of the best cooks in Asia Minor realizing that Alexander had a sweet tooth. In the past Alexander had referred to his biological father Philip as his socalled father and preferred to think of the deity Amon Zeus as his actual father. Thus he had finally managed to divorce himself from both of his biological parents.citation needed Orontobates and Memnon of Rhodes entrenched themselves in Halicarnassus. Alexander had sent spies to meet with dissidents inside the city who had promised to open the gates and allow Alexander to enter. When his spies arrived however the dissidents were nowhere to be found. A small battle resulted and Alexanders army managed to break through the city walls. Memnon however now deployed his catapults and Alexanders army fell back. Memnon then deployed his infantry and shortly before Alexander would have received his first and only defeat his infantry managed to break through the city walls surprising the Persian forces and killing Orontobates. Memnon realizing the city was lost set fire to it and withdrew with his army. A strong wind caused the fire to destroy much of the city. Alexander then committed the government of Caria to Ada and she in turn formally adopted Alexander as her son ensuring that the rule of Caria passed unconditionally to him upon her eventual death.citation needed Syriaedit Shortly after the battle Memnon died. His replacement was a Persian who had spent time in Macedonia called Pharnabazus. He disrupted Alexanders supply routes by taking Aegean islands near the Hellespont and by fomenting rebellion in southern Greece. Meanwhile Darius took the Persian army to intercept Alexander. Alexander marched his army east through Cappadocia where for a stretch of nearly 150 km 93 mi there was no water. As his army approached Mount Taurus they found only one route through which to pass which was a narrow defile called The Gates. The defile was very narrow and could have been easily defended. However the Persian satrap of Cappadocia had an inflated view of his own abilities. He had been at the Battle of the Granicus River and had believed that Memnons scorched Earth strategy would work here. He did not realize that the different circumstances of the terrain made that strategy useless. Had he mounted a credible defence of the defile Alexander would have been easily repulsed. He left only a small contingent to guard the defile and took his entire army to destroy the plain that lay ahead of Alexanders army. The Persian contingent that was supposed to guard the defile soon abandoned it and Alexander passed through without any problems. Alexander supposedly said after this incident that he had never been so lucky in his entire career.citation needed After reaching Mount Taurus Alexanders army found a stream that flowed from the mountain with water that was ice cold. Not thinking Alexander jumped into the stream suffered a cramp and then a convulsion and was pulled out nearly dead. He quickly developed pneumonia but none of his physicians would treat him because they feared that if he died they would be held responsible. One physician named Philip who had treated Alexander since he was a child agreed to treat him. Although he soon fell into a coma he eventually recovered.citation needed Battle of Issusedit Alexanders decisive attack The Battle of Issus took place in southern Anatolia on November 333 BC.7 After Alexanders forces defeated the Persians at the Battle of the Granicus Darius took personal charge of his army gathered a large army from the depths of the empire and maneuvered to cut the Greek line of supply requiring Alexander to countermarch his forces setting the stage for the battle near the mouth of the Pinarus River and south of the village of Issus. Darius was apparently unaware that by deciding to stage the battle on a river bank he was minimizing the numerical advantage his army had over Alexanders.19 Initially Alexander chose what was apparently unfavorable ground. This surprised Darius who mistakenly elected to hold the wrong position while Alexander instructed his infantry to take up a defensive posture. Alexander personally led the more elite Greek Companion cavalry against the Persian left up against the hills and cut up the enemy on the less encumbering terrain thereby generating a quick rout. After achieving a breakthrough Alexander demonstrated he could do the difficult thing and held the cavalry in check after it broke the Persian right. Alexander then mounted his beloved horse Bucephalus took his place at the head of his Companion cavalry and led a direct assault against Darius. The horses that were pulling Darius chariot were injured and began tossing at the yoke. Darius about to fall off his chariot instead jumped off. He threw his royal diadem away mounted a horse and fled the scene. The Persian troops realizing they had lost either surrendered or fled with their hapless king. The Macedonian cavalry pursued the fleeing Persians for as long as there was light. As with most ancient battles significant carnage occurred after the battle as pursuing Macedonians slaughtered their crowded disorganized foe.citation needed The invading troops led by Alexander were outnumbered more than 21 yet they defeated the army personally led by Darius III of Achaemenid Persia. The battle was a decisive Macedonian victory and it marked the beginning of the end of Persian power. It was the first time the Persian army had been defeated with the King present on the field. Darius left his wife and an enormous amount of treasure behind as his army fled. The greed of the Macedonians helped to persuade them to keep going as did the large number of Persian concubines and prostitutes they picked up in the battle. Darius now fearing for both his throne and his life sent a letter to Alexander in which he promised to pay a substantial ransom in exchange for the prisoners of war and agreeing to a treaty of alliance with and the forfeiture of half of his empire to Alexander. Darius received a response which began King Alexander to Darius. In the letter Alexander blamed Darius for his fathers death and claimed Darius was but a vulgar usurper who planned to take Macedonia. He agreed to return the prisoners without ransom but told Darius that he and Alexander were not equals and that Darius was to henceforth address Alexander as King of all Asia. Darius was also curtly informed that if he wanted to dispute Alexanders claim to the Achaemenid throne that he would have to stand and fight and that if he instead fled Alexander would pursue and kill him. By this Alexander revealed for the first time that his plan was to conquer the entire Persian Empire.citation needed Siege of Tyreedit A naval action during the siege Drawing by Andr Castaigne The Siege of Tyre occurred in 332 BC when Alexander set out to conquer Tyre a strategic coastal base. Tyre was the site of the only remaining Persian port that did not capitulate to Alexander. Even by this point in the war the Persian navy still posed a major threat to Alexander. Tyre the largest and most important citystate of Phoenicia was located both on the Mediterranean coast as well as a nearby Island with two natural harbors on the landward side. At the time of the siege the city held approximately 40000 people though the women and children were evacuated to Carthage an ancient Phoenician colony.citation needed Alexander sent an envoy to Tyre proposing a peace treaty and asked to visit their city and offer sacrifices to their God Melqart. The Tyrians politely told Alexander that their town was neutral in the war and that allowing him to offer sacrifices to Melqart would be tantamount to recognizing him as their king. Alexander considered building a causeway that would allow his army to take the town by force. His engineers did not believe it would be possible to build such a massive structure and so Alexander sent peace envoys once more to propose an alliance. The Tyrians believed this to be a sign of weakness and so they killed the envoys and threw their bodies over the city wall. The dissent against Alexanders plans to take the city by force disappeared and his engineers began to design the structure. Alexander began with an engineering feat that shows the true extent of his brilliance as he could not attack the city from sea he built a kilometerlong causeway stretching out to the island on a natural land bridge no more than two meters deep.20 Alexander then constructed two towers 150 feet high and moved them to the end of the causeway. The Tyrians however quickly devised a counterattack. They used an old horse transport ship filling it with dried branches pitch sulfur and various other combustibles. They then lit it on fire creating what we might call a primitive form of napalm and ran it up onto the causeway. The fire spread quickly engulfing both towers and other siege equipment that had been brought up.citation needed This convinced Alexander that he would be unable to take Tyre without a navy. Fate would soon provide him with one. Presently the Persian navy returned to find their home cities under Alexanders control. Since their allegiance was to their city they were therefore Alexanders. He now had eighty ships. This coincided with the arrival of another hundred and twenty from Cyprus which had heard of his victories and wished to join him. Alexander then sailed on Tyre and quickly blockaded both ports with his superior numbers. He had several of the slower galleys and a few barges refit with battering rams the only known case of battering rams being used on ships. Alexander started testing the wall at various points with his rams until he made a small breach in the south end of the island. He then coordinated an attack across the breach with a bombardment from all sides by his navy. Once his troops forced their way into the city they easily overtook the garrison and quickly captured the city. Those citizens that took shelter in the temple of Heracles were pardoned by Alexander. It is said that Alexander was so enraged at the Tyrians defense and the loss of his men that he destroyed half the city. Alexander granted pardon to the king and his family whilst 30000 residents and foreigners taken were sold into slavery. There was a family though that Alexander gave a very high position in his government but the only contact he ever had with them was when he spent the night with the wife of the household.citation needed Egyptedit Siege of Gazaedit Main article Siege of Gaza 332 BCE The stronghold at Gaza was built on a hill and was heavily fortified.21 The inhabitants of Gaza and their Nabataean allies did not want to lose the lucrative trade which was controlled by Gaza.21 Alexander Mosaic showing Battle of Issus from the House of the Faun Pompeii Batis the commander of the fortress of Gaza refused to surrender to Alexander. Though a eunuch Batis was physically imposing and ruthless. After three unsuccessful assaults the stronghold was finally taken by force22 but not before Alexander received a serious shoulder wound. When Gaza was taken the male population was put to the sword and the women and children were sold into slavery. According to the Roman historian Quintus Curtius Rufus Batis was killed by Alexander in imitation of Achilles treatment of the fallen Hector. A rope was forced through Batiss ankles probably between the ankle bone and the Achilles tendon and Batis was dragged alive by chariot beneath the walls of the city. Alexander who admired courage in his enemies and might have been inclined to show mercy to the brave Persian general was infuriated at Batiss refusal to kneel and by the enemy commanders haughty silence and contemptuous manner. With Gaza taken Alexander marched into Egypt. His entry was described as closer to a triumphant procession than an invasion.7 They welcomed Alexander as their king placed him on the throne of the Pharaohs7 giving him the crown of Upper and Lower Egypt and named him the incarnation of Ra and Osiris. He set in motion plans to build Alexandria and though future tax revenues would be channeled to him he left Egypt under the management of Egyptians which helped to win him their support. citation needed Mesopotamiaedit Battle of Gaugamelaedit The Battle of Gaugamela took place in 331 BC in what is now Iraqi Kurdistan possibly near Dohuk2324 and resulted in a decisive victory for the Macedonians. After the Siege of Gaza Alexander advanced from Syria towards the heart of the Persian Empire crossing both the Euphrates and the Tigris rivers without any opposition. Darius was building up a massive army drawing men from the far reaches of his empire and planned to use sheer numbers to crush Alexander. Though Alexander had conquered part of the Persian empire it was still vast in area and in manpower reserves and Darius could recruit more men than Alexander could dream of. Also present in the Persian army a sign that the Persians were still very powerful were the feared war elephants. While Darius had a significant advantage in number of soldiers most of his troops were not as organized as Alexanders.citation needed Alexanders decisive attack The battle began with the Persians already present at the battlefield. Darius had recruited the finest cavalry from his eastern satrapies. Darius placed himself in the center with his best infantry as was the tradition among Persian kings. The Macedonians were divided into two with the right side of the army falling under the direct command of Alexander and the left to Parmenion. Alexander began by ordering his infantry to march in phalanx formation towards the center of the enemy line. Darius now launched his chariots which were intercepted by the Agrianians and quickly rendered useless. Alexander while leading the charge formed his units into a giant wedge which quickly smashed right into the weakened Persian center. Darius charioteer was killed by a spear and chaos rang out as everyone incorrectly thought it was Darius who had been killed. The Persian line then collapsed and Darius fled. Darius escaped with a small core of his forces remaining intact although the Bactrian cavalry and Bessus soon caught up with him. The remaining Persian resistance was quickly put down. In all the Battle of Gaugamela was a disastrous defeat for the Persians and possibly one of Alexanders finest victories.citation needed Persisedit Alexanders first victory over the Persian king Darius depicted in medieval European style in the 
15 th century romance The History of Alexanders Battles After the battle Parmenion rounded up the Persian baggage train while Alexander and his own bodyguard chased after Darius in hopes of catching up. Substantial amounts of loot were gained following the battle with 4000 talents captured as well as the Kings personal chariot and bow. Darius planned to head further east and raise another army to face Alexander while he and the Macedonians headed to one of the Persian capitals Babylon and then to another Susa. There Alexander found wealth that even he had never imagined possible. He paid his troops and sent a sum of money six times the annual income of Athens to Greece in order to put down a Spartan rebellion. Darius meanwhile dispatched letters to his eastern satrapies asking them to remain loyal. The satrapies however had other intentions and quickly capitulated to Alexander.citation needed Bessus fatally stabbed Darius before fleeing eastwards. Darius was found by one of Alexanders scouts moaning in pain. Darius dying and chained to a baggage train being pulled by an ox was lying next to a lone dog and his royal robes were covered in blood. He asked for water and then clutching the Macedonian soldiers hand said that he was thankful that he would not die utterly alone and abandoned. Alexander who may have felt genuinely saddened at Darius death buried Darius next to his Achaemenid predecessors in a full military funeral. Alexander claimed that while dying Darius had named Alexander as his successor to the Achaemenid throne and had asked Alexander to avenge his death a striking irony since it was Alexander who had pursued him to his death. The Achaemenid Persian Empire is considered to have fallen with the death of Darius.citation needed Alexander viewing himself as the legitimate Achaemenid successor to Darius viewed Bessus as a usurper to the Achaemenid throne and eventually found and executed this usurper. The majority of the existing satraps were to give their loyalty to Alexander and be allowed to keep their positions. Alexanders troops now thought the war was over. Alexander was unsure how to deal with this so he decided to scare them into submission. He gave a speech arguing that their conquests were not secure that the Persians did not want the Greeks to remain in their country and that only the strength of Macedon could secure the country. The speech worked and Alexanders troops agreed to remain with him. Alexander now the Persian King of Kings adopted Persian dress and mannerisms which in time the Greeks began to view as decadent and autocratic. They began to fear that Alexander the king they had heroworshiped was turning into an eastern despot although a young eunuch was eventually introduced to Alexander and helped to keep his decadence in check.citation needed Battle of the Persian Gateedit Main article Battle of the Persian Gate Map of the Persian Gate In the winter of 330 BC at the Battle of the Persian Gate northeast of todays Yasuj in Iran the Persian satrap Ariobarzanes led a last stand of the Persian forces.2526 After the Battle of Gaugamela in presentday Iraqi Kurdistan Alexander had advanced to Babylon and Susa. A Royal Road connected Susa with the more eastern capitals of Persepolis and Pasargadae in Persis the Persian Empire had several capitals and was the natural venue for Alexanders continued campaign. After the conquest of Susa Alexander split the Macedonian army into two parts. Alexanders general Parmenion took one half along the Royal Road and Alexander himself took the route towards Persis. Passing into Persis required traversing the Persian Gates a narrow mountain pass that lent itself easily to ambush.27 Believing that after his victory over the Uxians he would not encounter any more enemy forces during his march Alexander neglected to send scouts ahead of his vanguard and thus walked into Ariobarzanes ambush. Once the Macedonian army had advanced sufficiently into the narrow pass the Persians rained down boulders on them from the northern slopes. From the southern slope Persian archers and catapults launched their projectiles. Alexanders army initially suffered heavy casualties losing entire platoons at a time.28 Ariobarzanes had hoped that defeating Alexander at the Persian Gates would allow the Persians more time to field another army and possibly stop the Macedonian invasion altogether. Ariobarzanes held the pass for a month29 but Alexander succeeded in encircling the Persian army and broke through the Persian defenses. The defeat of Ariobarzaness forces at the Persian Gate removed the last military obstacle between Alexander and Persepolis. Upon his arrival at the city of Persepolis Alexander appointed a general named Phrasaortes as successor of Ariobarzanes. Four months later Alexander allowed the troops to loot Persepolis. A fire broke out and spread to the rest of the city. It is not clear if it had been a drunken accident or a deliberate act of revenge for the burning of the Acropolis of Athens during the Second GrecoPersian War.30 Siege of the Sogdian Rockedit Bactriaedit In 329 BC Alexander launched the Siege of Cyropolis and fought against the Sakas in Battle of Jaxartes. After Alexander defeated the last of the Achaemenid Empires forces in battle of Gabai against Spitamenes and Coenus Koinos one Alexander the Greats generals in 328 BC he began a new campaign to Ariana in 327 BC. He wanted to conquer the entire known world which in Alexanders day ended on the eastern end of India. Greeks of Alexanders day knew nothing of China or any other lands east of Bactria. The Siege of the Sogdian Rock a fortress located north of Bactria in Sogdiana occurred in 327 BC. Oxyartes of Bactria had sent his wife and daughters one of whom was Roxana to take refuge in the fortress as it was thought to be impregnable and was provisioned for a long siege. When Alexander asked the defenders to surrender they refused telling him that he would need men with wings to capture it. Alexander asked for volunteers whom he would reward if they could climb the cliffs under the fortress. There were some 300 men who from previous sieges had gained experience in rockclimbing. Using tentpegs and strong flaxen lines they climbed the cliff face at night losing about 30 of their number during the ascent. In accordance with Alexanders orders they signaled their success to the troops below by waving bits of linen and Alexander sent a herald to shout the news to the enemys advanced posts that they might now surrender without further delay. The defenders were so surprised and demoralized by this that they surrendered. Alexander fell in love with Roxana whom ancient historians call the most beautiful woman in the world not an uncommon claim for an ancient queen on sight and eventually married her. The story of the siege is told by the Roman historian Arrian of Nicomedia in Anabasis section 
4.1 
8.4 
19.6 .citation needed Indian campaignedit Main articles Indian campaign of Alexander the Great and Battle of the Hydaspes Campaigns and landmarks of Alexanders invasion of the Indian subcontinent After the death of Spitamenes and his marriage to Roxana Roshanak in Bactrian to cement his relations with his new Central Asian satrapies Alexander was finally free to turn his attention to the Indian subcontinent. Alexander invited all the chieftains of the former satrapy of Gandhara in the north of what is now Jhelum River Pakistani region Modern History to come to him and submit to his authority. Omphis ruler of Taxila whose kingdom extended from the Indus to the Hydaspes complied but the chieftains of some hill clans including the Aspasioi and Assakenoi sections of the Kambojas known in Indian texts also as Ashvayanas and Ashvakayanas refused to submit. In the winter of 327326 BC Alexander personally led a campaign against these clans the Aspasioi of Kunar valley the Guraeans of the Guraeus valley and the Assakenoi of the Swat and Buner valleys.31 A fierce contest ensued with the Aspasioi in which Alexander himself was wounded in the shoulder by a dart but eventually the Aspasioi lost the fight. Alexander then faced the Assakenoi who fought bravely and offered stubborn resistance to Alexander in the strongholds of Massaga Ora and Aornos. The fort of Massaga could only be reduced after several days of bloody fighting in which Alexander himself was wounded seriously in the ankle. According to Curtius Not only did Alexander slaughter the entire population of Massaga but also did he reduce its buildings to rubbles.32 A similar slaughter then followed at Ora another stronghold of the Assakenoi. In the aftermath of Massaga and Ora numerous Assakenians fled to the fortress of Aornos. Alexander followed close behind their heels and captured the strategic hillfort after the fourth day of a bloody fight. This fight was the challenge Alexander was looking for an army with huge elephants that were almost able to defeat Alexander. A painting by Charles Le Brun depicting Alexander and Porus Puru during the Battle of the Hydaspes. After gaining control of the former Achaemenid satrapy of Gandhara including the city of Taxila Alexander advanced into Punjab where he engaged in battle against the regional king Porus whom Alexander defeated in the Battle of the Hydaspes in 326 BC3334 but was so impressed by the demeanor with which the king carried himself that he allowed Porus to continue governing his own kingdom as a satrap.35 Although victorious Battle of the Hydaspes was also the most costly battle fought by the Macedonians.36 East of Porus kingdom near the Ganges River was the powerful Nanda Empire of Magadha. According to the Greek sources the Nanda army was five times larger than the Macedonian army.37 Fearing the prospects of facing the powerful Nanda Empire armies and exhausted by years of campaigning his army mutinied at the Hyphasis River refusing to march further east. This river thus marks the easternmost extent of Alexanders conquests. As for the Macedonians however their struggle with Porus blunted their courage and stayed their further advance into India. For having done all they could do to repulse an enemy who mustered only twenty thousand infantry and two thousand horse they violently opposed Alexander when he insisted on crossing the river Ganges also the width of which as they learned was thirtytwo furlongs its depth a hundred fathoms while its banks on the further side were covered with multitudes of menatarms and horsemen and elephants. For they were told that the kings of the Ganderites and Praesii were awaiting them with eighty thousand horsemen two hundred thousand footmen eight thousand chariots and six thousand fighting elephants.38 Asia in 323 BC the Nanda Empire and Gangaridai Empire of Ancient India in relation to Alexanders Empire and neighbors Alexander spoke to his army and tried to persuade them to march further into India but Coenus pleaded with him to change his opinion and return the men he said longed to again see their parents their wives and children their homeland. Alexander seeing the unwillingness of his men agreed and diverted. Along the way his army conquered the Malli clans in modernday Multan. In the territory of the Indus he nominated his officer Peithon as a satrap a position he would hold for the next ten years until 316 BC and in the Punjab he left Eudemus in charge of the army at the side of the satrap Porus and Taxiles. Eudemus became ruler of a part of the Punjab after their death. Both rulers returned to the West in 316 BC with their armies. In 321 BC Chandragupta Maurya founded the Maurya Empire in India and overthrew the Greek satraps. Return from Indiaedit Alexander now sent much of his army to Carmania modern southern Iran with his general Craterus and commissioned a fleet to explore the Persian Gulf shore under his admiral Nearchus while he led the rest of his forces back to Persia by the southern route through the Gedrosian Desert now part of southern Iran and Makran now part of Pakistan. According to Plutarch during the 
60 day march through the desert Alexander lost threequarters of his army to the harsh desert conditions along the way.39 Battle recordedit Outcome Date War Action Opponents Type Country present day Rank Victory 3380802 2 August 338 BC Philip IIs submission of Greece Chaeronea Battle of Chaeronea .Thebans Athenians and other Greek cities Battle Greece Prince  Victory 335 335 BC Balkan Campaign Mount Haemus Battle of Mount Haemus .Getae Thracians Battle Bulgaria King  Victory 33512 December 335 BC Balkan Campaign Pelium Siege of Pelium .Illyrians Siege Albania King  Victory 33512 December 335 BC Balkan Campaign Pelium Battle of Thebes .Thebans Battle Greece King  Victory 33405 May 334 BC Persian Campaign Granicus Battle of the Granicus .Achaemenid Empire Battle Turkey King  Victory 334 334 BC Persian Campaign Miletus Siege of Miletus .Achaemenid Empire Milesians Siege Turkey King  Victory 334 334 BC Persian Campaign Halicarnassus Siege of Halicarnassus .Achaemenid Empire Siege Turkey King  Victory 3331105 5 November 333 BC Persian Campaign Issus Battle of Issus .Achaemenid Empire Battle Turkey King  Victory 332 JanuaryJuly 332 BC Persian Campaign Tyre Siege of Tyre .Achaemenid Empire Tyrians Siege Lebanon King  Victory 33210 October 332 BC Persian Campaign Tyre Siege of Gaza .Achaemenid Empire Siege Palestine King  Victory 3311001 1 October 331 BC Persian Campaign Gaugamela Battle of Gaugamela .Achaemenid Empire Battle Iraq King  Victory 33112 December 331 BC Persian Campaign Uxian Defile Battle of the Uxian Defile .Uxians Battle Iran King  Victory 3300120 20 January 330 BC Persian Campaign Persian Gate Battle of the Persian Gate .Achaemenid Empire Battle Iran King  Victory 329 329 BC Persian Campaign Cyropolis Siege of Cyropolis .Sogdians Siege Turkmenistan King  Victory 32910 October 329 BC Persian Campaign Jaxartes Battle of Jaxartes .Scythians Battle Uzbekistan King  Victory 327 327 BC Persian Campaign Sogdian Rock Siege of the Sogdian Rock .Sogdians Siege Uzbekistan King  Victory 327 May 327  March 326 BC Indian Campaign Cophen Cophen campaign .Aspasians Expedition Afghanistan and Pakistan King  Victory 32604 April 326 BC Indian Campaign Aornos Siege of Aornos .Avaka Siege Pakistan King  Victory 32605 May 326 BC Indian Campaign Hydaspes Battle of the Hydaspes .Porus Battle Pakistan King  Victory 325 November 326  February 325 BC Indian Campaign Aornos Siege of Multan .Malli Siege Pakistan King  See alsoedit Ancient Macedonian army Military tactics of Alexander the Great Wars of Cyrus the Great Diadochi RomanPersian wars Referencesedit  Freeman Charles. The Greek Achievement The Foundation of the Western World. Allen Lane 1999. ISBN 9780713992243. p.172 In scope and extent his achievements ranked far above that of the Macedonian king Alexander the Great who was to demolish the empire in the 3
20 s but failed to provide any stable alternative.  Bowra C. Maurice 1994 1957. The Greek Experience. London Phoenix Orion Books Ltd. p. 9. ISBN 9781857991222.  Sacks David 1995 Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek World London Constable and Co. Ltd ISBN 9780094752702 p. 16.  Strudwick 2013 p. 97.  Philip II king of Macedonia. Britannica. Encyclopdia Britannica Inc. 11 July 2023.  McCarty Alexander the Great p. 3031. Plutarch The Age of Alexander p. 262263 Renault The Nature of Alexander the Great p. 6162 Fox The Search For Alexander p. 72  a b c d Strudwick 2013 p. 96.  McCarty Alexander the Great p. 31. Plutarch The Age of Alexander p. 263 Renault The Nature of Alexander the Great p. 72 Fox The Search For Alexander p. 104 Bose Alexander the Greats Art of Strategy p. 95  Bose Alexander the Greats Art of Strategy p. 96. Renault The Nature of Alexander the Great p. 72  Arrian The Campaigns of Alexander p. 4448. Renault The Nature of Alexander the Great p. 7374.  Arrian The Campaigns of Alexander p. 5054. Renault The Nature of Alexander the Great p. 77.  Plutarch. Phocion. p. 17.  cf. Justinus Marcus Junianus. Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus. p. 
11.6 .  Strauss Barry. Masters of Command. p. 50.  Strauss Barry. Masters of Command. p. 48.  a b Strauss Barry. Masters of Command. p. 51.  Strauss Barry. Masters of Command. pp. 5153.  httpsissuu.comsonjcemarcevadocsalexanderthegreathistoricalso Archived 8 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine see page 72 Arrian 
1.1 
6.7 .  Murison C. L. 1972. Darius III and the Battle of Issus. Historia Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte. 21 3 399423. ISSN 00182311. JSTOR 4435274.  Stafford Ned 14 May 2007. How geology came to help Alexander the Great. Nature.com. Retrieved 17 May 2007.  a b Siege of Tyre and Gaza. Retrieved 19 January 2007.  Leaders and Battles Gaza Siege of. Leaders and Battles Database. Archived from the original on 22 October 2006. Retrieved 18 January 2007.  KurdishGlobe The Location of the Battle of Gaugamela Discovered. www.kurdishglobe.net. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014.  The Location of the Battle of Gaugamela Discovered  The Kurdish Globe Erbil Iraq  HighBeam Research. 24 September 2015. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.  Robinson Cyril Edward 1929. A History of Greece. Methuen  Company Limited. ISBN 9781846031083.permanent dead link  Farrokh Kaveh 24 April 2007. Shadows in the Desert Ancient Persia at War General Military. Osprey Publishing. p. 106. ISBN 9781846031083.permanent dead link ISBN 9781846031083.  For the identification see Henry Speck Alexander at the Persian Gates. A Study in Historiography and Topography in American Journal of Ancient History n.s. 
1.1  2002 15234 more... Archived 18 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine.  Quintus Curtius Rufus  N. G. L. Hammond 1992. The Archaeological and Literary Evidence for the Burning of the Persepolis Palace The Classical Quarterly 42 2 p. 358364.  John Prevas 2005. Envy of the Gods Alexander the Greats IllFated Journey Across Asia. Da Capo Press. p. 38. ISBN 9780306814426.permanent dead link  Narain A. K. 1965. Alexander the Great Greece and Rome  12. pp. 155165.  Curtius in McCrindle Op cit p 192 J. W. McCrindle History of Punjab Vol I 1997 p 229 Punajbi University Patiala Editors Fauja Singh L. M. Joshi Kambojas Through the Ages 2005 p 134 Kirpal Singh.  Fuller p. 198 While the battle raged Craterus forced his way over the Haranpur ford. When he saw that Alexander was winning a brilliant victory he pressed on and as his men were fresh took over the pursuit.  The Anabasis of AlexanderBook VChapter XVIII  The Anabasis of AlexanderBook VChapter XIX  Peter Connolly. Greece and Rome at War. Macdonald Phoebus Ltd 1981 p. 66  BongardLevin G. 1979. A History of India. Moscow Progress Publishers. p. 264.  Plutarch Alexander. p. 62.  Plutarch  Life of Alexander Part 7 of 7. penelope.uchicago.edu. Bibliographyedit Arrian 1976 1
40 s AD. The Campaigns of Alexander. trans. Aubrey de Slincourt. Penguin Books. ISBN 9780140442533. Bowra C. Maurice 1994 1957. The Greek Experience. London Phoenix Orion Books Ltd. p. 9. ISBN 9781857991222. Farrokh Kaveh 24 April 2007. Shadows in the Desert Ancient Persia at War General Military. Osprey Publishing. p. 106. ISBN 9781846031083.permanent dead link ISBN 9781846031083. Lane Fox Robin 1973. Alexander the Great. Allen Lane. ISBN 9780860077077. Lane Fox Robin 1980. The Search for Alexander. Little Brown  Co. Boston. ISBN 9780316291088. Green Peter 1992. Alexander of Macedon 356323 B.C. A Historical Biography. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520071667. Plutarch 2004. Life of Alexander. Modern Library. ISBN 9780812971330. Renault Mary 1979. The Nature of Alexander. Pantheon Books. ISBN 9780394738253. Robinson Cyril Edward 1929. A History of Greece. Methuen  Company Limited. ISBN 9781846031083.permanent dead link Strudwick Helen 2013. The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. London Amber Books. ISBN 9781435146549. Wilcken Ulrich 1997 1932. Alexander the Great. W. W. Norton  Company. ISBN 9780393003819. Worthington Ian 2003. Alexander the Great. Routledge. ISBN 9780415291873. Worthington Ian 2004. Alexander the Great Man and God. Pearson. ISBN 9781405801621. Further readingedit Alexander the Great in Fact and Fiction edited by A.B. Bosworth E.J. Baynham. New York Oxford University Press USA 2002 Paperback ISBN 9780199252756. Baynham Elizabeth. Alexander the Great The Unique History of Quintus Curtius. Ann Arbor University of Michigan Press 1998 hardcover ISBN 9780472108589 2004 paperback ISBN 9780472030811. Brills Companion to Alexander the Great by Joseph Roisman editor. Leiden Brill Academic Publishers 2003. Cartledge Paul. Alexander the Great The Hunt for a New Past. Woodstock NY New York The Overlook Press 2004 hardcover ISBN 9781585675654 London PanMacmillan 2004 hardcover ISBN 9781405032926 Vintage 2005 paperback ISBN 9781400079193. Dahmen Karsten. The Legend of Alexander the Great on Greek and Roman Coins. Oxford Routledge 2006 hardcover ISBN 9780415394512 paperback ISBN 9780415394529. De Santis Marc G. At The Crossroads of Conquest. Military Heritage December 2001. Volume 3 No. 3 4655 97 Alexander the Great his military his strategy at the Battle of Gaugamela and his defeat of Darius making Alexander the King of Kings. Fuller J.F. C A Military History of the Western World From the Earliest Times to the Battle of Lepanto New York Da Capo Press Inc. 1987 and 1988. ISBN 9780306803048 Gergel Tania Editor Alexander the Great 2004 published by the Penguin Group London ISBN 9780142001400 Brief collection of ancient accounts translated into English Larsen Jakob A. O. Alexander at the Oracle of Ammon Classical Philology Vol. 27 No. 1. January 1932 pp. 7075. Lonsdale David. Alexander the Great Killer of Men Historys Greatest Conqueror and the Macedonian Way of War New York Carroll  Graf 2004 ISBN 9780786714292 Pearson Lionel Ignacius Cusack. The Lost Histories of Alexander the Great. Chicago Ridge IL Ares Publishers 2004 paperback ISBN 9780890055908. Thomas Carol G. Alexander the Great in his World Blackwell Ancient Lives. Oxford Blackwell Publishers 2006 hardcover ISBN 9780631232452 paperback ISBN 9780631232469. External linksedit Wars of Alexander the Great at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Primary sources Plutarch Of the Fortune or Virtue of Alexander the Great in English Justin Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus in English Alexander the Great An annotated list of primary sources Archived 4 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine from Livius.org Wiki Classical Dictionary extant sources Archived 29 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine and fragmentary and lost sources Other A Bibliography of Alexander the Great by Waldemar Heckel Archived 7 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine Pothos.org Alexanders Home on the Web Alexander III the Great entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Alexander the Great on the Web a comprehensive directory of some 1000 sites Alexander The Great in the French museum Le Louvre Archived 17 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine Alexander The Great Mystery by T. Peter Limber in Saudi Aramco Magazine Trace Alexanders conquests on an animated map Alexander the Great of Macedon a project by John J. Popovic Alexander in the Punjab. A Photo Essay Archived 13 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine photos of all sites Alexander visited Alexander the Great Coins a site depicting Alexanders coins and later coins featuring Alexanders image v t e Achaemenid Empire History Family tree Timeline History of democracy Art Achaemenid Persian Lion Rhyton Oxus Treasure Achaemenid coinage Apadana hoard Danake Daric Architecture Persepolis Apadana Gate of All Nations Tachara Palace of Darius in Susa Tomb of Cyrus Persian column Naqshe Rostam Kabaye Zartosht Mausoleum at Halicarnassus Tombs at Xanthos Harpy Tomb Nereid Monument Tomb of Payava Culture Old Persian cuneiform Old Persian Behistun Inscription Xerxes Is inscription at Van Ganjnameh Cyrus Cylinder Warfare Persian Revolt Battle of Hyrba Battle of the Persian Border LydianPersian Wars Battle of Pteria Battle of Thymbra Siege of Sardis 547 BC Battle of Opis Conquest of the Indus Valley First conquest of Egypt Scythian campaign of Darius I GrecoPersian Wars Ionian Revolt Siege of Naxos 499 BC Battle of Lade Siege of Eretria Battle of Marathon Battle of Thermopylae Battle of Artemisium Destruction of Athens Battle of Salamis Battle of Plataea Battle of Mycale Babylonian revolts Wars of the Delian League Battle of the Eurymedon Peloponnesian War Battle of Cyzicus Battle of Cunaxa Corinthian War Battle of Cnidus Great Satraps Revolt Second conquest of Egypt Wars of Alexander the Great Battle of the Granicus Siege of Miletus Siege of Halicarnassus Battle of Issus Siege of Tyre 332 BC Siege of Gaza Battle of Gaugamela Battle of the Persian Gate Diplomacy Earth and water Peace of Callias Peace of Antalcidas Administration Capitals Pasargadae Ecbatana Babylon Susa Satrapies Armenia Districts of the Empire Persepolis Administrative Archives Royal Road Chapar Khaneh Angarium Angarum Dynasties Achaemenid Pharnacid Mithridatic Pontus Ariarathid Cappadocia Orontid Armenia Seven Achaemenid clans Related 25
00 year celebration of the Persian Empire Xanthian Obelisk Cappadocian calendar v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus Crete Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus GrecoBactrian Kingdom IndoGreek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations Confederations Doric Hexapolis c.1100  c.560 BC Italiote League c.800389 BC Ionian League c. 650404 BC Peloponnesian League c.550366 BC Amphictyonic League c.595279 BC Acarnanian League c. 50031 BC Hellenic League 499449 BC Delian League 478404 BC Chalcidian League 430348 BC Boeotian League c. 4
24 c. 395 BC Aetolian League c. 400188 BC Second Athenian League 378355 BC Thessalian League 374196 BC Arcadian League 3
70 c. 230 BC Epirote League 370168 BC League of Corinth 338322 BC Euboean League c. 300 BCc. 300 AD Achaean League 280146 BC Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists  scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre GrecoBuddhist art Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology mythological figures Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld GrecoBuddhism GrecoBuddhist monasticism Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus Olympia Language ProtoGreek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Las Locri Medma Metapontion Nepolis Pandosia Lucania Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia LiparaMeligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassa Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene Apollonia Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheuss Limin Illicitanus LiminPortus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oine Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Ancient Greek wars Archaic First Messenian War Lelantine War Second Messenian War LydianMilesian War First Sacred War Sicilian Wars Classical GrecoPersian Wars Aeginetan War Wars of the Delian League Third Messenian War First Peloponnesian War Second Sacred War Samian War Second Peloponnesian War Phyle Campaign Corinthian War Boeotian War Wars of the Theban hegemony ThebanSpartan War Social War 357355 BC Third Sacred War Foreign War Expansion of Macedonia Wars of Alexander the Great Hellenistic IndoGreek wars Lamian War Wars of the Diadochi AntigonidNabataean confrontations SeleucidMauryan war Pyrrhic War Syrian Wars Pyrrhus invasion of the Peloponnese Chremonidean War SeleucidParthian Wars Cleomenean War Lyttian War Social War 220217 BC Macedonian Wars First Second Third Fourth Cretan War RomanSeleucid War Aetolian War War against Nabis Galatian War Maccabean Revolt Seleucid Dynastic Wars Achaean War Mithridatic Wars First Second Third War of Actium Military history Authority control databases National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWarsofAlexandertheGreatoldid1217114366 Categories Alexander the Great Wars of Alexander the Great Darius III Macedonian Empire Invasions of Iran Wars involving Macedonia ancient kingdom Wars involving the Achaemenid Empire Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 3 April 2024 at 2235 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width