Deutscher Kunstverlag - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 Profile 
3 References 
4 External links Toggle the table of contents Deutscher Kunstverlag 2 languages Deutsch Franais Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable independent thirdparty sources. May 2015 Learn how and when to remove this message Deutscher Kunstverlag Founded 1921 Country of origin Germany Headquarters location Berlin and Munich Key people Katja Richter Official website www.deutscherkunstverlag.de The Deutscher Kunstverlag DKV is an educational publishing house with offices in Berlin and Munich. The publisher specializes in books about art cultural history architecture and historic preservation. Historyedit Deutscher Kunstverlag was founded in 1921 in Berlin. Founders were the publishing companies Insel Verlag E. A. Seemann Deutsche VerlagsAnstalt Julius Hoffmann G. Grote Julius Bard and Walter de Gruyter as well as the bank Delbrck Schickler  Co. de. Some book series appeared already in 1925 which to this day still partially determine the publishing profile. In addition to scientific publications the Deutscher Kunstverlag publishes art books and exhibition catalogs. After the Second World War the publisher moved its headquarters to Munich. Since the 19
90 s the owners have frequently changed. In early 2007 Gabriele Miller purchased the Deutscher Kunstverlag and was the sole shareholder. The head office of the publishing house was then moved back to Berlin. In October 2010 the daughter of the main shareholder Stephanie Ecker took over the commercial management of the publishing house. In January 2011 she and Gabriela Wachter owner of Parthas publishing became managing copartners of the Deutsche Kunstverlag. Since 2018 Deutscher Kunstverlag has been an independent publishing house under the umbrella of the academic publisher De Gruyter. In its traditional program areas the publishing house is strengthening its presence and creating the structures for digital publishing. In dialog with editors scholars museums and foundations innovative concepts are being developed that both ensure the usual quality of content and design and are aligned with the current demands of authors and the book trade. 1 Profileedit An important series published by the Deutscher Kunstverlag is Das Handbuch der Deutschen Kunstdenkmler Handbook of German Art Monuments from Georg Dehio. This book series has been published by the publishing house since 1929 and is constantly updated. In the art guide series DKVKunstfhrer formerly Groe Baudenkmler individual publications are published in brochure form mainly as a source of information onsite of the monuments. Also museum guides and art post cards for museums collections and art monuments are included in the publishers program. The series AntiquittenFhrer and the successful title Kunst  Krempel Art  Stuff 3 volumes for the Bayerischer Rundfunk Television broadcast with the same name served as a reference for collectors and fans. The series Bildhandbuch der Kunstdenkmler image manual of monuments which was established in the mid19
50 s and includes 49 volumes stopped publication in the 19
90 s. Also the series Deutsche Lande  Deutsche Kunst ended with the last issue in 1987. Referencesedit  Die Geschichte des Deutschen Kunstverlag in German. Deutscher Kunstverlag. Retrieved 21 July 2016. External linksedit Official website Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDeutscherKunstverlagoldid1159047689 Categories German companies established in 1921 Book publishing companies of Germany Educational book publishing companies Mass media in Berlin Mass media in Munich Hidden categories CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles lacking reliable references from May 2015 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 7 June 2023 at 2201 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width