Roman emperor - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background and beginning 
2 Powers under the Principate 
3 Succession and legitimacy 
4 Later developments Toggle Later developments subsection 
4.1 Byzantine period 
5 Titles Toggle Titles subsection 
5.1 Imperator 
5.2 Caesar 
5.3 Augustus 
5.4 Princeps 
5.5 Basileus  autokrator 
6 Later assertions to the title Toggle Later assertions to the title subsection 
6.1 Holy Roman Empire 
6.2 Ottoman Empire 
7 Number of emperors 
8 See also 
9 Notes 
10 References Toggle References subsection 
10.1 Citations 
10.2 Sources 
11 Further reading 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Roman emperor 49 languages nglisc  Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg Bikol Central Catal Cebuano etina Eesti  Espaol Esperanto  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa  Latina Lietuvi Lingua Franca Nova   Bahasa Melayu   Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan   Portugus Romn Slovenina   srpski Suomi Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ruler of the Roman Empire during the imperial period For the list of Roman emperors see List of Roman emperors. For the ruler of the Roman Kingdom in the archaic period see King of Rome. For the dual chief magistrate during the Roman Republic see Roman consul. Emperor of the Roman Empire Imperial Vexillum of the emperor Bust of Augustus wearing the corona civica Details Style Imperator Caesar Augustus Princeps Dominus Noster Autokrator or Basileus depending on period First monarch Augustus Last monarch Theodosius I unified Julius Nepos Westerna Constantine XI Eastern Formation 16 January 27 BC Abolition 9 May 480 AD Western 29 May 1453 Eastern Appointer Roman Senate officially andor Roman military The Roman emperor was the ruler and monarchical head of state of the Roman Empire starting with the granting of the title augustus to Octavian in 27 BC.2 The term emperor is a modern convention and did not exist as such during the Empire. Often when a given Roman is described as becoming emperor in English it reflects his taking of the title augustus and later basileus. Another title used was imperator originally a military honorific and caesar originally a surname. Early emperors also used the title princeps first one alongside other Republican titles notably consul and pontifex maximus. The legitimacy of an emperors rule depended on his control of the Roman army and recognition by the Senate an emperor would normally be proclaimed by his troops or by the Senate or both. The first emperors reigned alone later emperors would sometimes rule with coemperors to secure the succession or to divide the administration of the empire between them. The office of emperor was thought to be distinct from that of a rex king. Augustus the first emperor resolutely refused recognition as a monarch.3 For the first three hundred years of Roman emperors efforts were made to portray the emperors as leaders of the Republic fearing any association with the kings who ruled Rome prior to the Republic. From Diocletian whose tetrarchic reforms divided the position into one emperor in the West and one in the East emperors ruled in an openly monarchic style.4 Although succession was generally hereditary it was only hereditary if there was a suitable candidate acceptable to the army and the bureaucracy5 so the principle of automatic inheritance was not adopted which often led to several claimants to the throne. Despite this elements of the republican institutional framework senate consuls and magistrates were preserved even after the end of the Western Empire. Constantine the Great the first Christian emperor moved the capital from Rome to Constantinople formerly known as Byzantium in 330 AD. Roman emperors had always held high religious offices under Constantine there arose the specifically Christian idea that the emperor was Gods chosen ruler on earth a special protector and leader of the Christian Church a position later termed Caesaropapism. In practice an emperors authority on Church matters was frequently subject to challenge. The Western Roman Empire collapsed in the late 
5 th century after multiple invasions by Germanic barbarian tribes with no recognised claimant to Emperor of the West remaining after the death of Julius Nepos in 480. Instead the Eastern emperor Zeno proclaimed himself as the sole emperor of a theoretically undivided Roman Empire although in practice he had no authority in the West. The subsequent Eastern emperors ruling from Constantinople styled themselves as Basileus of the Romans   Basileus Romaon in Greek but are often referred to in modern scholarship as Byzantine emperors. The papacy and Germanic kingdoms of the West acknowledged the Eastern emperors until the accession of Empress Irene in 797. After this the papacy created a rival lineage of Roman emperors in western Europe the Holy Roman Emperors which ruled the Holy Roman Empire for most of the period between 800 and 1806. These emperors were never recognized in Constantinople and their coronations resulted in the medieval problem of two emperors. The last Eastern emperor was Constantine XI Palaiologos who died during the Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453. After conquering the city Ottoman sultans adopted the title Caesar of the Romans kayseri Rm. A Byzantine group of claimant emperors existed in the Empire of Trebizond until its conquest by the Ottomans in 1461 although they had used a modified title since 1282. Background and beginningedit See also Crisis of the Roman Republic Augustus depicted as a magistrate at the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek Modern historians conventionally regard Augustus as the first emperor whereas Julius Caesar is considered the last dictator of the Roman Republic a view that is shared by the Roman writers Plutarch Tacitus and Cassius Dio.6 Conversely the majority of Roman writers including Pliny the Younger Suetonius and Appian as well as most of the ordinary people of the Empire thought of Julius Caesar as the first emperor.7 Caesar did indeed rule the Roman state as an autocrat but he failed to create a stable system to maintain himself in power.89 His rise to power was the result of a long and gradual decline in which the Republic fell under the influence of powerful generals such as Marius and Sulla.10 At the end of the Republic no new and certainly no single title indicated the individual who held supreme power. Insofar as emperor could be seen as the English translation of the Latin imperator then Julius Caesar had been an emperor like several Roman generals before him. Instead by the end of the Caesars civil wars it became clear that there was certainly no consensus to return to the oldstyle monarchy but that the period when several officials would fight one another had come to an end. Julius Caesar and then Augustus after him accumulated offices and titles of the highest importance in the Republic making the power attached to those offices permanent and preventing anyone with similar aspirations from accumulating or maintaining power for themselves. Julius Caesar had been pontifex maximus since 64 BC held the offices of consul and dictator five times since 59 BC and was appointed dictator in perpetuity in 44 BC shortly before his assassination. He had also become the de facto sole ruler of Rome in 48 BC when he defeated his last opposition at the Battle of Pharsalus. His killers proclaimed themselves as the liberatores liberators and the restorers of the Republic but their rule was cut short by Caesars supporters who almost immediately established a new dictatorship. Cameo of Augustus in a quadriga drawn by tritons at the Kunsthistorisches Museum Vienna In his will Caesar appointed his grandnephew Octavian as his heir and adopted son. He inherited his property and lineage the loyalty of most of his allies and  again through a formal process of senatorial consent  an increasing number of the titles and offices that had accrued to Caesar. In August 43 BC following the death of both consuls of the year Octavian marched to Rome and forced the Senate to elect him consul. He then formed the Second Triumvirate alongside Mark Antony and Lepidus dividing the Roman world among them. Lepidus was sidelined in 36 BC and relations between Octavian and Antony soon deteriorated. In September 31 BC Octavians victory at Actium put an end to any effective opposition and confirmed his supremacy over Rome. In January 27 BC Octavian and the Senate concluded the socalled First settlement. Until then Octavian had been ruling the state with his powers as triumvir even though the Triumvirate itself disappeared years earlier. He announced that he would return the power to the Senate and People of Rome but this was only an act. The Senate confirmed Octavian as princeps the first among equals and gave him control over almost all Roman provinces for a tenure of ten years. This limitation was only superficial as he could renew his powers indefinitely. In addition the Senate awarded him the appellation of augustus elevated. The honorific itself held no legal meaning but it denoted that Octavian henceforth Augustus now approached divinity and its adoption by his successors made it the de facto main title of the emperor. He also received the civic crown alongside several other insignias in his honor. Augustus now held supreme and indisputable power and even though he still received subsequent grants of powers such as the granting of tribunicia potestas in 23 BC these were only ratifications of the powers he already possessed.1112 Most modern historians use 27 BC as the start date of the Roman Empire. This is mostly a symbolic date as the Republic had essentially disappeared many years earlier. Ancient writers often ignore the legal implications of Augustus reforms and simply write that he ruled Rome following the murder of Caesar or that he ruled alone after the death of Mark Antony.1314 Most Romans thus simply saw the emperor as the individual that ruled the state with no specific title or office attached to him. Augustus actively prepared his adopted son Tiberius to be his successor and pleaded his case to the Senate for inheritance on merit. After Augustus death in AD 14 the Senate confirmed Tiberius as princeps and proclaimed him as the new augustus. Tiberius had already received imperium maius and tribunicia potestas in AD 4 becoming legally equal to Augustus but still subordinate to him in practice.15 The imperial office was thus not truly defined until the accession of Caligula when all of Tiberius powers were automatically transferred to him as a single abstract position that was symbolized by his sacred title of augustus.161217 Powers under the Principateedit Politics of ancient Rome Periods Roman Kingdom 753509 BC Roman Republic 50927 BC Roman Empire 27 BC  AD 395 Principate 27 BC  AD 284 Dominate AD 284641 Western AD 395476 Eastern AD 3951453 Timeline Constitution Kingdom Republic Sullan republic Empire Augustan reforms Late Empire Political institutions Imperium Collegiality Auctoritas Roman citizenship Cursus honorum Assemblies Centuriate Curiate Plebeian Tribal Ordinary magistrates Consul Praetor Quaestor Promagistrate Aedile Tribune Censor Governor Extraordinary magistrates Corrector Dictator Magister equitum Consular tribune Rex Triumviri Decemviri Public law Mos maiorum Ius Senatus consultum Quaestio perpetua Senatus consultum ultimum Titles and honours Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praeses Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Triumvir monetalis Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Other countries v t e The legal authority of the emperor derived from an extraordinary concentration of individual powers and offices that were extant in the Republic and developed under Augustus and later rulers rather than from a new political office. Under the Republic these powers would have been split between several people who would each exercise them with the assistance of a colleague and for a specific period of time. Augustus held them all at once by himself and with no time limits even those that nominally had time limits were automatically renewed whenever they lapsed.18 The Republican offices endured and emperors were regularly elected to the most prominent of them the consulship and censorship.19 This early period of the Empire is known as the Principate derived from the title princeps used by the early emperors. The most important bases of the emperors power were his supreme power of command imperium maius and tribunician power tribunicia potestas as personal qualities separate from his public office.202122 Originally the powers of command where divided in consular imperium for Rome and proconsular imperium for the provinces. This division became obsolete in 19 BC when Augustus was given consular imperium  despite leaving the consulship in 23 BC  and thus control over all troops. This overwhelming power was referred to as imperium maius to indicate its superiority to other holders of imperium such as the proconsuls of the few senatorial provinces and allies such as Agrippa.232421 The governors appointed to the imperial provinces only answered to the emperor himself who could maintain or replace them at will.24 Denarius of Augustus 18 BC.b The tribunician power tribunicia potestas first assumed by Augustus in 23 BC gave him authority over the tribune of the plebs without having to actually hold the office  a tribune was by definition a plebeian whereas Augustus although born into a plebeian family had become a patrician when he was adopted into the gens Julia.24 By adopting the role of a tribune Augustus was presenting himself as the representative of the common man and the protector of democracy.2522 As always this was not a sudden grant of power Augustus had been receiving several powers related to the tribunes such as sacrosanctity since 36 BC.2122 With this powers he could veto any act or proposal of any magistrate propose laws and convoke the Senate.2425 His sacrosanctity also made him untouchable and any offence against him could be treated as a crime of treason.2522 The tribunician power was arguably the most stable and important of the emperors powers.262728 Despite being a perpetual title it was always renewed each year which often coincided with the beginning of a new regnal year although regnal years were not officially adopted until Justinian I.26
29 c The office of censor was not fully absorbed into the imperial office until the reign of Domitian who declared himself perpetual censor censor perpetuus in AD 85. Before this the title had been only used by Claudius 47 Vespasian and Titus both in 
73.2 627 The emperor also had power over religious affairs which led to the creation of a worship cult. Augustus became pontifex maximus the chief priest of the College of Pontiffs in 12 BC after the death of the former triumvir Lepidus.2124 Emperors from the reign of Gratian r. 375383 onward used the style pontifex inclytus honorable pontiff. The title of pontifex maximus was eventually adopted by the bishops of Rome during the Renaissance.30 The last known emperors to use the title were Valentinian III and Marcian in the 
5 th century.31 The only surviving document to directly refer to the emperors power is the Lex de imperio Vespasiani written shortly after Vespasians formal accession in December 69. The text of which only the second part survives states that Vespasian is allowed to make treaties hold sessions and propose motions to the Senate hold extraordinary sessions with legislative power endorse candidates in elections expand the pomerium and use discretionary power whenever necessary. The text further states that he is not bound by laws and that any previous act was retroactively considered legitimate.32 There is no mention of imperium nor tribunicia potestas although these powers were probably given in the earlier clauses.33 There is also no mention of any imperial office and the title of emperor is never used. The imperial titles are treated as inseparable of the person which is reflected in the name Imperator Caesar Vespasianus Augustus. This Lex sometimes related to the Lex regia royal law mentioned in the Corpus Juris Civilis of Eastern emperor Justinian I r. 527565 who cites the early 
3 rdcentury writer Ulpian. This was probably a later construct as its very name which derives from rex king would have been utterly rejected in the West.34 The Eastern Greekspeaking half of the Empire had always regarded the emperors as open monarchs basileis and called them as such.3536 Succession and legitimacyedit The weakest point of the Augustan institution was its lack of a clear succession system.3738 Formally announcing a successor would have revealed Augustus as a monarch so he and subsequent emperors opted to adopt their best candidates as their sons and heirs. Primogeniture was not relevant in the early Empire although emperors still attempted to maintain a familiar connection between them Tiberius for example married Julia the Elder making him Augustus soninlaw. Vespasian who took power after the collapse of the JulioClaudian dynasty and the tumultuous Year of the Four Emperors was the first emperor to openly declare his sons Titus and Domitian as his sole heirs giving them the title of caesar.373940 The Senate still exercised some power during this period as evidenced by his decision to declare Nero a public enemy41 and did influence in the succession of emperors. Following the murder of Domitian in AD 96 the Senate declared Nerva one of their own as the new emperor.39 His dynasty the Antonine continued the adoptive system until the reign of Marcus Aurelius r. 161180. Marcus was the first emperor to rule alongside other emperors first with his adoptive brother Lucius Verus who succeeded jointly with him and later with his son Commodus who was proclaimed coaugustus in 1
77.3 9
40 d Despite being the son of a previous emperor and having nominally shared government with him Commodus rule ended with his murder at the hands of his own soldiers. From his death in 192 until the 
5 th century there was scarcely a single decade without succession conflicts and civil war. During this period very few emperors died of natural causes.43 Such problems persisted in the later Eastern Empire where emperors had to often appoint coemperors to secure the throne. Despite often working as a hereditary monarchy there was no law or single principle of succession.44 Latin inscription dedicated to Septimius Severus and Caracalla in Ostia Antica AD 196.e Individuals who claimed imperial power illegally are referred to as usupers in modern scholarship. Ancient historians refer to these rival emperors as tyrants. In reality there was no distinction between emperors and usurpers as many emperors started as rebels and were retroactively recognized as legitimate. The Lex de imperio Vespasiani explicitly states that all of Vespasians actions are considered legal even if they happened before his recognition by the Senate.32 Ultimately legitimacy was a post factum phenomenon.45 Theodor Mommsen famously argued that here has probably never been a regime in which the notion of legitimacy is as absent as that of the Augustan principate.46 Imperial propaganda was often used to legitimize or delegitimize certain emperors. The Chronicon Paschale for example describes Licinius as having been killed like those who had briefly been usurpers before him.47 In reality Licinius was the legitimate emperor of the West having been appointed by Galerius while Constantine was the real usurper having been proclaimed by his troops.48 There were no true objective legal criteria for being acclaimed emperor beyond acceptance by the Roman army which was really the true basis of imperial power. Common methods used by emperors to assert claims of legitimacy such as support of the army blood connections sometimes fictitious to past emperors distributing ones own coins or statues and claims to preeminent virtue through propaganda were pursued just as well by many usurpers as they were by legitimate emperors.43 Septimius Severus notably declared himself as the adoptive son of the longdeceased Marcus Aurelius hence why he named Caracalla after him.49 Later Eastern imperial dynasties such as the Doukai and Palaiologoi claimed descent from Constantine the Great.5051 What turns a usurper into a legitimate emperor is typically that they managed to gain the recognition of a more senior legitimate emperor or that they managed to defeat a more senior legitimate emperor and seize power.5253 Modern historiography has not yet defined clear legitimacy criteria for emperors resulting in some emperors being included or excluded from different lists. The year 193 has traditionally been called the Year of the Five Emperors but modern scholarship now identifies Clodius Albinus and Pescennius Niger as usurpers because they were not recognized by the Roman Senate.54 Recognition by the Senate is often used to determine the legitimacy of an emperor52 but this criterion is not always followed. Maxentius is sometimes called an usurper because he did not have the recognition of Tetrarchs5556 but he held Rome for several years and thus had the recognition of the Senate.57 Other usurpers controlled if briefly the city of Rome such as Nepotianus and Priscus Attalus. In the East the possession of Constantinople was the essential element of legitimacy58 yet some figures such as Procopius are treated as usurpers. Rival emperors who later gained recognition are not always considered legitimate either Vetranio had the formal recognition by Constantius II yet he is still often regarded as a usurper5960 similarly to Magnus Maximus who was briefly recognized by Theodosius I.60 Western emperors such as Magnentius Eugenius and Magnus Maximus are sometimes called usurpers55 but Romulus Augustulus is traditionally regarded as the last Western emperor despite never receiving the recognition of the Eastern emperor Zeno. Later developmentsedit The Colossus of Constantine. Portraits after the Tetrarchy stopped including realistic features as the emperor began to be seen as a symbol rather than an individual.61 The period after the Principate is known as the Dominate derived from the title dominus lord adopted by Diocletian. During his rule the emperor became an absolute ruler and the regime became even more monarchical.62 The emperors adopted the diadem crown as their supreme symbol of power abandoning the subtleties of the early Empire.63 Beginning in the late 
2 nd century the Empire began to suffer a series of political and economic crises partially because it had overexpanded so much.62 The Pax Romana Roman peace is often said to have ended with the tyrannical reign of Commodus. His murder was followed by the accession of Septimius Severus the victor of the Year of the Five Emperors. It was during his reign that the role of the army grew even more and the emperors power increasingly depended on it.646566 The murder of his last relative Severus Alexander led to the Crisis of the Third Century 235285 a 
50 year period that almost saw the end of the Roman Empire.38 The last vestiges of Republicanism were lost in the ensuing anarchy. In 238 the Senate attempted to regain power by proclaiming Pupienus and Balbinus as their own emperors the first time since Nerva.6768 They managed to usurp power from Maximinus Thrax but they were killed within two months. With the rise of the soldier emperors the city and Senate of Rome began to lose importance. Maximinus and Carus for example did not even set foot on the city.65 Carus successors Carinus and Numerian the last of the Crisis emperors did not bother to assume the tribunicia potestas either.64 After reuniting the Roman Empire in 285 Diocletian began a series of reforms to restore stability. Reaching back to the oldest traditions of jobsharing in the Republic Diocletian established at the top of this new structure the Tetrarchy rule of four in an attempt to provide for smoother succession and greater continuity of government. Under the Tetrarchy Diocletian set in place a system of two emperors augusti and two subordinates that also served as heirs caesares. When an emperor retired as Diocletian and Maximian did in 305 or died his caesar would succeed him and in turn appoint a new caesar.69 Each pair ruled over a half of the Empire which led to the creation of a Western and Eastern Roman Empire a division that eventually became permanent.70 This division had already a precedent in the joint rule of ValerianGallienus and CarusCarinus.68 Diocletian justified his rule not by military power but by claiming divine right.70 He imitated Oriental divine kingship and encouraged the reverence of the emperor making anything related to him sacer sacred.7172 He declared himself Jovius the son of Jupiter and his partner Maximian was declared Herculius son of Hercules.73 This divine claim was maintained after the rise of Christianity as emperors regarded themselves as the chosen rulers of God.62 The emperor no longer needed the Senate to ratify his powers so he became the sole source of law. These new laws were no longer shared publicly and were often given directly to the praetorian prefects  originally the emperors bodyguard but now the head of the new praetorian prefectures  or with private officials.71 The emperors personal court and administration traveled alongside him which further made the Senates role redundant. Consuls continued to be appointed each year but by this point it was an office often occupied by the emperor himselff who now had complete control over the bureaucratic apparatus.74 Diocletian did preserve some Republican traditions such as the tribunicia potestas.26 The last known emperor to have used it was Anastasius I at the start of the 
6 th century. Anastasius was also the last attested emperor to use the traditional titles of proconsul and pater patriae.75 The last attested emperor to use the title of consul was Constans II who was also the last Eastern emperor to visit Rome.76 Its possible that later emperors also used it as an honorary title as the office of consul was not abolished until 892 during the reign of Leo VI.77 During the Dominate it became increasingly common for emperors to raise their children directly to augustus emperor instead of caesar heir probably because of the failure of the Tetrarchy. This practice had first been applied by Septimius Severus who proclaimed his 
10 yearold son Caracalla as augustus. He was followed by Macrinus who did the same with his 
9 yearold son Diadumenian and several other emperors during the Crisis. This became even more common from the 
4 th century onwards. Gratian was proclaimed emperor at the age of 8 and his coruler and successor Valentinian II was proclaimed emperor at the age of 
4.7 8 Many child emperors such as Philip II or Diadumenian never succeeded their fathers. These coemperors all had the same honors as their senior counterpart but they did not share the actual government hence why junior coemperors are usually not counted as real emperors by modern or ancient historians. There was no title to denote the junior emperor writers used the vague terms of second or little emperor.
79 g Despite having a successful reign himself Diocletians tetrarchic system collapsed as soon as he retired in 305. Constantine I the son of tetrarch Constantius I reunited the empire in 324 and imposed the principle of hereditary succession which Diocletian intended to avoid.80 Constantine was also the first emperor to convert to Christianity and emperors after him especially after its officialization under Theodosius I saw themselves as the protectors of the Church.81 The territorial divisions of the Tetrarchy were maintained and for most of the following century the Empire was ruled by two senior emperors one in the West with Milan and later Ravenna as capital and another in the East with Constantinople as capital.h This division became permanent on the death of Theodosius I in 395 when he was succeeded by his sons Honorius and Arcadius.82 The two halves of the Empire while later functioning as de facto separate entities were always considered and seen legally and politically as separate administrative divisions of a single insoluble state by the Romans of the time.831 Roman coins tremissis of Romulus Augustulus and Julius Nepos the last emperors of the Western Roman Empire. In the West the office of emperor soon degenerated into being little more than a puppet of Germanic generals such as Aetius and Ricimer the last emperors of the West being known as the shadow emperor.84 In 476 the Heruli Odoacer overthrew the childemperor Romulus Augustulus made himself king of Italy and shipped the imperial regalia to the Emperor Zeno in Constantinople. Historians mark this date as the date of the fall of the Western Roman Empire although by this time there was no longer any Empire left as its territory had reduced to Italy. Julius Nepos who was overthrown and expelled to Dalmatia in favor of Romulus continued to claim the title until his murder in 480. The Eastern court recognized this claim and Odoacer minted coins in his name although he never managed to exercise real power.85 The death of Nepos left Zeno as the sole emperor of a technically reunited Roman Empire.1 Byzantine periodedit The Roman Empire survived in the East for another 1000 years but the marginalization of the former heartland of Italy to the empire had a profound cultural impact on the empire and its emperor which adopted a more Hellenistic character.i The Eastern emperors continued to be recognized in the Western kingdoms until the accession of Irene r. 797802 the first empress regnant. The Italian heartland was recovered during the reign of Justinian I r. 527565 but this was reverted by the end of the century. Rome technically remained under imperial control but was completely surrounded by the Lombards. Africa was lost to the Arabs in the early 
7 th century and Rome eventually fell to the Lombards in 751 during the reign of Constantine V. The Frankish king Pepin the Short defeated them and received the favour of Pope Stephen II who became the head of the Papal States. Pepins son Charlemagne was crowned Imperator Romanorum the first time Imperator was used as an actual regnal title by Pope Leo III in Christmas AD 800 thus ending the recognition of the Eastern emperor.89 Western rulers also began referring to the Empire as the Greek Empire regarding themselves as the true successors of Rome.90 Miniature depicting Manuel II Palaiologos and his family 1404.j The inhabitants of the Eastern half of the Empire always saw the emperor as an open monarch. Starting with Heraclius in 629 Roman emperors styled themselves basileus the traditional title for Greek monarchs used since the times of Alexander the Great.9293 The title was used since the early days of the Empire and became the common imperial title by the 
3 rd century but did not appear in official documents until the 
7 th century.3593 Michael I Rangabe r. 811813 was the first emperor to actually use the title of Roman emperor   Basileus Romaon. This was a response to the new line of emperors created by Charlemagne  although he was recognized as basileus of the Franks.93 By the 
9 th century the full imperial title became basileus and autokrator of the Romans usually translated as Emperor and Autocrat of the Romans.
94 k The title autokrator was also used to distinguish a junior coemperor basileus from his senior colleague basileus autokrator.94 By the times of the Palaiologos there were two distinct ceremonies for the accession of an emperor first an acclamation as basileus and later a coronation as autokrator which also included being raised on a shield. These rites could happen years apart.96 The Eastern Empire became not only an absolute monarchy but also a theocracy. According to George Ostrogorsky the absolute power of the Roman emperor was further increased with the advent of Christian ideas.97 This became more evident after the Muslim conquests of the 
7 th century which gave Byzantine imperialism a new sense of purpose.98 The emperor was the subject of a series of rites and ceremonies including a formal coronation performed by the Patriarch of Constantinople.97 The Byzantine state is often said to have followed a Caesaropapist model where the emperor played the role of ruler and head of the Church but there was often a clear distinction between political and secular power.99 The line of Eastern emperors continued uninterrupted until the sack of Constantinople and the establishment of the Latin Empire in 1204. This led to the creation of three lines of emperors in exile the emperors of Nicaea the emperors of Trebizond and the shortlived emperors of Thessalonica. The Nicean rulers have been traditionally regarded as the legitimate emperors of this period as they recovered Constantinople and restored the Empire in 1261.l The Empire of Trebizond continued to exist for another 200 years but from 1282 onwards its rulers used the modified title of Emperor and Autocrat of all the East the Iberians and the Perateia accepting the Niceans as the sole Roman emperors.100 However the Byzantine Empire had been reduced mostly to Constantinople and the rise of other powers such as Serbia and Bulgaria forced the Byzantines to recognize their rulers as basileus. Despite this emperors continued to view themselves as the rulers of an universal empire.97 During the last decades of the Empire power was once again shared between multiple emperors and colleagues each ruling from their own capital notably during the long reign of John V.101 Constantinople finally fell to the Ottoman Turks in 1453 its last emperor Constantine XI Palaiologos dying in battle. The last vestiges of the empire Morea and Trebizond fell in 14
61.1 01 Titlesedit Imperatoredit Main article Imperator Denarius of Julius Caesar marked caesar imperator Aureus of Vespasian marked imperator caesar vespasianus augustus The title imperator  from imperare to command  dates back to the Roman Republic and was given to victorious commanders by their soldiers. They held imperium that is military authority. The Senate could then award the extraordinary honor of a triumph the commander then retained the title until the end of his magistracy. In Roman tradition the first triumph was that of Romulus the founder of Rome but the first attested use of imperator was in 189 BC on the triumph of Aemilius Paulus. It was a title held with great pride Pompey was hailed imperator more than once as was Sulla and Julius Caesar.102 However as noted by Cassius Dio the meaning of the title changed under the new monarchy and came to denote the possession of the supreme power.103 Both Dio and Suetonius refer to Caesar as the first one to assume imperator as a proper name a praenomen imperatoris but this seems to be an anachronism.104 The last ordinary general to be awarded the title was Junius Blaesus in AD 22 after which it became a title reserved solely for the sovereign.102 Augustus used Imperator instead of his first name praenomen becoming Imperator Caesar instead of Caesar Imperator.102 From this the title slowly became a synonym of the office hence the word emperor. Tiberius Caligula and Claudius avoided using the title but it is recorded that Caligula was hailed imperator by the Senate on his accession indicating that it was already considered an integral part of the dignity.105 It was not until the late reign of Nero in AD 66 that imperator became once more part of the emperors nomenclature.106 Virtually all emperors after him used the praenomen imperatoris with only a few variations under his successors Galba and Vitellius.107 The original meaning of the title continued to be used for a time with emperors registering the number of times they were hailed imperator.103 The title became the main appellation of the ruler by the time of Vespasian.102108 After the Tetrarchy emperors began to be addressed as dominus noster our Lord although imperator continued to be used. The appellation of dominus was known and rejected by Augustus but ordinary men of the Empire used it regularly. It began to used in official context starting with Septimius Severus and was first officially adopted in coinage by Aurelian.109 In the East imperator was translated as autokrator selfruler a title that continued to be used until the end of the Empire. This is the modern Greek word for emperor . There are still some instances of imperator in official documents as late as the 
9 th century. Its last known use was on 866867 coins of Michael III and his coemperor Basil I who are addressed as imperator and rex respectively.110 In the West imperator was transformed into a monarchical title by Charlemagne becoming the official Latin title of the Holy Roman Empire. Caesaredit Main article Caesar title Originally the cognomen third name of the dictator Gaius Julius Caesar which was then inherited by Augustus and his relatives. Augustus used it as a family name nomen styling himself as Imp. Caesar instead of Imp. Julius Caesar.104 However the nomen was still inherited by women such as Julia the Younger and appear in some inscriptions.111 After the death of Caligula Augustus greatgrandson his uncle Claudius was proclaimed emperor. He was not an official member of the Julia gens112 but he was the grandson of Octavia Augustus sister and thus still part of the family.113 Following the suicide of Nero the last descendant of Caesar the new emperor Galba adopted the name of Servius Galba Caesar Augustus thus making it part of the imperial title. Five days before his murder he adopted Piso Licinianus as his son and heir renaming him as Servius Sulpicius Galba Caesar.114 After this Caesar came to denote the heir apparent who would add the name to his own as heir and retain it upon accession as augustus.109 The only emperor not to assume it was Vitellius who adopted the name Germanicus instead. Most emperors used it as their nomen  with Imperator as their praenomen  until the reign of Antoninus Pius when it permanently became part of the formula Imperator Caesar full name Augustus.107 In the 
3 rd century caesars also received the honorific of nobilissimus most noble which later evolved into a separate title.115 Coin of Constantius II marked dominus noster constantinus pius felix augustus During the Tetrarchy the powers of the caesar increased considerably but following the accession of Constantine I it once more remained as a title for heirs with no significant power attached to it. The title slowly lost importance in the following decades as emperors started to promote their sons directly to augustus. In the East the title finally lost its imperial character in 705 when Justinian II awarded it to Tervel of Bulgaria.m After this it became a court title bestowed to prominent figures of the government and lost even more relevance after the creation of the title sebastokrator by Alexios I Komnenos.116 Despite this its regular use by earlier emperors led to the name becoming synonym with emperor in certain regions. Several countries use Caesar as the origin of their word for emperor like Kaiser in Germany and Tsar in Bulgaria and Russia. After the Constantinian dynasty emperors followed Imperator Caesar with Flavius which also began as a family name but was later incorporated into the emperors titles thus becoming Imperator Caesar Flavius.117 The last use of the formula rendered as Autokrator Kaisar Flabios... Augoustos     in Greek is in the Basilika of Leo VI the Wise r. 8869
12.1 18 Augustusedit Main article Augustus title Originally the main title of the emperor.112119 According to Suetonius it was not merely a new title but a more honorable one inasmuch as sacred places too and those in which anything is consecrated by augural rites are called august augusta from the increase auctus in dignity. It was also connected to the religious practice of augury which was itself linked to Romes founding by Romulus and to auctoritas the authority based on prestige.120121 The honorific was awarded as both a name and a title to Octavian in 27 BC and was inherited by all subsequent emperors who placed it after their personal names. The only emperor to not immediately assume it was Vitellius although he did use it after his recognition by the Senate.122 Later emperors ruled alongside one or several junior augusti who held de jure but not de facto equal constitutional power.n Despite its use as the highest imperial title it was generally not used to indicate the office of Emperor itself as ordinary people and writers had become accustomed to Imperator. In the East the title was initially translated as Sebastos but the form Augoustos eventually became more common. Emperors after Heraclius styled themselves as Basileus but Augoustos still remained in use in a lesser form up until the end of the Empire. In the West the title was also used by Charlemagne and the subsequent Holy Roman Emperors as part of the formula Imperator Augustus. Both Eastern and Western rulers also used the style semper augustus forever augustus.123 Princepsedit Main article Princeps The word princeps meaning first was a republican term used to denote the leading member of the Senate and it was used by the early emperors to emphasize the continuance of the Republic.109 The title had already been used by Pompey and Julius Caesar among others. It was a purely honorific title with no attached duties or powers hence why it was never used in official titulature.124109 The title was the most preferred by Augustus as its use implies only primacy is in the first among equals as opposed to dominus which implies dominance. It was the title used by early writers before the term imperator became popular.108 In his Res Gestae Augustus explicitly refers to himself as the princeps senatus.125 The title was also sometimes given to heirs in the form of princeps iuventutis first of the youth a term that continued to be used during the Tetrarchy.126 In the era of Diocletian and beyond princeps fell into disuse and was replaced with dominus lord127 the use of princeps and dominus broadly symbolizes the differences in the empires government giving rise to the era designations Principate and Dominate. The title is still found in some later sources however. The poet Claudian for example describes Honorius as having been raised from caesar to princeps instead of augustus.75 The title survived the fall of the Western Roman Empire as it was used by rulers such as Theodoric the Great. Coin of Leo VI r. 886912 marked leon en cristo basileus romaeon Basileus  autokratoredit Main article Basileus Basileus was the traditional Greek title for monarchs. It was first used by Alexander the Great r. 336323 BC during his conquests.128 The term was applied to emperors unofficially since the beginning of the Empire35 but in official records it was often used as the Greek translation of the title rex with autokrator the Greek equivalent to imperator reserved for the emperor. As a result Western writers often associated basileus with king as opposed to emperor despite this distinction not existing in Greek.129 Basileus was first officially used by Heraclius in 629 after his victory over the Persians and it became the main title of the emperor afterward. After the 
9 th century the full imperial title became basileus and autokrator of the Romans     with autokrator distinguishing the senior emperor of the junior basileus.94 In later centuries the title was shortened simply as autokrator of the Romans resulting in a revival of that title.130 In later centuries an emperor would typically be acclaimed as basileus as an infant and then crowned by the Patriarch as autokrator.96 Foreign rulers were usually referred to as reges a Greek rendition of rex but the Eastern emperors were eventually forced to recognize other monarchs as basileus mainly the Latin131 Holy Roman Serbian and Bulgarian emperors.94 Later assertions to the titleedit Main articles Succession of the Roman Empire and Succession to the Byzantine Empire Despite overthrowing Roman rule Odoacer never claimed the imperial dignity. His successor Theodoric the Great is sometimes said to have been an emperor in all but name despite using the title of rex and recognizing the emperor in Constantinople. He also used the ancient title of princeps in full princeps Romanus and dominus noster actively trying to imitate the old emperors.o132133 He even requested and received the regalia sent to Constantinople by Odoacer although it appears that he only requested the purple robes and not the imperial crown nor scepter.134 The rebels Burdunellus and Peter both active shortly after the fall of the West are referred to as tyrants in sources. This may imply that they claimed the imperial indignity although there is almost no information available for these rebellions.135 The Berber governor Masties assumed the title of imperator shortly after 476 claiming to rule over the Romans and Maurians.136 The last attempt to restore the office of emperor in the West was during the Siege of Ravenna 539540 when the Goths offered Belisarius the throne which he refused.137 Holy Roman Empireedit Main article Holy Roman Empire Charles V was the last emperor of the Holy Roman Empire to receive a papal coronation. The concept of the Roman Empire was renewed in the West with the coronation of the king of the Franks Charles the Great Charlemagne as Roman emperor by the Pope on Christmas Day 800. This coronation had its roots in the decline of the influence of the Pope in the affairs of the Byzantine Empire at the same time the Byzantine Empire declined in influence over politics in the West. The Pope saw no advantage to be derived from working with the Byzantine Empire but as George Ostrogorsky points out an alliance with the famous conqueror of the Lombards on the other hand ... promised much.138 The immediate response of the Eastern Roman emperor was not welcoming. At that time it was axiomatic that there could be only one Empire as there could be only one church writes Ostrogorsky. The coronation of Charles the Great violated all traditional ideas and struck a hard blow at Byzantine interests for hitherto Byzantium the new Rome had unquestionably been regarded as the sole Empire which had taken over the inheritance of the old Roman imperium. Conscious of its imperial rights Byzantium could only consider the elevation of Charles the Great to be an act of usurpation.139 Nikephoros I chose to ignore Charlemagnes claim to the imperial title clearly recognizing the implications of this act. According to Ostrogorsky he even went so far as to refuse the Patriarch Nicephorus permission to dispatch the customary synodica to the Pope.140 Meanwhile Charlemagnes power steadily increased he subdued Istria and several Dalmatian cities during the reign of Irene and his son Pepin brought Venice under Western hegemony despite a successful counterattack by the Byzantine fleet. Unable to counter this encroachment on Byzantine territory Nikephoross successor Michael I Rangabe capitulated in return for the restoration of the captured territories Michael sent Byzantine delegates to Aachen in 812 who recognized Charlemagne as basileus although not of the Romans.14193 This line of emperors was actually Germanic rather than Roman. These emperors used a variety of titles most frequently Imperator Augustus before finally settling on Imperator Romanus Electus Elected Roman Emperor. Historians customarily assign them the title Holy Roman Emperor which has a basis in actual historical usage and treat their Holy Roman Empire as a separate institution. To Latin Catholics of the time the Pope was the temporal authority as well as spiritual authority and as Bishop of Rome he was recognized as having the power to anoint or crown a new Holy Roman Emperor. The last man to be crowned by the pope although in Bologna not Rome was Charles V who also had a claim to the throne of the Byzantine Empire through Andreas Palaiologoss designation of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile as his heirs.142143144 This line of emperors lasted until 1806 when Francis II dissolved the empire during the Napoleonic Wars. Until the coronation of Napoleon in 1804 these rulers were the only ones to use the title of emperor in Europe. Many rulers after him styled themselves as emperor such as the Habsburg emperors of Austria and the Hohenzollern emperors of Germany. The British kings used the title of Emperor of India KaisariHind from 1876 to 1947. Much of the notions often associated with the term emperor as in a ruler above kings originates from the Holy Roman Empire where there was indeed a feudal hierarchy in which the emperor was at the top. The emperor who was in theory subordinate to the Pope was followed by kings dukes and counts.145 Ottoman Empireedit Main article Ottoman claim to Roman succession 1480 portrait of Mehmed II by Gentile Bellini Under Sultan Mehmed II the Ottoman Empire conquered Constantinople in 1453 an event generally regarded to have marked the definitive end of the Roman Empire146 as well as the final and decisive step in the Ottoman conquest of the former empires core lands and subjects.147148149 After the conquest of Constantinople in 1453 the sultans of the Ottoman Empire laid claim to be the legitimate Roman emperors in succession to the Byzantine emperors who had previously ruled from Constantinople.150 Mehmed had great interest in Roman and classical Greek history a topic he had been taught on extensively by court teachers in his youth. He emulated himself on Julius Caesar and Alexander the Great at one point visited the city of Troy to see the graves of the mythological Greek heroes Achilles and Ajax and kept a copy of the Iliad in his personal library.151 Based on the concept of right of conquest the sultans at times assumed the styles kayseri Rm152153154149 meaning the Caesar of the Romans which was one of the titles applied to the Byzantine emperors in earlier Ottoman writings and basileus which was the ruling title of the Byzantine emperors. The assumption of the heritage of the Roman Empire also led the Ottoman sultans to claim to be universal monarchs the rightful rulers of the entire world. The early sultans after the conquest of Constantinople  Mehmed II Bayezid II Selim I and Suleiman I  staunchly maintained that they were Roman emperors and went to great lengths to legitimize themselves as such. Greek aristocrats i.e. former Byzantine nobility were often promoted to senior administrative positions and Constantinople was maintained as the capital rebuilt and considerably expanded under Ottoman rule. The administration architecture and court ceremonies of the early post1453 Ottoman Empire were heavily influenced by the former Byzantine Empire. The Ottoman sultan also used their claim to be Roman emperors to justify campaigns of conquest against Western Europe although this notion gradually faded away as the Ottomans shifted towards a more unified Islamic identity.155 The style kayseri Rm remained in use by the sultans as late as the 
18 th century.156 Number of emperorsedit Portrait of Constantius II in Filocaluss Chronograph of 354 Several ancient writers tried to count the number of Roman emperors through history but each of them gives a different count. The 
4 thcentury historian Festus states that From Octavian Caesar Augustus to Jovian there were imperatores 43 in number through 407 years reckoning from 43 BC.157 The 
6 thcentury Chronicon Paschale calls Diocletian the 
33 rd Roman emperor. Adding the eight other emperors mentioned in the work would give a total of 41 emperors up until Constantine I.47 A few writers also attempted to make their own lists of emperors. The 
4 thcentury calligrapher Filocalus in his Chronographia records 58 emperors from Augustus to Constantine.158 His contemporary Epiphanius records 44 emperors in his work On Weights and Measures.159 The 
13 thcentury Chronicon Altinate records 46 emperors in the same time period.160 These discrepancies arise from the fact that there was never a defining distinction between legitimate emperors and usurpers.161 Other emperors had such uneventful or brief reigns that they are unmentioned by literary sources like Liciniuss coemperors Valerius Valens and Martinian.162 See alsoedit Ancient Rome portal List of Roman empresses List of condemned Roman emperors List of Roman imperial victory titles List of Italian monarchs List of Roman usurpers Family tree of Roman emperors Roman imperial cult Roman usurper Notesedit  Although Romulus Augustulus r.475476 is often regarded as the last Western emperor his predecessor Julius Nepos continued to be recognized in the Eastern court as the legitimate ruler of the West.1  The legend reads spqr imperator caesari augustus consul xi tribunicia potestas vi meaning consul for the 
11 th time wielder of the tribunician power for the 
6 th time.  For a further discussion of the tribunicia potestas and the role of the Senate see Rowe Greg 2002. Princes and Political Cultures The New Tiberian Senatorial Decrees. University of Michigan Press. pp. 4166. ISBN 9780472112302.  There was however much precedent. The consulate of the Republic was a twin magistracy and earlier emperors had often had a subordinate lieutenant with many imperial offices. Many emperors had planned a joint succession in the past  Augustus planned to leave Gaius and Lucius Caesar as joint emperors on his death Tiberius wished to have Caligula and Tiberius Gemellus do so as well as Claudius with Nero and Britannicus. All of these arrangements had ended in failure either through premature death Gaius and Lucius or murder Gemellus and Britannicus.42  The text reads IMP CAES DIVI MARCI ANTONINI PII FILIVS  DIVI COMMODI FRATER DIVI ANTONINI PII  NEPOS DIVI HADRIANI PRONEP DIVI TRAIANI  PARTHICI ABNEPOS DIVI NERVAE ADNEPOS  L SEPTIMIVS SEVERVS PIVS PERTINAX AVG  ARABICVS ADIABENICVS PP PONTIF MAX  TRIBVNIC POTEST IIII IMP VIII COS II ET  MARCVS AVRELIVS ANTONINVS CAESAR  DEDICAVERVNT. Dedicated to Imperator Caesar son of the divine Marcus Antoninus Pius brother of the divine Commodus grandson of the divine Antoninus Pius greatgrandson of the divine Hadrian greatgreat grandson of the divine Trajan conqueror of Parthia greatgreatgreatgrandson of the divine Nerva Lucius Septimius Severus Pius Pertinax Augustus conqueror of Arabia and Adiabene father of the fatherland supreme priest having the tribunician power for the fourth time imperator for the eighth time consul for the second time and Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Caesar.  Consuls still maintained some privileges during the later Empire but at times it was only an honorary office. Some emperors gave the title to their children. For instance Valentinian II assumed the consulate of 376 at the age of 5 and Honorius did the same in 386 at the age of 2.  A mosaic in Italy shows Constantine IV r. 668686 alongside his coemperors Heralius and Tiberius. Constantine is called maior imperator Heraclius and Tiberius being only imperator.  Starting with Diocletian almost every other emperor ruled alongside an equal or junior coemperor. The only two emperors of this period to rule over the entire Roman Empire for their entire reign were Julian II and Jovian both of which only ruled about a year. Valentinian I who succeeded Jovian immediately divided the empire between himself and his brother Valens. After this the empire was again reunited by Theodosius I but he died only a few months later.  The Eastern Empire is often referred as the Byzantine Empire from Byzantium the original name of Constantinople in modern scholarship although it was still technically the same state of Antiquity.86 Their Greekspeaking inhabitants were called Romaioi  and were still considered Romans by themselves and the populations of Eastern Europe and the Near East although they always had a more Greekoriented culture because of the conquests of Alexander the Great. The Ottoman Turks still used the term Rm Rome when referring to the Eastern Empire.87 After the fall of Empire the Tsardom of Russia proclaimed Moscow as the Third Rome regarding Constantinople as the Second Rome.88 The evolution of the church in the nolonger imperial city of Rome and the church in Constantinople also began to follow divergent paths culminating in the schism of 1054 between the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox faiths.  Manuel is referred as CC     C   CC basileus and autokrator of the Romans Palaiologos always augoustos. His wife Helena Draga is referred as C  C    augusta and autokratora of the Romans wise Palaiologina his son John VIII is called basileus while Andronikos and Theodore are called despotes.91  A variation of the title was later adopted by the Russian emperors who styled themselves as Emperor and Autocrat of All the Russias.95 In Russian the title employs the title imperator  instead of the traditional tsar  which had the same meaning.  This is reflected in the numbering used by scholars John V Palaiologos is numbered after John III Vatatzes and John IV Laskaris both emperors of Nicaea but the other rival emperors are treated as entirely new lines of succession.  Kaisar was originally a common way of referring to the emperor in the East. By the 
6 thcentury however writers considered it to be a lower title than basileus.36  Initially the number of coemperors was often no more than one. Constantine I notably ruled alongside eight successive emperors of equal seniority perhaps with the exception of Valerius Valens and Martinain.  There is one inscription erected by a senator and not Theoderic himself that calls him augustus which may indicate that some of his subjects regarded him as an emperor. Procopius refers to him as a genuine emperor basileus despite being in name an usurper tyrannos.132 Referencesedit Citationsedit  a b c Bury 2012 p. 408.  Watkin 2017 p. 37.  Galinsky 2005 pp. 1314  Williams 1997 p. 147  Heather 2005 p. 28  Barnes 2009 pp. 278279  Barnes 2009 pp. 279282  Sandys 1921 p. 285. To describe him as the founder of the Empire is an error for he bequeathed to Augustus rather warnings than examples.  Craven Maxwell 2019. The Imperial Families of Ancient Rome. Fonthill Media. p. 27.  Watkin 2017 pp. 3337.  Bowman Champlin  Lintott 1996 pp. 7687.  a b Eck  Takcs 2007 pp. 5058.  Eutropius Breviarium 
7.8  From that period he held the government as sole ruler for fortyfour years for during the twelve previous years he had held it in conjunction with Antony and Lepidus. Thus from the beginning of his reign to the end were fiftysix years.  Jerome Chronichon 1
84 th Olympiad. 
2 nd ruler of the Romans Octavianus Caesar Augustus reigned for 56 years and 6 months from whom the kings basileus of the Romans are called Augusti.  Bowman Champlin  Lintott 1996 p. 201.  Bowman Champlin  Lintott 1996 p. 119.  Rich John 2012. Making the emergency permanent auctoritas potestas and the evolution of the principate of Augustus. Des rformes augustennes 8082.  Ancient Rome at Encyclopedia Britannica  Murray John 1875. A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities. University of Chicago. pp. 260266.  Bowman Champlin  Lintott 1996 pp. 117118.  a b c d Petit 2022 pp. 4647.  a b c d Sandys 1921 pp. 287288.  Atkins Jed W. 2018. Roman Political Thought. Cambridge University Press. pp. 2930. ISBN 9781107107007.  a b c d e Mousourakis 2017 pp. 238239.  a b c Mousourakis 2014 p. 18.  a b c d Sandys 1921 p. 231.  a b Petit 2022 p. 145.  Mousourakis 2017 p. 242.  Bagnall Roger Shaler Worp Klaas Anthony 2004. Chronological Systems of Byzantine Egypt. Brill. p. 4. ISBN 9789004136540.  Curran John R. 2020 From Petrus to Pontifex Maximus The Early Reception and Appropriation of the Apostle Peter 60800 CE Brill pp. 4357 ISBN 9789004425682  Hekster 2022 p. 36.  a b Tuori Kaius 2019 lex de imperio Vespasiani Oxford Classical Dictionary ISBN 9780199381135  Sandys 1921 p. 280.  Canning Joseph 2014. A History of Medieval Political Thought 3001450. Routledge. ISBN 9781136623424.  a b c Bury 2012 pp. 1516.  a b Wifstrand Albert 2005. Epochs and Styles Selected Writings on the New Testament Greek Language and Greek Culture in the Postclassical Era. Mohr Siebeck. pp. 158163. ISBN 9783161486272.  a b Petit 2022 pp. 5254.  a b Mousourakis 2014 p. 20.  a b c TellegenCouperus 2002 p. 76.  a b Kelly  Hug 2022 pp. 6062.  Overmeire Sam Van 2012. Nero the Senate and People of Rome Reactions to an Emperors Image. In Deroux Carl ed.. Studies in latin Literature and Roman History. Vol. XVI. pp. 472491.  Birley Anthony 2000. Marcus Aurelius. Routledge. pp. 117 153 n. 157.  a b Smolin Nathan I. 2021. Christ the Emperor Roman Emperor and Christian Theology in the 
4 th Century AD Doctoral thesis. University of North Carolina. pp. 2223. doi
10.1 76
15 wg
7 y
3 h07.  Kazhdan Aleksandr Petrovich Constable Giles 1982. People and Power in Byzantium An Introduction to Modern Byzantine Studies. Dumbarton Oaks. p. 146. ISBN 9780884021032.  McEvoy 2013 pp. 3641.  Omissi 2018 pp. 3334.  a b Chronicon Paschale Olympiads 266276  Humphries Mark 2008. From Usurper to Emperor The Politics of Legitimation in the Age of Constantine. Journal of Late Antiquity. 1 82100. doi
10.1 3
53 jla.
0.0 009. S
2 CID 154368576.  Rantala Jussi 2017. The Ludi Saeculares of Septimius Severus The Ideologies of a New Roman Empire. Taylor  Francis. p. 95. ISBN 9781351970396.  Krsmanovi Bojana 11 September 2003. Doukas family. Encyclopaedia of the Hellenic World Asia Minor. Athens Foundation of the Hellenic World. Retrieved 17 April 2012.  Palaeologan Dynasty 12591453. Encyclopaedia of the Hellenic World. Asia Minor Foundation of the Hellenic World. 2008. Retrieved 20200617.  a b Claes Liesbeth 2015. Coins with power imperial and local messages on the coinage of the usurpers of the second half of the third century. Jaarboek voor Munt en Penningkunde. 102 1560. OCLC 948592865.  Omissi 2018 pp. 
17 ff.  Bennett Julian 2003. Trajan Optimus Princeps. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 9781134709144.  a b Kulikowski Michael 2006. Romes Gothic Wars From the Third Century to Alaric. Cambridge University Press. p. 199. ISBN 9781139458092.  Collections Online  British Museum. britishmuseum.org. Retrieved 20230809.  Omissi 2018 p. 131.  Van Tricht Filip 2011. The Imperial Ideology. The Latin Renovatio of Byzantium The Empire of Constantinople 12041228. Leiden Brill. pp. 61101. ISBN 9789004203235.  Omissi 2018 pp. 185186.  a b Elton Hugh 2018. The Roman Empire in Late Antiquity A Political and Military History. Cambridge University Press. p. 112. ISBN 9780521899314.  Ruiz Mara Pilar Garca Puertas Alberto J. Quiroga 2021. Emperors and Emperorship in Late Antiquity Images and Narratives. Brill. pp. 141146. ISBN 9789004446922.  a b c AguileraBarchet 2014 p. 54.  Bury 2012 p. 10.  a b TellegenCouperus 2002 p. 77.  a b Southern Pat 2003. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine. Routledge. p. 254. ISBN 9781134553815.  Digeser 2000 pp. 2024.  Hekster 2022 p. 189.  a b Digeser 2000 p. 25.  Watkin 2017 p. 53.  a b Digeser 2000 p. 26.  a b Watkin 2017 p. 56.  Bury 2012 p. 12.  Digeser 2000 pp. 2730.  AguileraBarchet 2014 p. 55.  a b Hekster 2022 p. 42.  Cameron A.  Schauer D. 1982. The Last Consul Basilius and His Diptych. The Journal of Roman Studies 72 126145.  Riedel Meredith 2018. Leo VI and the Transformation of Byzantine Christian Identity. Cambridge University Press. p. 100. ISBN 9781107053076.  McEvoy 2013 pp. 18.  Bury 2012 pp. 56.  Kim Young Richard 2021. The Cambridge Companion to the Council of Nicaea. Cambridge University Press. pp. 2729. ISBN 9781108427746.  Watkin 2017 p. 62.  Watkin 2017 p. 61.  Sandberg Kaj 2008. The SoCalled Division of the Roman Empire in AD 395 Notes on a Persistent Theme in Modern Historiography. Arctos. 42 199213. ISSN 05707
34 X.  McEvoy Meaghan 2017. Shadow emperors and the choice of Rome 455476 AD. Antiquit Tardive. 25 95112. doi
10.1 4
84 J.AT.
5.1 14852. ISSN 12507334.  Demo eljko 1988. The Mint in Salona Nepos and Ovida 4744812. In Kos Peter Demo eljko eds.. Studia Numismatica Labacensia Alexandro Jelonik Oblata. Ljubljana Narodni muzej.  There is much discussion on the term Byzantine as well as when does exactly the Dominate end and the Byzantine period begins. Mango Cyril 2002. The Oxford History of Byzantium. OUP Oxford. pp. 15. ISBN 0198140983.  ElCheikh Nadia Maria 2004. Byzantium Viewed by the Arabs. Harvard University Press. pp. 
22 ff. ISBN 9780932885302.  Parry Ken Melling David eds. 1999. The Blackwell Dictionary of Eastern Christianity. Malden MA Blackwell Publishing. p. 490. ISBN 9780631232032.  Kazhdan 1991 p. 413.  Fouracre Paul Gerberding Richard A. 1996. Late Merovingian France History and Hagiography 640720. Manchester University Press. p. 345. ISBN 9780719047916.  Hilsdale Cecily J. 2014. Byzantine Art and Diplomacy in an Age of Decline. Cambridge University Press. pp. 260262. ISBN 9781107033306.  Kaegi Walter E. 2003. Heraclius Emperor of Byzantium. Cambridge University Press. p. 194. ISBN 9780521814591.  a b c d Kazhdan 1991 p. 264.  a b c d Kazhdan 1991 p. 235.  Chapter Six On the Title of His Imperial Majesty and the State Coat of Arms. The Fundamental State Laws of the Russian Empire. Russian Imperial House. Archived from the original on Oct 22 2023.  a b Macrides Ruth Munitiz J. A. Angelov Dimiter 2016. PseudoKodinos and the Constantinopolitan Court Offices and Ceremonies. Routledge. pp. 302305. ISBN 9781317073956.  a b c Ostrogorsky George 1956. The Byzantine Emperor and the Hierarchical World Order. The Slavonic and East European Review. 35 84 114. ISSN 00376795. JSTOR 4204790.  Magdalino Paul 2017. Basileia The Idea of Monarchy in Byzantium 6001200. In Kaldellis Anthony Siniossoglou Niketas eds.. The Cambridge Intellectual History of Byzantium PDF. Cambridge University Press. pp. 575598. ISBN 9781107041813.  Caesaropapism  Byzantine Empire Autocracy  Ecclesiastical Power. Encyclopdia Britannica.  Kazhdan 1991 p. 1047.  a b Jeffreys Elizabeth Haldon John F. Cormack Robin 2008. The Oxford Handbook of Byzantine Studies. Oxford University Press. pp. 291293. ISBN 9780199252466.  a b c d Hornblower Simon Spawforth Antony Eidinow Esther 2012. Imperator. The Oxford Classical Dictionary. pp. 728729. doi
10.1 0
93 acrefore97801993811
35.0 
13.3 268. ISBN 9780199545568.  a b For a discussion of imperium and imperator see Foster Russell 2015. All roads lead to Rome. Mapping European Empire Tabulae imperii Europaei. Routledge. pp. 1152. ISBN 9781317593072.  a b Syme 1958.  Barrett Anthony A. 2002. Caligula The Corruption of Power. Routledge. p. 53. ISBN 9781134609888.  Sutherland C.H.V. 2018. Roman Imperial Coinage. Vol. 1. Spink Books. p. 133. ISBN 9781912667369.  a b Hammond 1957.  a b Paterculus II 8090 for example only uses princeps but the English text translates the word directly as emperor. Livy I. 19 calls Augustus imperator once but he also uses the term when writing about other generals II. 
39 ff.  a b c d Greenidge 1901 pp. 352355.  Grierson Philip 1973. Catalogue of Byzantine Coins vol. 3 Leo III to Nicephorus III 7171081. Washington D.C. Dumbarton Oaks. pp. 456467. ISBN 0884020126.  CIL 2 1660 6 930. Tiberius is sometimes called Tiberius Julius Caesar instead of the more common Tiberius Caesar.  a b Loewenstein 1973 p. 349.  Pagn Victoria Emma 2017. Tacitus. Bloomsbury Publishing. pp. 2830. ISBN 9781786731326.  Harriet I. Flower 2006. The Art of Forgetting Disgrace  Oblivion in Roman Political Culture. Univ of North Carolina Press. p. 225. ISBN 9780807830635.  Bury J. B. 2015. The Imperial Administrative System in the Ninth Century. Cambridge University Press. p. 35. ISBN 9781108081504.  Kazhdan 1991 p. 363.  Rsch Gerhard 1978. Onoma Basileias. Byzantina et Neograeca Vindobonensia in German. Verlag der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. pp. 4950. ISBN 9783700102601.  Novela 1 in Jus GraecoRomanum III p. 67.  Strothmann Meret Bochum 20061001. Augustus 2. Brills New Pauly.  Suetonius Augustus 7.  Southern Patricia 2013. Augustus. Routledge. p. 196. ISBN 9781134589494.  Tacitus. Annals Book II 62 90.  Drocourt Nicolas 2021. A Companion to Byzantium and the West 9001204. Brill. p. 234. ISBN 9789004499249.  Salmon Edward Togo 1968. A History of the Roman World from 30 B.C. to A.D. 138. Psychology Press. p. 11. ISBN 9780415045049.  Res Gestae I.7 For ten years in succession I was one of the triumvirs for the reestablishment of the constitution. To the day of writing this JuneJuly AD 14 I have been princeps senatus for forty years. Augustus thus dates his tenure as princeps from 27 BC. He also only counts his de jure tenure as triumvir.  Rees Roger 2002. Layers of Loyalty in Latin Panegyric AD 289307. Oxford University Press. pp. 146147. ISBN 9780199249183.  Goldsworthy 2010 p. 443  Roisman Joseph Worthington Ian 2010. A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. John Wiley  Sons. p. 375. ISBN 9781405179362.  Madariaga Isabel De 2014. Politics and Culture in EighteenthCentury Russia. Routledge. pp. 1718. ISBN 9781317881902.  Bellinger Alfred Raymond Grierson Philip 1973. Catalogue of the Byzantine Coins in the Dumbarton Oaks Collection and in the Whittemore Collection. Dumbarton Oaks. p. 96. ISBN 9780884022619.  Tricht Filip Van 2011. The Latin Renovatio of Byzantium The Empire of Constantinople 12041228. Brill. p. 357. ISBN 9789004203921.  a b Amory Patrick 2003. People and Identity in Ostrogothic Italy 489554. Cambridge University Press. p. 59. ISBN 9780521526357.  Fouracre Paul McKitterick Rosamond Abulafia David 1995. The New Cambridge Medieval History Volume 1 c. 5
00 c. 700. Cambridge University Press. p. 146. ISBN 9780521362917.  Arnold Jonathan J. 2014. Theoderic and the Roman Imperial Restoration. Cambridge University Press. pp. 7277 100104. ISBN 9781107054400.  Collins Roger 2008. Visigothic Spain 409711. John Wiley  Sons. pp. 3536. ISBN 9780470754566.  Martindale John R. 1980 Masties. The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire  Volume 2 Cambridge University Press p. 734 ISBN 0521201594  Moorhead John 2013. Justinian. Routledge. p. 85. ISBN 9781317898795.  Ostrogorsky 1957 p. 164  Ostrogorsky 1957 pp. 1
64 ff  Ostrogorsky 1957 p. 175  Ostrogorsky 1957 p. 176  Setton 1978 p. 463.  Enepekides 1960 pp. 138143.  Freiberg 2014 p. 152.  StollbergRilinger Barbara 2015. The Emperors Old Clothes Constitutional History and the Symbolic Language of the Holy Roman Empire. Berghahn Books. p. 131. ISBN 9781782388050.  Nicol 1992 p. ix.  re 2020 p. 46.  Moustakas 2011 p. 215.  a b nalck Halil 2019. ki Karann Sultan ki Denizin Hakan Kayseri Rum  Fatih Sultan Mehemmed Han in Turkish. Trkiye I Bankas Kltr Yaynlar. ISBN 9786257999120.  Nicolle Haldon  Turnbull 2007 p. 174.  Kumar 2017 p. 90.  Nicol 1967 p. 334.  goston 2021 p. 80.  olak 2014 p. 20.  Koodziejczyk Dariusz 2012. Khan caliph tsar and imperator the multiple identities of the Ottoman sultan. In Fibiger Bang Peter Koodziejczyk Dariusz eds.. Universal Empire A Comparative Approach to Imperial Culture and Representation in Eurasian History. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139136952.  Kumar 2017 p. 89.  Breviarum in De Imperatoribus Romanis.  Chronography of 354 AD. Part 16 Chronicle of the City of Rome. Tertullian.org.  Dean James Elmer 1935. Epiphanius Treatise on Weights and Measures The Syriac Version. The University of Chicago Press. pp. 2839. OCLC 912074.  Cessi Roberto ed. 1993. Origo civitatum Italie seu Venetiarum Chronicon Altinate et Chronicon Gradense. Tipografia del senato. pp. 102104. OCLC 1067434891  Omissi 2018 pp. 333.  Barnes Timothy D. 1982. The New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine. p. 15. doi
10.4 1
59 harvard.9780674280670. ISBN 9780674280663. Literary sources explicitly style him Caesar the coins Augustus Sourcesedit goston Gbor 2021. The Last Muslim Conquest. Princeton Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691159324. AguileraBarchet Bruno 2014. A History of Western Public Law Between Nation and State. Springer. ISBN 9783319118031. Barnes Timothy 2009. The first Emperor the view of late antiquity. In Griffin Miriam ed.. A Companion to Julius Caesar. John Wiley  Sons. ISBN 9781444308457. Bowman Alan K. Champlin Edward Lintott Andrew eds. 1996. The Cambridge Ancient History Volume X The Augustan Empire 43 B.C.A.D. 69. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521264303. Bury J. B. 2012 1889. History of the Later Roman Empire. Vol. 1. Dover Publications. ISBN 9780486143385. olak Hasan 2014. Tekfur fasiliyus and kayser Disdain Negligence and Appropriation of Byzantine Imperial Titulature in the Ottoman World. In Hadjianastasis Marios ed.. Frontiers of the Ottoman Imagination Studies in Honour of Rhoads Murphey. Leiden Brill. ISBN 9789004283510. Digeser Elizabeth DePalma 2000. The Making of a Christian Empire Lactantius  Rome. Cornell University Press. ISBN 9780801435942. Eck Werner Takcs Sarolta A. 2007 The Age of Augustus translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider 
2 nd ed. Oxford Blackwell Publishing ISBN 9781405151498 Enepekides P. K. 1960. Das Wiener Testament des Andreas Palaiologos vom 7. April 1502 The Vienna Testament of Andreas Palaiologos from 7 April 1502. Akten des 11. Internat. ByzantinistenKongresses 1958 in German. Munich C.H. Beck. pp. 138143. OCLC 761003148. Freiberg Jack 2014. Bramantes Tempietto the Roman Renaissance and the Spanish Crown. New York Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107042971. Galinsky Karl 2005. The Cambridge companion to the Age of Augustus. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521807968. Retrieved 20110803. Goldsworthy Adrian 2010. How Rome Fell Death of a Superpower. Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300164268. Greenidge A. H. J. 1901. Roman Public Life. London Macmillan  Co. Hammond Mason 1957. Imperial Elements in the Formula of the Roman Emperors during the First Two and a Half Centuries of the Empire. Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. 25 1964. doi
10.2 3074238646. JSTOR 4238646. Heather Peter 2005. The Fall of the Roman Empire. Pan Macmillan. ISBN 9780330491365. Retrieved 20110803. Hekster Olivier 2022. Caesar rules  the Emperor in the changing Roman world c. 50 BC  AD 565. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781009226790. Kazhdan Alexander ed. 1991 Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium Oxford University Press ISBN 9780195046526 Kelly Benjamin Hug Angela eds. 2022. The Roman Emperor and his Court c. 30 BCc. AD 300. Vol. 1. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781009081511. Kumar Krishan 2017. Visions of Empire How Five Imperial Regimes Shaped the World. Princeton Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691192802. McEvoy Meaghan 2013. Child Emperor Rule in the Late Roman West AD 367455. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199664818. Mousourakis George 2014. Roman Law and the Origins of the Civil Law Tradition. Springer. ISBN 9783319122687. Mousourakis George 2017. The Historical and Institutional Context of Roman Law. Routledge. ISBN 9781351888417. Moustakas Konstantinos 2011. Byzantine Visions of the Ottoman Empire Theories of Ottoman Legitimacy by Byzantine Scholars after the Fall of Constantinople. In Lymberopoulou Angeliki ed.. Images of the Byzantine World Visions Messages and Meanings  Studies Presented to Leslie Brubaker. Farnham Ashgate. ISBN 9781409407768. Loewenstein Karl 1973. The Governance of Rome. The Hague Netherlands Martinus Nijhof. ISBN 9789024714582. Nicol Donald M. 1967. The Byzantine View of Western Europe. Greek Roman and Byzantine Studies. 8 4 315339. Nicol Donald M. 1992. The Immortal Emperor The Life and Legend of Constantine Palaiologos Last Emperor of the Romans. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780511583698. Nicolle David Haldon John Turnbull Stephen 2007. The Fall of Constantinople The Ottoman Conquest of Byzantium. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 9781846032004. OCLC 78989635. Omissi Adrastos 2018. Emperors and Usurpers in the Later Roman Empire. Oxford University Press. pp. 333. ISBN 9780198824824. Ostrogorsky George 1957. History of the Byzantine State. Translated by Hussey Joan. New Brunswick Rutgers University Press. Petit Paul 2022. Pax Romana. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520371101. Sandys John 1921. A Companion to Latin Studies 
3 rd ed.. Cambridge University Press. Setton Kenneth M. 1978. The Papacy and the Levant 12041571 Volume II The Fifteenth Century. Philadelphia The American Philosophical Society. ISBN 0871691272. Syme Ronald 1958 Imperator Caesar A Study in Nomenclature Historia vol. 7 no. 2 pp. 175188 JSTOR 4434568 TellegenCouperus Olga 2002. A Short History of Roman Law. Routledge. ISBN 9781134908011. re Pinar 2020. Reclaiming Byzantium Russia Turkey and the Archaeological Claim to the Middle East in the 
19 th Century. London I. B. Tauris. ISBN 9781788310123. Watkin Thomas Glyn 2017. An Historical Introduction to Modern Civil Law. Taylor  Francis. ISBN 9781351958912. Williams Stephen 1997 1985. Diocletian and the Roman recovery. New York Routledge. ISBN 9780415918275. Retrieved 20110803. Further readingedit Christoforou Panayiotis 2023. Imagining the Roman Emperor perceptions of rulers in the high empire. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781009362498. Millar Fergus 1977. The Emperor in the Roman World 31 BCAD 337. Cornell University Press. ISBN 9780801410581. Scarre Chris. Chronicle of the Roman Emperors The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers of Imperial Rome. London Thames  Hudson 1995. ISBN 0500050775 WallaceHadrill Andrew 1982. Civilis Princeps Between Citizen and King. The Journal of Roman Studies. 72 3248. doi
10.2 307299114. ISSN 00754358. JSTOR 299114. S
2 CID 162347650. External linksedit Website of De Imperatoribus Romanis Decadence Rome and Romania and the Emperors Who Werent and Other Reflections on Roman History by Kelley L. Ross Ph.D. Chronology of Roman emperors and other rulers 30 BC1461 by Ian Mladjov Ph.D. M.A. B.A. v t e Roman emperors by time period List of Roman emperors Roman Empire Family tree Early Principate Crisis of the Third Century Dominate Western Roman Empire and Eastern Roman Empire JulioClaudian dynasty 27 BCAD 68 Year of the 4 Emperors 6869 Flavian dynasty 6996 NervaAntonine dynasty 96192 Year of the 5 Emperors 192193 Severan dynasty 193235 Barracks emperors 235284 Year of the 6 Emperors 238 Gordian dynasty 238244 Illyrian emperors 268284 Gallic emperors 260274 Britannic emperors 286297 Tetrarchies 293313 Constantinian dynasty 305363 Valentinianic dynasty 364392 Theodosian dynasty 378455 Western Roman emperors 395476 Eastern RomanByzantine emperors 3951453 Emperors of Nicaea 12041261 Emperors of Trebizond 12041461 EmperorsDespots of Thessalonica 12241246 v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Ancient Rome topics Outline Timeline History Foundation Kingdom overthrow Republic Empire History Pax Romana Principate Dominate Western Empire fall historiography of the fall Byzantine Empire decline fall Later Roman Empire History Constitution History Kingdom Republic Empire Late Empire Senate Legislative assemblies Curiate Centuriate Tribal Plebeian Executive magistrates SPQR Law Twelve Tables Mos maiorum Citizenship Auctoritas Imperium Status Litigation Government Curia Forum Cursus honorum Collegiality Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Optimates and populares Province Magistrates Ordinary Consul Censor Praetor Tribune Tribune of the plebs Military tribune Quaestor Aedile Promagistrate Governor Extraordinary Rex Interrex Dictator Magister equitum Decemviri Consular tribune Triumvir Military History Borders Establishment Structure Campaigns Political control Strategy Engineering Frontiers and fortifications castra Technology Army Legion Infantry tactics Personal equipment Siege engines Siege in Ancient Rome Navy Auxiliaries Decorations and punishments Hippika gymnasia Economy Agriculture Deforestation Commerce Finance Currency Republican currency Imperial currency Culture Architecture Art Bathing Calendar Clothing Cosmetics Cuisine Education Folklore Hairstyles Literature Music Mythology Religion Deities Romanization Romans Sexuality Spectacles Theatre Toys and games Wine Society Patricians Plebs Conflict of the Orders Secessio plebis Equites Gens Tribes Assembly Patronage Naming conventions Demography Women Marriage Adoption Slavery Bagaudae Technology Amphitheatres Aqueducts Bridges Circuses Civil engineering Concrete Domes Metallurgy Numerals Roads Sanitation Ships Temples Theatres Thermae Latin History Alphabet Versions Old Classical Vulgar Late Medieval Renaissance NeoLatin Contemporary Ecclesiastical Romance languages Writers Latin Aelius Donatus Ammianus Marcellinus Appuleius Asconius Pedianus Augustine Aurelius Victor Ausonius Bothius Caesar Catullus Cassiodorus Censorinus Cicero Claudian Columella Cornelius Nepos Ennius Eutropius Fabius Pictor Sextus Pompeius Festus Rufus Festus Florus Frontinus Fronto Fulgentius Gellius Horace Hydatius Hyginus Jerome Jordanes Julius Paulus Justin Juvenal Lactantius Livy Lucan Lucretius Macrobius Marcellus Empiricus Marcus Aurelius Manilius Martial Nicolaus Damascenus Nonius Marcellus Obsequens Orosius Ovid Petronius Phaedrus Plautus Pliny the Elder Pliny the Younger Pomponius Mela Priscian Propertius Quadrigarius Quintilian Quintus Curtius Rufus Sallust Seneca the Elder Seneca the Younger Servius Sidonius Apollinaris Silius Italicus Statius Suetonius Symmachus Tacitus Terence Tertullian Tibullus Valerius Antias Valerius Maximus Varro Velleius Paterculus Verrius Flaccus Vergil Vitruvius Greek Aelian Atius of Amida Appian Arrian Cassius Dio Diodorus Siculus Diogenes Lartius Dionysius of Halicarnassus Dioscorides Eusebius of Caesaria Galen Herodian Josephus Julian Libanius Lucian Pausanias Philostratus Phlegon of Tralles Photius Plutarch Polyaenus Polybius Porphyrius Priscus Procopius Simplicius of Cilicia Sozomen Stephanus Byzantinus Strabo Themistius Theodoret Zonaras Zosimus Major cities Alexandria Antioch Aquileia Berytus Bononia Carthage Constantinopolis Eboracum Leptis Magna Londinium Lugdunum Lutetia Mediolanum Pompeii Ravenna Roma Smyrna Vindobona Volubilis Lists and other topics Cities and towns Climate Consuls Dictators Distinguished women Dynasties Emperors Empresses Fiction Film Generals Gentes Geographers Institutions Laws Legacy Legions Magistri equitum Nomina Pontifices maximi Praetors Quaestors Tribunes RomanIranian relations External wars and battles Civil wars and revolts Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleRomanemperoroldid1221766797 Categories 
20 s BC establishments in the Roman Empire 1453 disestablishments 
15 thcentury disestablishments in the Byzantine Empire Roman emperors Ancient Roman titles Positions of authority Hidden categories CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 Turkishlanguage sources tr Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latinlanguage text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 1 May 2024 at 2138 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width