View source for List of pharaohs - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk View source for List of pharaohs Add languages Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item  List of pharaohs You do not have permission to edit this page for the following reason This IP address has been blocked from editing Wikipedia. This does not affect your ability to read Wikipedia pages. Most people who see this message have done nothing wrong. Some kinds of blocks restrict editing from specific service providers or telecom companies in response to recent abuse or vandalism and can sometimes affect other users who are unrelated to that abuse. Review the information below for assistance if you do not believe that you have done anything wrong. The IP address or range 1
56.2 

08.0.0 16 has been blocked disabled by Materialscientist for the following reasons To edit please log in. Last edited Last edited by 1530 8 May 2024 UTC Usermulti error no username detected help. Editing by unregistered users from your shared IP address or address range may be currently disabled due to abuse. However you are still able to edit if you sign in with an account. If you are currently blocked from creating an account and cannot create one elsewhere in the foreseeable future you may follow the instructions at WikipediaRequest an account to request that volunteers create your username for you. Please use an email address issued to you by your ISP school or organization so that we may verify that you are a legitimate user on this network. Please reference this block in the comment section of the form. Please check on this list that the username you choose has not already been taken. We apologize for any inconvenience. This block will expire on 0031 8 August 2024. Even when blocked you will usually still be able to edit your user talk page as well as email administrators and other editors. For information on how to proceed please read the FAQ for blocked users and the guideline on block appeals. The guide to appealing blocks may also be helpful. Other useful links Blocking policy  HelpI have been blocked You can view and copy the source of this page  Ancient Egyptian king lists Modern lists of pharaohs are based on historical records and including Ancient Egyptian king lists and later histories such as Manethos Aegyptiaca as well as archaeological evidence. Concerning ancient sources Egyptologists and historians alike call for caution in regard to the credibility exactitude and completeness of these sources many of which were written long after the reigns they report.refToby A. H. Wilkinson Royal Annals Of Ancient Egypt. Routledge London 2012 ISBN1136602
47 X p. 50.ref An additional problem is that ancient king lists are often damaged inconsistent with one another andor selective.The following ancient king lists are known along with the dynasty under which they were createdrefToby A. H. Wilkinson Royal Annals Of Ancient Egypt. Routledge London 2012 ISBN1136602
47 X p. 61.ref Den seal impressions 
1 st Dynasty found on a cylinder seal in Den pharaohDens tomb. It lists all 
1 st Dynasty kings from Narmer to Den by their Horus names.ref namejosepcite book urlhttpsbooks.google.combooksidpJ
48 YP
14 qZQC pages16875 editor
1 firstZahi editor
1 lastHawass editor
1 linkZahi Hawass firstJosep lastCervelloAutuori chapterNarmer Menes and the Seals from Abydos year2003 titleEgyptology at the Dawn of the Twentyfirst Century Proceedings of the Eighth International Congress of Egyptologists 2000 volume2 locationCairo publisherAmerican University in Cairo Pressisbn9789774247149 ref Palermo Stone 
5 th Dynasty carved on an basaltolivinebasalt slab. Broken into pieces and thus today incomplete. Giza writing board 
6 th Dynasty painted with red green and black ink on gypsum and cedar wood. Very selective. South Saqqara Stone 
6 th Dynasty carved on a black basalt slab. Very selective. Karnak King List 
18 th Dynasty carved on limestone. Very selective. Abydos King List of Seti I 
19 th Dynasty carved on limestone. Very detailed but omitting some of the Kings from First Intermediate Period and all the kings from Second Intermediate Period of Egypt. Abydos King List of Ramesses II 
19 th Dynasty carved on limestone. Very selective. Ramesseum king list 
19 th Dynasty carved on limestone. Contains most of the New Kingdom pharaohs up to Ramesses II. Saqqara Tablet 
19 th Dynasty carved on limestone. Very detailed but omitting most kings of the 
1 st Dynasty for unknown reasons. Turin King List 
19 th Dynasty written with red and black ink on papyrus. Likely the most complete kinglist in history today damaged. Medinet Habu king list 
20 th Dynasty carved on limestone and very similar to the Ramesseum king list. Manethos Aegyptiaca Greek Period possibly written on papyrus. The original writings are lost today and many anecdotes assigned to certain kings seem fictitious. Return to List of pharaohs. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiListofpharaohs Hidden category UserLinks transclusions with errors Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width