Giza writing board - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Description 
2 Inscription Toggle Inscription subsection 
2.1 Overview 
2.2 King list 
2.3 List of deities 
2.4 Domain list 
2.5 Sacrifice lists 
3 Discovery 
4 Function 
5 See also 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Giza writing board 4 languages  Deutsch Franais  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian artefact Giza writing board Part of the king list Material Cedar wood and Gypsum Created c. 2345 BC Discovered 1904 Giza Giza Governorate Egypt Discovered by George Reisner The Giza writing board also named Giza king list is an ancient Egyptian artefact created during the late Fifth Dynasty c.2494  c.2345 BCE or early Sixth Dynasty c.2345  c.2181 BCE. It was found in the burial place of a high official Mesdjerw and his wife Hetepneferet. The Giza writing board is also known today under the name Giza king list because it presents a short list of six pharaohs from different dynasties.1 Mesdjerw held the titles of Confidant of the king Inspector of the auditioners of the treasure house and Overseer of the gold storages.2 Descriptionedit The Giza writing board was made of polished cedar wood and gypsum. The original size of the board is unknown and cannot be reconstructed due to the damaged state of the artefact the tablet was broken into pieces by grave robbers and the cedar wood has nearly completely decayed away. Originally it was made of a thin wooden board that was covered smoothly with white gypsum. It was inscribed with a vast and detailed list written with red green and black ink.3 Inscriptionedit Overviewedit Giza writing board complete view after Edward Brovarskis Two Old Kingdom writing boards from Giza page 52 obj. 
1.4 . From the right to the left empty columns first four rows king list following four rows deity list 12 rows domain list 27 rows and the sacrificial animals in boxes. The list was divided into five chapters each separated by three thicker strokes. The first two chapters were meant to contain a text but for unknown reasons these remained empty.3 The third chapter contains 43 vertical columns. The first 4 columns contain the famous king list with six names that are repeated verbatim in every column. Each king list ends with the word Maat here with the meaning justified. The next 12 columns contain a list of deities three different deity groups repeated four times each. The same goes for the remaining 27 columns which list certain city names. However the last city group is repeated only three times which explains the uneven sum of 27 city columns altogether.23 The fourth chapter is divided into square compartments which contains the depictions of sacrificial birds. The fifth chapter is also divided into compartments this time filled with depictions of sacrificial fishes.23 King listedit king list List of deities List of domains and places List of sacrificial animals The famous king list contains the cartouche names of following kings from top to bottom Neferirkare Kakai 
5 th dynasty. Sahure also 
5 th dynasty. Khafra 
4 th dynasty builder of the second largest pyramid at Giza. Djedefra also 
4 th dynasty first pharaoh using the sun symbol in a royal cartouche. Teti 
3 rd dynasty commonly identified as HorSekhemkhet. Bedjataw 
2 nd dynasty commonly identified as king HorHotepsekhemwy. The list names the kings in reverse chronological order with the earliest king being the last given. Each column ends with the phrase maa meaning the justified which was typical for honouring deceased kings. It may be possible that Mesdjerw participated in the mortuary cult for these kings. This would explain why it was important for him to mention and thus honour only these selected kings.2 The cartouche names Bedjataw or Bedjaw and Teti are of special interest to Egyptologists. Indeed the name Bedjataw is otherwise only known from the Abydos King List dating to the much later New Kingdom period. According to the position given to it on the list the name Teti seems to designate a king who must have ruled before Djedefre and Khafre. A possible candidate for Teti is HorSekhemkhet whose nebty name is known from ivory stencils to have been Djeserteti. Hence the Egyptologist Wolfgang Helck has proposed that Teti is Sekhemkhet.13 List of deitiesedit The list of deities comprises three fix groups of certain deities each group is repeated four times which results in twelve columns altogether. Every group comprises eight deities there were once 24 gods listed. However the writing board is heavily damaged in this section many of the names are lost today.2 First group from top to bottom Seker god of the underworld. Worshipped since predynastic times. Nemty another underworld deity also worshipped since predynastic times. Sopdu protector deity of foreign origin often depicted with one or several captives. destroyed. Horus god of the sky safety patron of the pharaohs. Geb earth deity. Sak crocodile god which is seldom mentioned and thus little known. Neith goddess of war and hunting worshipped since predynastic times. Second group top to bottom destroyed. destroyed. destroyed. Nekhbet throne goddess in shape of a vulture resting on a basket. Shezmu seldom mentioned deity. He was the god of the wine the gardeners and the dancers. A party god. Qis a deity of sumerian origin worshipped since protodynastic times. He is shown holding two giraffes or lions in each hand. Selket goddess of protection and health. Her heraldic animal is the scorpion. Sobek crocodile god of the Nile and the swamps. He evoked and controlled the yearly lifespending Nile inundation. Third group top to bottom destroyed. Min god of potence and fertility. His idol is an erect phallus. He was worshipped since predynastic times. Onuris god of war and expeditions. He is shown in Asiatic wardrobes with knotted hair yellowish skin and a long lush beard. Seshat goddess of building founding and measuring. She was worshipped since Early dynastic period. OsirisKhontamenty god of the underworld. He is the godlike judge of the court of the dead. Meret seldom mentioned goddess of dancing luck and joy. She is depicted standing on a gold collar and clapping her hands rhythmically. Kherty god of the underworld. He welcomes the deceased ones and guides them safely to the court of the dead. Anubis jackalheaded god of grieve mummification and burials. He was worshipped since Early dynastic times. Domain listedit The domain list comprises 28 cities and domains. Some of these domains are well known to Egyptologists because their names were found in numerous Old Kingdom tombs throughout Giza but also at Saqqara. Others are devoted to certain gods such as the cities IretNemty where Nemty works and TefetKhnum where they gather together for Khnum. Another city Tenmet afefi hill of the flies is of particular interest because it shows by far the earliest hieroglyph of a house fly.23 Sacrifice listsedit The first sacrifice list comprises six birds most of them goose and duck species. However despite the detailed and naturalistic drawings it remains difficult to Egyptologists and ornithologists to identify some of the depicted species. The first bird can be identified as a Sennar guineafowl. This bird is known in hieroglyphic writings as Nehbird its signs stands for being attentive or being vigilant. The fourth bird might be a greylag and the penultimate bird may be a pintail duck.23 The second sacrifice list comprises three species of fish each species repeated twice which makes a total sum of six fish depictions. The first species can be identified as a Nile perch the second one is some kind of carp species. The third fish can be identified as a Nile Tilapia.23 Discoveryedit The writing board was found in 1904 by American Egyptologist George Andrew Reisner in chamber C of Mesdjerws tomb mastaba G1011 at Giza. The tomb was badly damaged by grave robbers. Mesdjerws name and titles were found on a loosened door jamb the writing board was scattered across the sandy floor.23 Functionedit The exact function of the Giza writing board remains unclear. In normal cases royal scribes used such writing boards for calligraphic and dictional practices. Or they used them as blueprints for later relief decorations. However the hieroglyphic design and the depictions of the animals on the Giza writing board are way too detailed and professionally exercised to be a simple blueprint or writing test. For this reasons some scholars think it was possible that Mesdjerw created his writing board as some kind of notebook for the afterlife. Such things were similar to the offering stelae inside tomb chambers of royal officials and their popularity grew during the New Kingdom period. Old Kingdom examples however are extremely rare and in case of the Giza writing board unique in its design.23 See alsoedit Karnak king list Aegyptiaca Palermo Stone Saqqara Tablet Turin King List Referencesedit  a b Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit  gyptologische Abhandlungen A . Vol. 45. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774. p. 117.  a b c d e f g h i j Edward Brovarski Two Old Kingdom writing boards from Giza. In Annales du Service des Antiquits de lEgypte No. 71. Cairo 1987 p. 29  52.  a b c d e f g h i j William Stevenson Smith William Kelly Simpson The art and architecture of ancient Egypt. Penguin Books London 1981 ISBN 0140560149 S. 358  359.  Edward Brovarski Two Old Kingdom writing boards from Giza. In Annales du Service des Antiquits de lEgypte No. 71. Cairo 1987 p. 52 obj. 1. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleGizawritingboardoldid1213134125 Categories 
25 thcentury BC works 
24 thcentury BC works 1904 archaeological discoveries Ancient Egyptian King lists Archaeological discoveries in Egypt Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 March 2024 at 0817 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width