Penn Museum - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History Toggle History subsection 
1.1 2009 restructuring 
1.2 Museum building 
2 Museum Library 
3 Collections Toggle Collections subsection 
3.1 Ethnology and Archaeology Collections 

3.1.1 Africa 

3.1.2 North America 

3.1.3 Mexico and Central America 

3.1.4 South America 

3.1.5 Asia 

3.1.6 Egypt 
3.2 Iraq 
3.3 Physical Anthropology Collections 

3.3.1 Morton Collection 

3.3.2 MOVE Bombing Victim Remains 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Further reading 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Penn Museum 15 languages  Azrbaycanca  Deutsch Franais  Italiano     Srpskohrvatski   Trke   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 3956
56 N 7511
28 W  
39.9 4
90 N 
75.1 9
11 W  
39.9 490 
75.1 911 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Archaeological museum University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology The Warden Garden and Main Entrance to the Penn Museum Established 1887 1887 Location 3260 South Street Philadelphia Pennsylvania United States Coordinates 3956
56 N 7511
28 W  
39.9 4
90 N 
75.1 9
11 W  
39.9 490 
75.1 911 Type Anthropology and archaeology Director Dr. Christopher Woods Public transit access Penn Medicine SEPTA Regional Rail SEPTA bus 30 40 42 49 LUCY Website penn.museum 
5 th
4 th century BC Etruscan gold necklace display at the Penn Museum 2005. Penn Museum formerly known as The University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology is an archaeology and anthropology museum at the University of Pennsylvania. It is located on Penns campus in the University City neighborhood of Philadelphia at the intersection of 
33 rd and South Streets.1 It also is close enough for Drexel University students to walk or take SEPTA transportation services. Housing over 
1.3  million artifacts the museum features one of the most comprehensive collections of Middle and NearEastern art in the world. Historyedit The University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology was founded in 1887 following a successful archaeological expedition to the ancient site of Nippur in modernday Iraq then part of the Ottoman Empire. Provost William Pepper persuaded the trustees of the University of Pennsylvania to erect a fireproof building to house artifacts from the excavation.1 During the late 
19 th and early 
20 th centuries North American and European museums regularly sponsored such excavations throughout the Mediterranean and Near East sharing the ownership of their discoveries with the host country. Penn Museum followed this practice in acquiring the vast majority of its collections and as a result most of the museums objects have a known archaeological context increasing their value for archaeological and anthropological research and presentation. Since its beginning the Penn Museums scientists have conducted more than 300 archaeological and anthropological expeditions around the world. Today the museums three floors of gallery space feature materials from the ancient Mediterranean World Egypt the Near East Mesopotamia East Asia and Mesoamerica as well as artifacts from the indigenous peoples of Africa and Native America. Since 1958 the Penn Museum has published Expedition magazine.  ISSN 001447382 The excavations and collections of the museum provide resources for student research and the museum hosts the Graduate Group in the Art and Archaeology of the Mediterranean World. 2009 restructuringedit On November 19 2008 the Penn Museums administration terminated eighteen Research Specialist positions in archaeological and anthropological research in the Mediterranean world the Middle East and Americas sections effective May 31 20
09.3  The scientific research center MASCA Museum Applied Science Center for Archaeology was also closed although the MASCA scientists moved to other Sections within the museum. The decision elicited local and worldwide criticism among concerned scholars who felt that it departed from the Penn Museums historic mission as a research institution. Museum administrators attributed this measure to the 2008 financial crisis and the deep budget cuts that had resulted at the University of Pennsylvania. The museums director at the time Dr. Richard Hodges later offered positions as Associate Curators or Research Project Managers to eleven of the eighteen individuals affected. The museum affirmed its commitment to research citing more than fifty active research projects spanning five continents that were engaging nearly 200 Museumaffiliated scholarsmore than at any other archaeological and anthropological institute or museum in North America could claim at the time. Museum buildingedit The Stoner Courtyard at the Penn Museum The museum is housed in an Arts and Crafts and Eclectic style building that is one of the landmarks of the University of Pennsylvania campus. The existing original building onto which have been grafted several later additions is actually only approximately onethird of an ambitious design that would have created one of the largest museum buildings in the United States. Features of the extant building include a dramatic rotunda multiple courtyards and gardens a fountain reflecting pool glass mosaics iron gates and stone statuary. The Penn Museum was designed by a team of Philadelphia architects all of whom taught on the faculty of the university Wilson Eyre Cope  Stewardson and Frank Miles Day. The first phase was completed in 1899 and housed the discoveries from an expedition sponsored by the university to the ancient site of Nippur. The rotunda which houses the Harrison Auditorium was completed in 1915. Charles Klauder designed the Coxe Memorial Wing which opened in 1926 to house the museums Egyptian collection. The Sharpe Wing was completed in 19
29.4  The Coxe Memorial Egyptian Wing was added to the museum in 1924 through a bequest by former museum board president Eckley Coxe. The administrative wing was added in 1929. The Academic Wing which provided laboratories for the Anthropology department and classrooms was opened in 1971. The most recent major addition was made in 2002 with the addition of the Mainwaring Collections Storage Wing. Museum Libraryedit The Museum Library was established in 1900 when the personal library of University of Pennsylvania professor of American archaeology and linguistics Daniel Garrison Brinton was acquired.5 This library contained an estimated 4098 volumes of which the ethnology and linguistics of the American Indigenous peoples were the primary disciplines. This library also consists of a manuscript collection of nearly two hundred volumes relevant to the study of autochthonous Central American languages most of which are either severely endangered or have completely disappeared. The original location of the library holdings was the Furness Building until they were transferred to the museum building in 1898. They were relocated to the Elkins Library up until 1971 upon when they were moved to their final home in the university extension of the museum.5 Prior to its move in 1971 the collection was built upon the support of museum curators contributing their personal monographs negotiations with affiliate institutions here and abroad as well as endowments by philanthropic individuals.5 The library collection was maintained by a staff comprising a single parttime librarian until 1942 when Cynthia Griffin became the first fulltime librarian. It was under Griffin that the collection and library witnessed many developments. Prior to her arrival use of the library had been limited to employees of the museum and university professor however Griffin extended the accessibility to include students. She also augmented communication networks between the library and libraries worldwide. Within twenty years the librarys collection more than doubled its capacity from nearly 20000 volumes in 1945 to over 46000 volumes in 1965 and by 1971 the breadth of the collection was well over 50000 volumes increasing by 14000 volumes annually.5 The range of disciplines featured in the collection is specific to the museum itself and incorporates all divisions of anthropology and archaeology. There is a special emphasis on works published within the field of Mesoamerican archaeology as well as works which relate to the current research of the universitys professors. As of 2008 there are approximately 115000 volumes in the librarys collection 14000 of these volumes have been circulated on an annual basis. The library also has subscriptions to an estimated 549 scholarly journals. Computing services within the library include desktop and laptop computers. Other services encompass a range of printing and scanning utilities as well as accommodating seating for 154 individuals. The library supports two quiet rooms for patron study a space to examine photographs a room designed specifically for microform research and a collection of audio and video materials.5 Collectionsedit Headdress of a noblewoman buried at Ur from the report on the Joint Expedition of the British Museum and of the Penn Museum 1900. Illustration by M. Louise Baker. Penn Museums extensive collections fall into three main divisions archaeology the artifacts recovered from the past by excavation ethnology the objects and ideas collected from living peoples and physical anthropology the physical remains of humans and nonhuman primates. For curation and display the items in the archaeology and ethnology collections are organized by geographic regions. As of 2023 there are eleven permanent galleries Africa Asia Egypt Sphinx Middle East Eastern Mediterranean Etruscan Greece Rome Native American Voices and Mexico and Central America.6 The collections are organized along similar lines but with larger geographic groupings for some regions. Collection areas include Africa America North Central and South Asia Egypt Europe Etruscan Greece and Rome Mediterranean Near East and Oceania.7 Many items within these collections are not on display in the permanent galleries but may be used for research and temporary exhibits. None of the items in the physical anthropology collections are on display but they are used for research. Ethnology and Archaeology Collectionsedit Africaedit The Penn Museum has one of the largest collections of African ethnographic and archaeological objects in the country. Mostly obtained from 1891 to 1937 the collection contains objects from all regions of Africa but with a concentration from the Democratic Republic of the Congo Gabon Angola Morocco Sierra Leone Ivory Coast Senegal Nigeria Kenya Tanzania Ethiopia South Africa Namibia Botswana and Madagascar. Wearable Literature designed by Breanna Moore and Emerson Ruffin debuted in the Penn Museum on November 16 2019. The Penn Museum has one of the most extensive Sherbro Island collections in the world. During a museum sponsored expedition in 19361937 Curator of General Ethnology Henry Usher Hall spent seven months conducting ethnographic research among the Sherbro people of Sierra Leone. The collection consists of textiles sculpture artifacts related to subsistence and household items secret society and examples of medicine bundles. Halls papers include field notes bibliographies and textual commentaries that provide ethnographic information about the way of life of the Sherbro people and othersincluding the Mende Krim and Temne peopleswho lived among them. The Central African collection includes approximately 3000 artifacts from the Democratic Republic of Congo formerly the Belgian Congo. The majority of these artifacts were collected by the German ethnographer Leo Viktor Frobenius on his expedition to the Kasai district of the Congo in 1906. His collection illustrates the diverse sculptural forms found among the different cultural groups in the Central African region. Some of the cultures represented in the collection are the Kuba Kongo Luba Suku Yaka Pende Teke Chokwe and Luluwa. One of the lesser known collection within the African Section is the Moroccan collection. Dr. and Mrs. Talcott Williams travelled to Morocco in 1898 and returned with approximately 600 objects to document the cultures in Morocco. The collection consists of clothing shoes rugs blankets weapons jewelry pottery baskets cooking pots. This thorough collection of objects representing daily life was well documented by Dr. Williams who also collected on behalf of the Smithsonian. On November 16 20198 the Penn Museum debuted a newly renovated African gallery alongside many other new galleries and rooms. Penn professor of Sociology and Africana Studies Dr. Tufuku Zuberi9 was appointed as the head curator for the new Africa exhibit10 and approached his former student Breanna Moore about designing a new dress for the gallery. Moore enlisted the help of her friend and Philadelphia artist Emerson Ruffin to create the dress titled Wearable Literature11 now a popular item in the Penn Museums African galleries.12 North Americaedit The North American archaeological collections contain heritage items from twenty thousand years old to a few hundred years old. In the 19
60 s these were arranged chronologically. Some of these items were excavated in the late 
19 th century and early 
20 th century while others were purchased or donated by reputable collectors.13 In 1896 Frank Hamilton Cushing excavated wolf deer and human masquettes that he found in the waters off of Key Marco Florida. The masquettes were unfortunately distorted upon removal from the water but they and the numerous tools and practical items had an unusually high level of preservation due to their underwater location.1314 In the interwar years Edgar B. Howard excavated some of the oldest items in the collection from the American Southwest.13 His excavations in 1932 and 1933 near Clovis New Mexico are significant in identifying the Clovis Point and in proving the coexistence of humans and extinct animals such as the bison and mammoth.15 The North American ethnographic holdings number approximately 40000 heritage items attributed to approximately 200 Indigenous nations and organized within eleven geographic regions Arctic SubArctic Northwest Coast Plateau California Great Basin Southwest Great Plains Southeast and Northeast. The strongest collections are those systematically created via ethnographic collecting expeditions in Alaska the Northwest Coast Southwest Southeast and Subarctic regions. Many of the Northwest Coast materials were collected in the early 
20 th century by Louis Shotridge the son of an influential Tlingit chiefly family.13 Penn Museum director George Byron Gordon hired Shotridge as a curator. He worked for the museum in various capacities between 1912 and 1932 including multiple field expeditions sponsored by John Wanamaker.16 Prominent ethnographers of the time also contributed to the North American collections. As a professor and chair of the anthropology department at the University of Pennsylvania Frank Gouldsmith Speck was one of the most prolific donors to the museums SubArctic ethnology collections. In addition Speck was an early adopter of audio recording technology with which he gathered examples of Creek and Yuchi songs.13 Individual donations significantly contribute to the collections in many areas. Mexico and Central Americaedit Cocl gold plaque or pectoral from Sitio Conte Panama Penn Museums Mesoamerican collections include objects from Mexico Guatemala Belize El Salvador Honduras Nicaragua Panama and Costa Rica. The American Sections ethnographic collections from Mesoamerica include strong collections of masks ceramics and textiles from Guatemala and very small collections from Mexico Panama Costa Rica Nicaragua and El Salvador. In Guatemala Robert Burkitt acquired ethnographic ceramics textiles tools hammocks fans and gourds from the Alta Verapaz the early twentieth century. The museum houses the outstanding Lilly de Jongh Osborne collection of 
19 th and early 
20 th century Guatemalan textiles exceptional because of its complete outfits for men women and children acquired systematically across different Guatemalan villages. This collection includes raw material and other objects and tools related to weaving. Ruben Reina studied the production of ceramics in Guatemala in the 19
60 s and 19
70 s and collected ceramics and textiles from the region. The Section houses a large collection of Guatemalan masks amassed by James Moore in the 19
60 s. The Penn Museum conducted an excavation of the Mayan city of Tikal Guatemala from 1956 to 1970. Many important artifacts from this excavation are on view in the museum along with several stelae from the contemporary cities of Caracol and Piedras Negras. The gallery also displays many Aztecan Oaxacan and Teotihuacano artifacts. On November 16 2019 the Penn Museum launched a new exhibit entitled The Mexico and Central America Gallery. This gallery features art and artifacts from eight Central American countries including Guatemala El Salvador and Nicaragua.17 Specifically one object of importance that is on display is Stela 14 a limestone rock with intricate carvings that stands at ten feet tall.18 Tatiana Proskouriakoff excavated this object in Piedras Negras and at the time of its discovery archaeologists could not decipher the Mayan hieroglyphics engraved in it. Proskouriakoff crossreferenced the glyphs on the Stela to historical events eventually decoding the hieroglyphic language. Proskouriakoffs discovery transformed the field of Maya Studies.19 South Americaedit The museums South American collections are as varied as the regions from which they come  the arid coast of Peru the Andean Highlands and the tropical lowlands of the Amazon Basin. The collections include anthropological materials from Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru and Venezuela. The American Sections ethnographic holdings from South America are strongest in materials from Bolivia Brazil Guyana and Peru. The Aymara Quechua and Yuracar of Bolivia are represented in early collections acquired by Max Uhle and William Curtis Farabee. More than thirty indigenous tribes from Brazil are represented in ethnographic collections acquired by Farabee and Vincenzo M. Petrullo in the 19
20 s and 19
30 s respectfully. Twelve different indigenous groups are represented in the collections acquired in Guyana by Farabee in the 19
20 s. More than twentyfive native groups from Peru are represented as well. Smaller collections represent some of the indigenous peoples of Argentina Yahgan Chile Alacaluf Mapuche Colombia Arhuaco Choc Goajira and Kogi and Ecuador Jvaro Tumaco Saparo. Asiaedit Rockcrystal sphere from the Qing dynasty The Penn Museums Asian collection is composed of close to 3000 objects of art and artifacts from China Tibet Japan South Korea Taiwan Vietnam Myanmar Cambodia India and other Asian countries.2021 Through the concerted efforts of Dr. George Byron Gordon the majority of this collection focuses on China. From 19141918 and again in 19231924 Penn Museum archaeologists attempted archaeological expeditions in China that ended in failure. Consequently the vast majority of the Chinese collection was purchased or donated through dealers in North America.22 Nevertheless it includes a significant number of high quality works of antiquity such as the over 290 porcelain vases and sculptures collected by banking magistrate J.P. Morgan.23 The Penn Museum acquired another important Asian collection from amateur collectors William and Isabel Ingram Mayer who made a collecting expedition across Mongolia and northern China in 19301931. The Mayer Collection consists of 464 small bronze daggers harnesses plaques and a variety of ornaments that represent the Ordos style made by the Scythians and related nomadic peoples between the 
12 th century BCE and 
3 rd century CE as well as some metalworks of more recent origin.24 Maxwell Sommerville 18291904 one of the first curators at the Penn Museum contributed many items from Japan and India including a set of Kalighat paintings from India that represent almost the entire Hindu pantheon.2526 The Asian Gallery is mounted in Harrison Rotunda which measures ninety feet across and ninety feet from the floor. Since its completion in 1915 this gallery has showcased the Chinese collection.2722 One of the central figures is a ceramic statue of a Luohan reputed to be one of a group of eight or ten statues from a cave in Yizhou that date between 947 and 1234 CE.28 Other rare Chinese works of art on display are two of the six horse panels from Emperor Taizongs Mausoleum in Shaanxi Province. Each of these horses had names and poems commemorating their service in the fight to unify China during the Tang dynasty. The secular focus and historic realism of these reliefs marked a new direction in Chinese art.29 Four of the panels are at the Beilin Museum in Xian while the only two to have left China were donated to the Penn Museum by Eldridge R. Johnson the founder of the Victor Talking Machine Company.3031 Johnson also donated the perfectly spherical crystal ball that sits in the center of the gallery which is supposed to have belonged to Empress Cixi 183519
08.3 1 Along with an Egyptian statue of Osiris the Chinese crystal ball was stolen in 1988. Shortly afterwards a student found its elegant silver stand a stylized ocean wave in a culvert not far from the museum. The items were recovered in 1991 after a museum volunteer saw the statue in an antique shop across the Schuylkill River in New Jersey. The FBI then traced the crystal ball to a home in New Jersey and returned it to the museum without a clue that would reveal who the original thieves were or how they committed the crime.3231 Egyptedit Merneptah presents an offering to Ptah on a stone column University of Pennsylvania Museum The museums collection of Egyptian artifacts is considered one of the finest in the world. The museums Egyptian galleries house an extensive collection of statuary mummies and reliefs. Most notably the museum houses a set of architectural elements including large columns and a 
13 ton granite Sphinx of Ramesses II circa 1200 B.C. from the palace of the Pharaoh Merenptah. These were excavated by a museum expedition to Egypt in 1915. In the late 19
70 s KarlTheodor Zauzich attendant of the Egyptian section discovered 3 missing fragments of the Insinger Papyrus in the museums collections. Iraqedit The museums most important collection is arguably that of the Royal Tombs of Ur which The University of Pennsylvania coexcavated with the British Museum in Iraq. Ur was an important and wealthy citystate in ancient Sumer and the artifacts from its royal tombs showcase the citys wealth. The collections consists of a variety of crowns figures and musical instruments many of which have been inlaid with gold and precious stones. The often traveling collection includes a well known Bullheaded lyre. The museums Babylonian section houses a collection of almost 30000 clay tablets inscribed in Sumerian and Akkadian cuneiform making it one of the ten largest collections in the world. The collection contains the largest number of Sumerian school tablets and literary compositions of any of the worlds museums as well as important administrative archives ranging from 2900 to 500 BCE. Physical Anthropology Collectionsedit Morton Collectionedit The Penn Museum holds approximately 1300 skulls collected by 
19 th century physician Samuel George Morton.33 The museum acquired the collection from the Academy of Natural Sciences in 19
66.2 2 Morton has long been criticized for promoting white supremacist views leveraging science to uphold racism poor research quality and unethically collecting human remains without consent.34 Despite this the museum claims the collection is an important historic and research resource.35 The museum has actively conducted research using the collection in recent years.3637383940 More than a dozen crania along with mid
19 th century measuring devices were on public display at the museum from 2012 to 2013 in an exhibit named Year of Proof Making and Unmaking Race.37 In 2018 students in the Penn and Slavery project discovered the collection includes 55 crania of enslaved people with 53 of these crania from Havana and two from the United States.4142 In July 2020 the museum announced it would move the collection from a private classroom43 into storage after criticism from students and the local community.4222 The museum is also planning to repatriate or rebury skulls of enslaved individuals.42 In 2024 the museum buried the remains of 19 AfricanAmerican residents of Philadelphia that it held in its collection in Eden Cemetery that has been used by the AfricanAmerican community. The interment sparked criticism from prominent members and groups representing the AfricanAmerican community in Philadelphia who said that they had not been consulted on the matter.44 MOVE Bombing Victim Remainsedit In April 2021 following critical news coverage the Penn Museum and the University of Pennsylvania apologized to the Africa family and the community in general for allowing human remains from the 1985 MOVE bombing to be used in research and training.45 In 1986 an official from the Philadelphia City Medical Examiners Office gave burned human remains found at the MOVE house to the museum for verification that the bones were those of 14 year old Katricia Dotson a.k.a. Katricia or Tree Africa and 12 year old Delisha Orr a.k.a. Delisha Africa although after the death certificates for both of those children were written and after Dotsons family believed they were given Dotsons remains for burial in 19
85.4 6 These remains were kept in a cardboard box in storage for decades and used for teaching by Alan Mann a professor at Penn and Janet Monge Manns graduate student and later curator of physical anthropology at the Penn Museum. Without the familys permission in 2019 the bones were used as a case study in an online forensic course by Janet Monge. They were also used as the subject of a Penn senior thesis in anthropology which Monge supervised.4748 Although the bones used by Monge in the online case study were given to MOVE members in 2021 accounts differ regarding how many remains were at the Penn Museum and whether all bones which were given to Mann and Monge in 1986 were returned in 2021. A legal team hired by the University of Pennsylvania stated that the bones of Delisha Orr were never at the Penn Museum.49 However an investigation by the City of Philadelphia disagreed and stated that there was evidence that remains of Delisha Orr were at the Penn Museum.50 Nine forensic anthropologists certified by the American Board of Forensic Anthropology disagreed with the claims published by Penns legal team and agreed with those of the City of Philadelphia.51 The City of Philadelphia also questioned whether all the remains of Katricia Dotson which were at the Penn Museum were given to MOVE in 20
21.5 2 See alsoedit Philadelphia portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archeology and Anthropology. Graduate Group in the Art and Archaeology of the Mediterranean World The Benghazi Venus List of museums with major collections of Egyptian antiquities Hiram M. Hiller Jr. G. Roger Edwards Referencesedit  a b Cheyney Edward Potts 1940. History of the University of Pennsylvania 17401940. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Press.  Expedition Magazine.  Wang Kathy 26 November 2008. Financial crisis forces firing of 18 Penn Museum researchers. The Daily Pennsylvanian. Archived from the original on 9 March 2009. Retrieved 31 March 2009.  Building Locations.  a b c d e A Brief History of the Museum Library. www.library.upenn.edu. Archived from the original on October 31 2014. Retrieved October 31 2014.  Galleries  Exhibitions. Penn Museum. Retrieved February 12 2023.  Curatorial Section Highlights. Penn Museum. Retrieved February 12 2023.  Penn Museum Opening Celebration Weekend.  Tufuku Zuberi Ph.D.  Renovated Penn Museum Opens to the Public Saturday With Reimagined Galleries Better Accessibility and a New Home for the Sphinx.  Dress.  Wearable Literature Instagram Post. Archived from the original on December 23 2021.  a b c d e Madeira Percy C. Jr. 1964. Men in Search of Man The First SeventyFive Years of the University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 33.  Key Questions Unlocking Floridas Ancient Past. Penn Museum Galleries and Exhibitions. Retrieved June 6 2023.  Howard Edgar B. 1935. Clovis. The Museum Journal. XXIV 23 79100  via June 6 2023.  Louis V Shotridge. Penn Museum The Louis Shotridge Digital Archive. Retrieved June 6 2023.  Building Transformation  Mexico and Central America Gallery  Penn Museum. www.penn.museum. Retrieved March 26 2020.  Stela 14  American Section Highlights  Penn Museum. www.penn.museum. Retrieved March 26 2020.  Mark Joan September 1 2004. Char Solomon Tatiana Proskouriakoff Interpreting the Ancient Maya. Isis. 95 3 534535. doi
10.1 086429052. ISSN 00211753.  Anon. Object Location Map. Penn Museum. Retrieved February 12 2023.  Lang Steven 2021. Identifying an Ancient Script. Expedition. 63 1 50.  a b c d Steinhardt Nancy Shatzman 2001. The Chinese Rotunda Turns 100. Orientations. 32 2 2223.  Anon 1917. University Museum Section of Oriental Art. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania. pp. 15170.  Cheng Fangyi. Chinese Nomadic Art and the Journey to Collect The Legacy of the Mayer Collection. Expedition. 58 3 815.  Pezzati Alessandro 2012. The Eccentric Maxwell Sommerville. Expedition. 54 3 39.  Ghosh Pika 2000. Kalighat Paintings from Nineteenth Century Calcutta in Maxwell Sommervilles Ethnological East Indian Collection. Expedition. 42 3 1121  via Ebscohost Academic Search Complete.  Pezzati Alessandro 2015. The First Century of the Harrison Rotunda. Expedition. 57 2 4648.  Steinhardt Nancy Shatzman 2010. The Luohan That Came From Afar. Expedition. 52 3 78.  Zhou Xiuqin 2001. Emperor Taizong and His Six Horses. Orientations. 32 2 4046.  Zhou Xiuqin 2005. Excavations at Zhaoling Shaanxi China More Light On the Museums Chinese Horse Reliefs. Expedition. 47 2 3839.  a b c Pezzati Alessandro 2012. The Purchase Theft and Recovery of the Crystal Ball. Expedition. 54 3 38.  Gibbons Thomas J. Jr. October 30 1991. Treasures Stolen from the Museum are Recovered after Three Years. The Philadelphia Inquirer.  Renschler Emily S. Monge Janet 2008. The Samuel George Morton Cranial Collection Historical Significance and New Research. Expedition Magazine. Vol. 50 no. 3. pp. 3038.  Morton Cranial Collection Biography.  The Morton Crania Collection. www.penn.museum. Retrieved July 31 2020.  Skull Study Unearths Biases. The Daily Pennsylvanian. Retrieved August 31 2020.  a b Making and Unmaking Race Morton Collection of Human Crania in the Spotlight at Penn Museum. Penn Today. September 18 2012. Retrieved July 31 2020.  A new take on the 
19 thcentury skull collection of Samuel Morton. Penn Today. October 4 2018. Retrieved July 31 2020.  Wade Nicholas June 13 2011. Scientists Measure the Accuracy of a Racism Claim. The New York Times. ISSN 03624331. Retrieved July 31 2020.  Paul Mitchell At Penn Four Years of Looking at the Past. Penn Today. February 22 2013. Retrieved July 31 2020.  Muhammad AbdulAliy A. July 12 2019. As reparations debate continues the University of Pennsylvania has a role to play. Philadelphia Inquirer. Retrieved July 31 2020.  a b c Diaz Johnny July 27 2020. Penn Museum to Relocate Skull Collection of Enslaved People. The New York Times. ISSN 03624331. Retrieved July 31 2020.  93014 New Center for the Analysis of Archaeological Materials CAAM inPenn Museums Renovated Conservation and Teaching Labs  Almanac Vol. 61 No. 07. almanac.upenn.edu. Retrieved July 31 2020.  Brewer Graham Lee February 3 2024. Penn Museum reburies the bones of 19 Black Philadelphians causing a dispute with community members. Associated Press. Retrieved February 3 2024.  DiSanto Jill April 26 2021. Statement from the Penn Museum on the MOVE house remains. www.penntoday.upenn.edu. Retrieved April 27 2021.  Heim Robert C. Tulante Sozi P. Graff Carla G. Tubbs Stephanie A. Ekhator Chukwufumnanya I. Hussain Tooba N. BradfordGrey Keir Remondino Brian G. Final Report of the Independent Investigation into the City of Philadelphias Possession of Human Remains of Victims of the 1985 Bombing of the MOVE Organization. www.phila.gov. Retrieved July 1 2022.  Bones of Black children killed in police bombing used in Ivy League anthropology course. the Guardian. April 23 2021. Retrieved April 23 2021.  Kassutto Maya April 21 2021. MOVE bombing Childrens remains killed in MOVE bombing sat in a box at Penn Museum for decades. www.billypenn.com. Retrieved April 27 2021.  DiSanto Jill August 25 2021. Report on the handling of human remains from the 1985 MOVE tragedy. Retrieved October 20 2022.  Heim Robert C. Tulante Sozi P. Graff Carla G. Tubbs Stephanie A. Ekhator Chukwufumnanya I. Hussain Tooba N. BradfordGrey Keir Remondino Brian G. Final Report of the Independent Investigation into the City of Philadelphias Possession of Human Remains of Victims of the 1985 Bombing of the MOVE Organization PDF. www.phila.gov. Retrieved July 1 2022.  Dickey Bronwen October 19 2022. She Was Killed by the Police. Why Were Her Bones in a Museum. The New York Times. Retrieved November 1 2022.  Heim Robert C. Tulante Sozi P. Graff Carla G. Tubbs Stephanie A. Ekhator Chukwufumnanya I. Hussain Tooba N. BradfordGrey Keir Remondino Brian G. Final Report of the Independent Investigation into the City of Philadelphias Possession of Human Remains of Victims of the 1985 Bombing of the MOVE Organization PDF. www.phila.gov. Retrieved July 1 2022. Further readingedit University of Pennsylvania. University Museum University of Pennsylvania. University Museum. Section of Oriental Art 1917. University museum section of oriental art. University of Pa. Retrieved April 24 2014. Brody J. J. and Rebecca Allen. Beauty From the Earth Pueblo Indian Pottery From the University Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia The University Museum 1990. Danien Elin C. Guide to the Mesoamerican Gallery At the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 2002. Pezzati Alessandro. Adventures In Photography Expeditions of the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 2002. Pezzati Alessandro Jane Hickman and Alexandra Fleischman. A Brief History of the Penn Museum. Expedition 54 no. 3 2012 419. Quick Jennifer. Magnificent Objects From the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 2004. Romano Irene Bald. Classical Sculpture Catalogue of the Cypriot Greek and Roman Stone Sculpture In the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 2006. Rose Charles Brian and G. Darbyshire. The Golden Age of King Midas Exhibition Catalogue. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 2016. Silverman David P. Searching for Ancient Egypt Art Architecture and Artifacts From the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Ithaca NY Cornell University Press 1997. Turfa Jean. Catalogue of the Etruscan Gallery At the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Press 2003. White Donald and Lee Horne. Guide to the Etruscan and Roman Worlds At the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 2002. Williams Lucy Fowler. Guide to the North American Ethnographic Collections At the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology 2003. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archeology and Anthropology. Library resources about University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology website The museums Permanent Exhibitions Expedition Magazine The Graduate Group in the Art and Archaeology of the Mediterranean World Secrets of the Silk Road UPenn Museum Symposium Reconfiguring the Silk Road New Research on EastWest Exchange in Antiquity A Museum Full of Antiquities Embraces Modernity Jon Hurdle The New York Times 4 December 2012 Historic American Buildings Survey HABS No. PA1646 University of Pennsylvania University Museum 3620 South Street Philadelphia Philadelphia County PA 4 photos 2 photo caption pages 3956
56 N 7511
28 W  
39.9 4
90 N 
75.1 9
11 W  
39.9 490 
75.1 911 v t e University of Pennsylvania Schools Arts and Sciences College Graduate Division Liberal and Professional Studies Communication Dental Medicine Design Education Engineering and Applied Science Law Medicine Nursing Social Policy and Practice Veterinary Medicine Wharton Programs Advanced Judaic Studies Government Global Communication Studies Mediterranean Art and Archaeology International Studies and Business Management and Technology Lauder Institute Health Economics Networked and Social Systems Engineering Molecular Life Science Public Policy Diplomacy and Global Engagement Places University City Annenberg Center College Hall College Houses David Rittenhouse Laboratory Fisher Fine Arts Library Historic District Houston Hall Institute of Contemporary Art Irvine Auditorium Kelly Writers House Meyerson Hall Moore School Morris Arboretum Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology New Bolton Center Penn Park Perelman Quadrangle The Quadrangle Richards Laboratories Van Pelt Library Athletics Penn Quakers Band Fight on Pennsylvania Basketball Mens Womens Football College Boat Club Lacrosse Penn Relays Soccer Mens Womens Mens squash Class of 1923 Arena Franklin Field Meiklejohn Stadium Palestra Media The Daily Pennsylvanian 
34 th Street Magazine Under the Button Pennsylvania Punch Bowl Penn Press Wharton School Publishing WQHS WXPN Life Student life Mask and Wig Glee Club Masala MERT Philomathean Society Penn Club of New York Hail Pennsylvania The Red and Blue People President J. Larry Jameson interim Notable alumni and faculty Wharton alumni Art Benjamin Franklin statue Edgar Fahs Smith statue George Whitefield statue The Button sculpture Category Commons v t e City of Philadelphia Topics History Timeline Accent Architecture Bibliography Companies Cuisine Culture Demographics Economy Education Media Music Notable people Riots Sites of interest Historic Landmarks Skyscrapers Transportation Government City Hall Mayor City Council District Attorney Airport Fire Department Free Library Police Department Public Health COVID19 pandemic and Deltacron hybrid variant 20202021 School district Federal U.S. Mint U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of PA U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
3 rd Circuit Neighborhoods Center City North Philadelphia Lower North Upper North OlneyOak Lane Northeast Philadelphia River Wards Northwest Philadelphia South Philadelphia Southwest Philadelphia West Philadelphia Museums Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University African American Museum in Philadelphia American Philosophical Society American Swedish Historical Museum Athenaeum of Philadelphia Barnes Foundation Bartrams Garden Belmont Mansion Betsy Ross House Civil War Museum Cliveden Eastern State Penitentiary Ebenezer Maxwell Mansion Edgar Allan Poe National Historic Site Elfreths Alley Fabric Workshop and Museum Fairmount Water Works Fort Mifflin Franklin Institute Germantown White House Glen Foerd on the Delaware Grand Army of the Republic Civil War Museum and Library Grumblethorpe HillPhysickKeith House Historic Strawberry Mansion Historical Society of Frankford Historical Society of Pennsylvania Independence National Historical Park Independence Hall Independence Seaport Museum Insectarium Institute of Contemporary Art John Johnson House John Ruan House La Salle University Art Museum Lemon Hill Marian Anderson Residence Museum Masonic Temple Library and Museum Museum of the American Revolution Mtter Museum National Constitution Center National Liberty Museum National Museum of American Jewish History Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts Philadelphia History Museum Philadelphia Museum of Art Philadelphias Magic Gardens Please Touch Museum Powel House RittenhouseTown Rodin Museum Rosenbach Museum and Library Ryerss Museum and Library Science History Institute Shofuso Japanese House and Garden Stenton Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial Penn Museum Wagner Free Institute of Science Woodmere Art Museum Wyck House Sports 
76 ers Eagles Flyers Freedoms Phillies Union Squares Centre Franklin Logan Rittenhouse Washington Related Delaware Valley Carpenters Hall Independence Hall Congress Hall Liberty Bell Syng inkstand SS United States 2016 Democratic National Convention Category Portal v t e Museums in Pennsylvania Art Allentown Art Museum Andy Warhol Museum Athenaeum of Philadelphia Barnes Foundation Brandywine River Museum Carnegie Museum of Art The Clemente Museum Demuth Museum Deshong Art Museum Erie Art Museum The Frick Pittsburgh Institute of Contemporary Art Philadelphia La Salle University Art Museum Mattress Factory Michener Art Museum Miller Gallery at Carnegie Mellon Palmer Museum of Art Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts Philadelphia Museum of Art Pittsburgh Glass Center Randyland Reading Public Museum Rodin Museum Susquehanna Art Museum Wayne Art Center Westmoreland Museum of American Art Woodmere Art Museum History culture and religion African American Museum in Philadelphia American Jewish Museum American Swedish Historical Museum Bicycle Heaven Civil War Museum of Philadelphia Erie Maritime Museum Gettysburg Museum Heinz History Center Independence National Historical Park Independence Hall Independence Seaport Museum Johnstown Flood Museum Masonic Library and Museum of Pennsylvania Meadowcroft Rockshelter Mercer Museum Museum of the American Revolution Museum of Indian Culture National Civil War Museum National Constitution Center Nationality Rooms Philadelphia History Museum Rosenbach Museum and Library State Museum of Pennsylvania U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Weitzman National Museum of American Jewish History Science technology and industry Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University America on Wheels Carnegie Museum of Natural History Carnegie Science Center Center for PostNatural History Choo Choo Barn Da Vinci Science Center Delaware County Institute of Science Drake Well Museum Everhart Museum Franklin Institute Miniature Railroad  Village Mtter Museum National Toy Train Museum North Museum of Nature and Science Pennsylvania Anthracite Heritage Museum Railroad Museum of Pennsylvania Railroaders Memorial Museum Reading Railroad Heritage Museum Roadside America Science History Institute Steamtown National Historic Site Wagner Free Institute of Science Childrens Childrens Museum of Pittsburgh Please Touch Museum Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States Greece Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePennMuseumoldid1213948118 Categories University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Anthropology museums in the United States Archaeological museums in Pennsylvania Art museums and galleries in Pennsylvania Asian art museums in the United States Egyptological collections in the United States Historic American Buildings Survey in Philadelphia Mesoamerican art museums in the United States Museums established in 1887 Museums in Philadelphia Museums of ancient Greece in the United States Museums of Ancient Near East in the United States Museums of ancient Rome in the United States PreColumbian art museums in the United States PreColumbian studies University museums in Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania campus African art museums in the United States Ethnographic museums in the United States Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2023 Use American English from November 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 16 March 2024 at 0224 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width