Ink - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 Types Toggle Types subsection 
2.1 Colorants 

2.1.1 Pigments 

2.1.2 Dyes 
3 Health and environmental aspects Toggle Health and environmental aspects subsection 
3.1 Carbon 
3.2 Iron gall common ink 
4 Indelible ink 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Sources 
8 Further reading 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ink 92 languages Afrikaans   Asturianu Azrbaycanca  Banjar   Bnlmg   Bosanski Catal etina ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa    Kreyl ayisyen Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Ligure Magyar    Bahasa Melayu  Nederlands    Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha    Polski Romn Runa Simi  Shqip Sicilianu Simple English  lnski   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Taqbaylit    Trke   Vahcuengh Vneto Ting Vit WestVlams Winaray     Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Liquid or paste that contains pigments or dyes For other uses see Ink disambiguation. Bottles of ink from Germany Writing ink and a quill Ink is a gel sol or solution that contains at least one colorant such as a dye or pigment and is used to color a surface to produce an image text or design. Ink is used for drawing or writing with a pen brush reed pen or quill. Thicker inks in paste form are used extensively in letterpress and lithographic printing. Ink can be a complex medium composed of solvents pigments dyes resins lubricants solubilizers surfactants particulate matter fluorescents and other materials. The components of inks serve many purposes the inks carrier colorants and other additives affect the flow and thickness of the ink and its dry appearance. Historyedit Ink drawing of Ganesha under an umbrella early 
19 th century. Ink called masi an admixture of several chemical components has been used in India since at least the 
4 th century BC.1 The practice of writing with ink and a sharp pointed needle was common in early South India.2 Several Jain sutras in India were compiled in ink.3 Many ancient cultures around the world have independently discovered and formulated inks for the purposes of writing and drawing. The knowledge of the inks their recipes and the techniques for their production comes from archaeological analysis or from written text itself. The earliest inks from all civilizations are believed to have been made with lampblack a kind of soot as this would have been easily collected as a byproduct of fire.4 Ink was used in Ancient Egypt for writing and drawing on papyrus from at least the 
26 th century BC.5 Egyptian red and black inks included iron and ocher as a pigment in addition to phosphate sulfate chloride and carboxylate ions meanwhile lead was used as a drier.6 Chinese inks may go back as far as7 four millennia8 to the Chinese Neolithic Period. These used plants animal and mineral inks based on such materials as graphite that were ground with water and applied with ink brushes. Direct evidence for the earliest Chinese inks similar to modern inksticks is around 256 BC in the end of the Warring States period and produced from soot and animal glue.9 The best inks for drawing or painting on paper or silk are produced from the resin of the pine tree. They must be between 50 and 100 years old. The Chinese inkstick is produced with a fish glue whereas Japanese glue  nikawa is from cow or stag.10 India ink was invented in China1112 though materials were often traded from India hence the name.1112 The traditional Chinese method of making the ink was to grind a mixture of hide glue carbon black lampblack and bone black pigment with a pestle and mortar then pour it into a ceramic dish to dry.11 To use the dry mixture a wet brush would be applied until it reliquified.11 The manufacture of India ink was wellestablished by the Cao Wei dynasty 220265 AD.13 Indian documents written in Kharosthi with ink have been unearthed in Xinjiang.14 The practice of writing with ink and a sharp pointed needle was common in early South India.2 Several Buddhist and Jain sutras in India were compiled in ink.3 Cephalopod ink known as sepia turns from dark blueblack to brown on drying and was used as an ink in the GraecoRoman period and subsequently. Black atramentum was also used in ancient Rome in an article for The Christian Science Monitor Sharon J. Huntington describes these other historical inks Oak galls and ironII sulfate About 1600 years ago a popular ink recipe was created. The recipe was used for centuries. Iron salts such as ferrous sulfate made by treating iron with sulfuric acid were mixed with tannin from gallnuts they grow on trees and a thickener. When first put to paper this ink is bluishblack. Over time it fades to a dull brown. Scribes in medieval Europe about AD 800 to 1500 wrote principally on parchment or vellum. One 
12 th century ink recipe called for hawthorn branches to be cut in the spring and left to dry. Then the bark was pounded from the branches and soaked in water for eight days. The water was boiled until it thickened and turned black. Wine was added during boiling. The ink was poured into special bags and hung in the sun. Once dried the mixture was mixed with wine and iron salt over a fire to make the final ink.15 The reservoir pen which may have been the first fountain pen dates back to 953 when Mad alMuizz the caliph of Egypt demanded a pen that would not stain his hands or clothes and was provided with a pen that held ink in a reservoir.16 In the 
15 th century a new type of ink had to be developed in Europe for the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg.17 According to Martyn Lyons in his book Books A Living History Gutenbergs dye was indelible oilbased and made from the soot of lamps lampblack mixed with varnish and egg white.18 Two types of ink were prevalent at the time the Greek and Roman writing ink soot glue and water and the 
12 th century variety composed of ferrous sulfate gall gum and water.19 Neither of these handwriting inks could adhere to printing surfaces without creating blurs. Eventually an oily varnishlike ink made of soot turpentine and walnut oil was created specifically for the printing press. Typesedit Magnified line drawn by a fountain pen. Ink formulas vary but commonly involve two components Colorants Vehicles binders Inks generally fall into four classes20 Aqueous Liquid Paste Powder Colorantsedit Pigmentsedit Main article Pigment Pigment inks are used more frequently than dyes because they are more colorfast but they are also more expensive less consistent in color and have less of a color range than dyes.20 Pigments are solid opaque particles suspended in ink to provide color.20 Pigment molecules typically link together in crystalline structures that are 
0.1 2 m in size and comprise 530 percent of the ink volume.20 Qualities such as hue saturation and lightness vary depending on the source and type of pigment. Dyesedit Main article Dye Dyebased inks are generally much stronger than pigmentbased inks and can produce much more color of a given density per unit of mass. However because dyes are dissolved in the liquid phase they have a tendency to soak into paper potentially allowing the ink to bleed at the edges of an image. To circumvent this problem dyebased inks are made with solvents that dry rapidly or are used with quickdrying methods of printing such as blowing hot air on the fresh print. Other methods include harder paper sizing and more specialized paper coatings. The latter is particularly suited to inks used in nonindustrial settings which must conform to tighter toxicity and emission controls such as inkjet printer inks. Another technique involves coating the paper with a charged coating. If the dye has the opposite charge it is attracted to and retained by this coating while the solvent soaks into the paper. Cellulose the woodderived material most paper is made of is naturally charged and so a compound that complexes with both the dye and the papers surface aids retention at the surface. Such a compound is commonly used in inkjet printing inks. An additional advantage of dyebased ink systems is that the dye molecules can interact with other ink ingredients potentially allowing greater benefit as compared to pigmented inks from optical brighteners and colorenhancing agents designed to increase the intensity and appearance of dyes. Dyebased inks can be used for anticounterfeit purposes and can be found in some gel inks fountain pen inks and inks used for paper currency.21 These inks react with cellulose to bring about a permanent color change.21 Dye based inks are used to color hair. Health and environmental aspectsedit See also Environmental issues with paper This section needs more reliable medical references for verification or relies too heavily on primary sources. Please review the contents of the section and add the appropriate references if you can. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Ink  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR June 2018 There is a misconception that ink is nontoxic even if swallowed. Once ingested ink can be hazardous to ones health. Certain inks such as those used in digital printers and even those found in a common pen can be harmful. Though ink does not easily cause death repeated skin contact or ingestion can cause effects such as severe headaches skin irritation or nervous system damage.22 These effects can be caused by solvents or by pigment ingredients such as pAnisidine which helps create some inks color and shine. Three main environmental issues with ink are Heavy metals Nonrenewable oils Volatile organic compounds Some regulatory bodiesspecify have set standards for the amount of heavy metals in ink.23 There is a trend toward vegetable oils rather than petroleum oils in recent years in response to a demand for better environmental sustainability performance. Ink uses up nonrenewable oils and metals which has a negative impact on the environment.24 Carbonedit Chinese inkstick carbonbased and made from soot and animal glue Carbon inks were commonly made from lampblack or soot and a binding agent such as gum arabic or animal glue. The binding agent keeps carbon particles in suspension and adhered to paper. Carbon particles do not fade over time even when bleached or when in sunlight. One benefit is that carbon ink does not harm paper. Over time the ink is chemically stable and therefore does not threaten the papers strength. Despite these benefits carbon ink is not ideal for permanence and ease of preservation. Carbon ink tends to smudge in humid environments and can be washed off surfaces. The best method of preserving a document written in carbon ink is to store it in a dry environment Barrow 1972. Recently carbon inks made from carbon nanotubes have been successfully created. They are similar in composition to traditional inks in that they use a polymer to suspend the carbon nanotubes. These inks can be used in inkjet printers and produce electrically conductive patterns.25 Iron gall common inkedit Main article Iron gall ink Iron gall inks became prominent in the early 
12 th century they were used for centuries and were widely thought to be the best type of ink. However iron gall ink is corrosive and damages paper over time Waters 1940. Items containing this ink can become brittle and the writing fades to brown. The original scores of Johann Sebastian Bach are threatened by the destructive properties of iron gall ink. The majority of his works are held by the German State Library and about 25 of those are in advanced stages of decay American Libraries 2000. The rate at which the writing fades is based on several factors such as proportions of ink ingredients amount deposited on the paper and paper composition Barrow 197216. Corrosion is caused by acid catalyzed hydrolysis and ironIIcatalysed oxidation of cellulose RouchonQuillet 2004389. Treatment is a controversial subject. No treatment undoes damage already caused by acidic ink. Deterioration can only be stopped or slowed. Somewho think it best not to treat the item at all for fear of the consequences. Others believe that nonaqueous procedures are the best solution. Yet others think an aqueous procedure may preserve items written with iron gall ink. Aqueous treatments include distilled water at different temperatures calcium hydroxide calcium bicarbonate magnesium carbonate magnesium bicarbonate and calcium hyphenate. There are many possible side effects from these treatments. There can be mechanical damage which further weakens the paper. Paper color or ink color may change and ink may bleed. Other consequences of aqueous treatment are a change of ink texture or formation of plaque on the surface of the ink Reibland  de Groot 1999. Iron gall inks require storage in a stable environment because fluctuating relative humidity increases the rate that formic acid acetic acid and furan derivatives form in the material the ink was used on. Sulfuric acid acts as a catalyst to cellulose hydrolysis and iron II sulfate acts as a catalyst to cellulose oxidation. These chemical reactions physically weaken the paper causing brittleness.26 Indelible inkedit A voters thumb stained with indelible ink Main article Election ink Indelible means unremovable. Some types of indelible ink have a very short shelf life because of the quickly evaporating solvents used. India Mexico Indonesia Malaysia and other developing countries have used indelible ink in the form of electoral stain to prevent electoral fraud. Election ink based on silver nitrate was first applied in the 1962 Indian general election after being developed at the National Physical Laboratory of India. The election commission in India has used indelible ink for many elections. Indonesia used it in its last election in Aceh.when In Mali the ink is applied to the fingernail. Indelible ink itself is not infallible as it can be used to commit electoral fraud by marking opponent party members before they have chances to cast their votes. There are also reports of indelible ink washing off voters fingers in Afghanistan.27 See alsoedit Blue Wool Scale Deinked pulp Election ink Fountain pen inks Gel pen Ink eraser Inkjet printing Inksaving typeface Invisible ink Lightfastness Pharmaceutical ink Preservation library and archival science Preservation of illuminated manuscripts Soy ink Squid ink Starks ink Tattoo ink Toner Referencesedit  Banerji page 673  a b Sircar page 62  a b Sircar page 67  Joseph Needham Tsien TsuenHsuin 11 July 1985. Science and Civilization in China Volume 5 Chemistry and Chemical Technology Part 1 Paper and Printing. Cambridge University Press. p. 5. ISBN 9780521086905.  Tallet Pierre 2012. Ayn Sukhna and Wadi elJarf Two newly discovered pharaonic harbours on the Suez Gulf PDF. British Museum Studies in Ancient Egypt and Sudan. 18 14768. ISSN 20495021. Retrieved 21 April 2013.  Christiansen Thomas Cotte Marine de Nolf Wout Mouro Elouan ReyesHerrera Juan de Meyer Steven Vanmeert Frederik Salvad Nati Gonzalez Victor Lindelof Poul Erik Mortensen Kell Ryholt Kim Janssens Koen Larsen Sine 2020. Insights into the composition of ancient Egyptian red and black inks on papyri achieved by synchrotronbased microanalyses. PNAS. 117 45 2782527835. Bibcode20
20 PNAS..117278
25 C. doi
10.1 0
73 pnas.2004534117. PMC 7668004. PMID 33106396.  Joseph Needham Tsien TsuenHsuin 11 July 1985. Science and Civilisation in China Volume 5 Chemistry and Chemical Technology Part 1 Paper and Printing. Cambridge University Press. p. 234. ISBN 9780521086905.   Woods Michael Woods Mary 2000. Ancient Communication Form Grunts to Graffiti.pp 5152. Minneapolis Runestone Press an imprint of Lerner Publishing Group.....     National ChangHua Hall of Social Education archived from the original on 20041126  Yuuko Suzuki Introduction to Japanese calligraphy Search Press 2005 Calligraphie japonaise 2003 d. Fleurus Paris  a b c d Gottsegen Mark D. 2006. The Painters Handbook A Complete Reference.Page 30 New York WatsonGuptill Publications. ISBN 0823034968.  a b Smith Joseph A. 1992. The Pen and Ink Book Materials and Techniques for Todays Artist.p. 23. New York WatsonGuptill Publications. ISBN 0823039862.  Sung Sun  Sun page 286288.  Sircar page 206  Think Ink by Sharon J. Huntington The Christian Science Monitor September 21 2004 retrieved January 17 2006.  CE Bosworth A Mediaeval Islamic Prototype of the Fountain Pen Journal of Semitic Studies 262229234 1981  St. Clair Kassia 2016. The Secret Lives of Colour. London John Murray. pp. 271273. ISBN 9781473630819. OCLC 936144129.  Lyons M. 2011. Books A living history. Los Angeles J. Paul Getty Museum.  Many recipes for iron gall inks are featured in A booke of secrets shewing diuers waies to make and prepare all sorts of inke... tr. out of Dutch into Englishe by W.P. i.e. William Philip London 1596.  a b c d Kipphan Helmut 2001 Handbook of print media technologies and production methods Illustrated ed. Springer pp. 130144 ISBN 9783540673262  a b Dyes Pigments and Inks. American Chemical Society. Retrieved 20200515.  First Aid for Ink Poisoning. www.dovemed.com. 2018. Retrieved 20190118.  Canadian Printing Ink Manufacturers Association  Ink  Ten Random Facts. Ten Random Facts. 20130715. Retrieved 20161129.  Simmons Trevor Hashim D Vajtai R Ajayan PM 2007 Large AreaAligned Arrays from Direct Deposition of SingleWall Carbon Nanotubes J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129 33 1008810089 doi
10.1 0
21 ja0737
45 e PMID 17663555.  Henk J. Porck and Ren Teygeler Preservation Science Survey Washington D.C. Council on Library and Information Resources 2000.  Afghanistan election indelible ink washes off voters fingers Sourcesedit Ainsworth Mitchell C. Inks and Their Composition and Manufacture Charles Griffin and Company Ltd 1904. N.a. March 2000 Bach Scores Turning to Dust in German Library American Libraries 2425 Banerji Sures Chandra 1989. A Companion to Sanskrit Literature. Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 8120800
63 X. Barrow W.J. 1972 Manuscripts and Documents Their Deterioration and Restoration Charlottesville University of Virginia Press ISBN 9780813904085 MartnGil J. RamosSnchez MC MartnGil FJ and JosYacamn M. Chemical composition of a fountain pen ink. Journal of Chemical Education 2006 83 147678. Reiland Birgit de Groot Suzan August 1521 1999 Ink Corrosion Comparison of the Currently Used Aqueous Treatments for Paper Objects Preprint from the 
9 th International Congress of IADA pp. 121129 RouchonQuillet V. Remazeilles C. Bernard J. Wattiaux A. Fournes L. et al. 2004 The Impact of Gallic Acid on Iron Gall Ink Corrosion Applied Physics A 79 2 389392 Bibcode20
04 ApPhA..79..3
89 R doi
10.1 0
07 s0033900425411 S
2 CID 95990608 Sircar D. C. 1996.Indian epigraphy. Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 8120811666. Waters C.E. 1940 Inks U.S. Department of Commerce National Bureau of Standards United States Government Printing Office Further readingedit Cueppers Christoph 1989. On the Manufacture of Ink. Ancient Nepal  Journal of the Department of Archaeology Number 113 AugustSeptember 1989 pp. 17. The Tibetan text and translation of a section of the work called Bzo gnas nyer mkhoi za ma tog by Jammgon Ju Miphamrgyamtsho 18461912 describing various traditional Tibetan techniques of making inks from different sources of soot and from earth puffballs dung sersha  a yellow fungus and the fruit of tsi dra ka Ricinus communis. External linksedit Ink at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Forty Centuries of Ink David N. Carvalho A detailed online textbook archived 8 June 2003 Roman ink article by Alexander Allen In Smiths Dictionary Greek and Roman Antiquities 1875 in LacusCurtius Ancient and Modern Ink Recipes David N. Carvalho Gorgeous Portrayal Of How Ink Is Made  video at The Huffington Post A Light Note on the Science of Writing and Inks is a manuscript in Arabic from 1852. It discusses the process of making inks. v t e Writing and writing material Enduring Plantbased Amate Trema micrantha Ficus aurea Bamboo and wooden slips Birch bark Betula Foldingbook manuscript Streblus asper Broussonetia papyrifera Ola leaf Corypha umbraculifera Palm leaf Borassus Paper Papyrus Cyperus papyrus Other materials Animal skin Parchment Vellum Ink Metals Intaglio Stamping Oracle bone Photographic film Stone Geoglyph Petroglyph Tablets Clay tablet Slate Wax tablet Textile printing Silk text Impermanent Electronic paper Screen Skywriting Carrier objects Book Codex Notebook Electronic media HuShaku baton Inscription Basrelief Manuscript Palimpsest Microform Scroll Sign Related topics Writing systems History of writing List of writing systems Written language Authority control databases National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleInkoldid1215572880 Categories Inks Printing materials Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional medical references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles requiring reliable medical sources Articles needing more detailed references All articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from March 2011 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2024 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 25 March 2024 at 2308 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width