Karnak King List - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Drawing of the list 
2 Description of the list 
3 Gallery 
4 See also 
5 Notes 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Karnak King List 26 languages  Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia  Magyar   Nederlands Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina Svenska    Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Engraved list of Egyptian kings Karnak King List Drawing of the list in 1843 Created c. 1450 BC Discovered before 1826 Luxor Luxor Governorate Egypt Present location Paris IledeFrance France The Karnak King List a list of early Egyptian kings engraved in stone was located in the southwest corner of the Festival Hall of Thutmose III in the middle of the Precinct of AmunRe in the Karnak Temple Complex in modern Luxor Egypt. Composed during the reign of Thutmose III it listed sixtyone kings beginning with Sneferu from Egypts Old Kingdom. Only the names of thirtynine kings are still legible and one is not written in a cartouche a border used normally to surround the name of a king. It is not a complete list of the Egyptian pharaohs as other kings are known from other ancient lists but this list is valuable as it contains the names of kings of the First and Second Intermediate Periods which are omitted in most other king lists. It was first described by James Burton in 18
25.1  In 1843 a German expedition directed by Egyptologist Karl Lepsius was traveling up the Nile River to Karnak. A French adventurer mile dAvennes dismantled and stole the blocks containing the king list one night in order to secure it for France and sent it home.23 Severely damaged it is now on display at the Louvre4 in Paris. Drawing of the listedit Drawing of the Karnak King List. The colored bits remain the white are more or less lost. Description of the listedit The list features the name of the pharaoh followed by the actual one inscribed on the list. The list comprises three sections and is divided at the center. The numbering follows Lepsius5 counting from the sides toward the center. Left side Right side Top Row Pharaoh Inscribed name Pharaoh Inscribed name 1. Name destroyed Name destroyed 32. Senusret III Khakare 2. Sneferu Sneferu 33. Sobekhotep IV Khaneferre 3. Sahure Sahure 34. Neferhotep I Khasekhemre 4. Nyuserre Ini Ini 35. Name destroyed Name destroyed 5. Djedkare Isesi Isesi 36. Sobekhotep I Sekhemrekhutawy 6. Name destroyed Name destroyed 37. Amenemhet VI Sankhibre 7. Name destroyed Name destroyed 38. Nebiryraw I Sewadjenre 8. Djehuti Sekhemresementawy 39. Unknown ...kaure Second Row Pharaoh Inscribed name Pharaoh Inscribed name 9. Name destroyed Name destroyed 40. Name destroyed Name destroyed 10. Intef II Intef 41. Neferhotep II Mersekhemre 11. Intef I In... 42. Sobekhotep VII Merkaure 12. Mentuhotep I Men... 43. Sobekhotep VIII Seusertawy 13. Intef the Elder Intef 44. Unknown ...re 14. Teti Teti 45. Unknown Senefer..re 15. Pepi I Meryre Pepi 46. Khahotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre 16. Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Merenre 47. Sobekhotep II Khaankhre Third Row Pharaoh Inscribed name Pharaoh Inscribed name 17. Amenemhat I Sehotepibre 48. Rahotep Sekhemre Wahkhaure 18. Amenemhat II Nebukare 49. Sewahenre Senebmiu Sewahenre 19. Name destroyed Name destroyed 50. Merhotepre Sobekhotep Merhotepre 20. Name destroyed Name destroyed 51. Wegaf Khutawire 21. Amenemhat IV Maatkherure 52. Name destroyed Name destroyed 22. Sobekneferu Sobekneferu 53. Name destroyed Name destroyed 23. Sehetepkare Intef Intef 54. Sobekemsaf I Sekhemrewadjkhau Bottom Row Pharaoh Inscribed name Pharaoh Inscribed name 24. Senusret I Kheperkare 55. Unknown ...re 25. Seqenenre Tao Seqenenre 56. Senusret IV Senefer..re 26. Senakhtenre Ahmose Senakhtenre 57. Nebiryraw I Sewadj..re 27. Bebiankh Seuserenre 58. Djehuti Sekhem..re 28. Nubkheperre Intef Nubkheperre 59. Name destroyed Name destroyed 29. Mentuhotep II Nebhepetre 60. Name destroyed Name destroyed 30. Mentuhotep III Seneferkare 61. Name destroyed Name destroyed 31. Mentuhotep IV ...re Galleryedit Detailed photos of the actual list in the Louvre See alsoedit Abydos King List Manetho King List Palermo Stone Saqqara Tablet Turin King List or Turin Papyrus Medinet Habu king list Notesedit  Burton James Excerpta Hieroglypica Plate Ia Cairo 1825  LIllustration Journal Universel Vol. VII p 244245 Paris 1846  Monderson Frederick. Temple of Karnak The Majestic Architecture of Ancient Kemet p. 58  Chapelle des anctres in the Sully wing Rezdechausse Room 12 Catalogue number E134
81 bis  Abhandlungen der Kniglichen Preuischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin 1852 1853 p.455 External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Karnak king list. Lepsius drawing from APAW 1852 from BerlinBrandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften Karnak king list with complete hieroglyphics sources and pictures v t e Karnak General History Open Air Museum Opet Festival Precincts AmunRe Great Hypostyle Hall Temple of Ptah Temple of Khonsu Bubastite Portal Festival Hall of Thutmose III Botanical garden of Thutmose III Montu Mut Aten Temple Temple of Amenhotep IV Related Chapelle Rouge Great Karnak Inscription Karnak king list White Chapel Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKarnakKingListoldid1215679466 Categories 
15 thcentury BC literature 1825 archaeological discoveries Archaeological discoveries in Egypt Karnak temple complex Ancient Egyptian King lists Thutmose III Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 March 2024 at 1448 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width