Abydos King List - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Contents of the king list Toggle Contents of the king list subsection 
1.1 First Dynasty 
1.2 Second Dynasty 
1.3 Third Dynasty 
1.4 Fourth Dynasty 
1.5 Fifth Dynasty 
1.6 Sixth Dynasty 
1.7 SeventhEighth Dynasty 
1.8 EleventhTwelfth Dynasty 
1.9 Eighteenth Dynasty 
1.1 
0 Nineteenth Dynasty 
2 See also 
3 External links Toggle the table of contents Abydos King List 38 languages   Azrbaycanca   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Galego  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Suomi Svenska   Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian king list from the 
19 th dynasty The start of the king list showing Seti and his son Ramesses II on the way to making an offering to PtahSekerOsiris on behalf of their 72 ancestors the contents of the king list. Ramesses is depicted holding censers. The Abydos King List also known as the Abydos Table is a list of the names of 76 kings of ancient Egypt found on a wall of the Temple of Seti I at Abydos Egypt. It consists of three rows of 38 cartouches borders enclosing the name of a king in each row. The upper two rows contain names of the kings while the third row merely repeats Seti Is throne name and nomen. Besides providing the order of the Old Kingdom kings it is the sole source to date of the names of many of the kings of the Seventh and Eighth Dynasties so the list is valued greatly for that reason. This list omits the names of many earlier pharaohs who were apparently considered illegitimate  those were Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep IV Sobekneferu pharaohs of the Ninth Dynasty pharaohs of the Tenth Dynasty the Hyksos pharaohs of the Second Intermediate Period Hatshepsut Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamen and Ay. Contents of the king listedit Drawing of the cartouches in the Abydos King List. First Dynastyedit Cartouches 1 to 8 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 1 to 8 Click to enlarge 1 Meni. Same name in Turin King List. Probably identical to Narmer. Menes 2 Teti. Same name in Turin King List. HorAha 3 Iti. Same name in Turin King List. Djer 4 Ita. Itui in Turin King List. Djet 5 Septi. Qenti in Turin King List. Den 6 Meribiap. Merbiapen in Turin King List. Anedjib 7 Semsu. Semsem in Turin King List. Semerkhet. 8 Qebeh. Same name in Turin King List. Qaa. Second Dynastyedit Cartouches 9 to 14 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 9 to 14 Click to enlarge 9 Bedjau. Baunetjer in Turin King List. Hotepsekhemwy 10 Kakau. Same name in Turin King List. Nebre 11 Banetjer. Same name in Turin King List. Ninetjer 12 Wadjnas. Name damaged in Turin King List. Weneg 13 Sendi. Senedj in Turin King List. Senedj 14 Djadjay. Bebti in Turin King List. Khasekhemwy Third Dynastyedit Cartouches 15 to 19 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 15 to 19 Click to enlarge 15 Nebka. Same name in Turin King List. Nebka 16 Djeserza. Djoserit in Turin King List. Djoser 17 Teti. Djoserti in Turin King List. Sekhemkhet 18 Sedjes. Hudjefa in Turin King List. Khaba 19 Neferkara. Huni in Turin King List. Huni Fourth Dynastyedit Cartouches 20 to 25 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 20 to 25 Click to enlarge 20 Sneferu. Senefer in Turin King List. Sneferu 21 Khufu. Name missing in Turin King List. Khufu 22 Djedefre. Name missing in Turin King List. Djedefre 23 Khafre. Name damaged in Turin King List Khafre 24 Menkaure. Name missing in Turin King List. Menkaure 25 Shepseskaf. Name missing in Turin King List. Shepseskaf Fifth Dynastyedit Cartouches 26 to 33 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 26 to 33 Click to enlarge 26 Userkaf. Name damaged in Turin king list. Userkaf 27 Sahure. Name missing in Turin King List. Sahure 28 Kakai. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferirkare Kakai 29 Neferefre. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferefre 30 Nyuserre. Name missing in Turin King List. Nyuserre Ini 31 Menkauhor. Same name in Turin King List. Menkauhor Kaiu 32 Djedkare. Djed in Turin King List. Djedkare Isesi 33 Unis. Same name in Turin King List. Unas Sixth Dynastyedit Cartouches 34 to 39 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 34 to 39 Click to enlarge 34 Teti Teti 35 Userkare Userkare 36 Meryre Pepi I Meryre 37 Merenre Merenre Nemtyemsaf I 38 Neferkare Pepi II Neferkare 39 Merenre Saemsaf Merenre Nemtyemsaf II SeventhEighth Dynastyedit Cartouches 40 to 47 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 40 to 47 Click to enlarge 40 Netjerikare. Neitiqerty in Turin King List. Netjerkare Siptah 41 Menkare. Neferka in Turin King List. Menkare 42 Neferkare. Nefer in Turin King List. Neferkare II 43 Neferkare Neby. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkare Neby 44 Djedkare Shemai. Name missing in Turin King List. Djedkare Shemai 45 Neferkare Khendu. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkare Khendu 46 Merenhor. Name missing in Turin King List. Merenhor 47 Sneferka. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkamin Cartouches 48 to 56 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 48 to 56 Click to enlarge 48 Nikare. Name missing in Turin King List. Nikare 49 Neferkare Tereru. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkare Tereru 50 Neferkahor. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkahor 51 Neferkare Pepiseneb. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkare Pepiseneb 52 Sneferka Anu. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkamin Anu 53 Kaukara. Ibi in Turin King List. Qakare Ibi 54 Neferkaure. Neferkare in Turin King List. Neferkaure II 55 Neferkauhor. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferkauhor 56 Neferirkare. Name missing in Turin King List. Neferirkare EleventhTwelfth Dynastyedit Cartouches 57 to 61 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 57 to 61 Click to enlarge 57 Nebhepetre. Same name in Turin King List. Mentuhotep II 58 Sankhkare. Seankhkare in Turin King List. Mentuhotep III 59 Sehetepibre. Name damaged in Turin King List. Amenemhat I 60 Kheperkare. Name damaged in Turin King List. Senusret I 61 Nubkaure. Name missing in Turin King List. Amenemhat II Cartouches 62 to 65 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 62 to 65 Click to enlarge 62 Khakheperre. Name missing in Turin King List. Senusret II 63 Khakaure. Name missing in Turin King List. Senusret III 64 Nimaatre. Name missing in Turin King List. Amenemhat III 65 Maakherure. Same name in Turin King List. Amenemhat IV Eighteenth Dynastyedit Cartouches 66 to 74 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 66 to 74 Click to enlarge 66 Nebpehtira Ahmose I 67 Djeserkara Amenhotep I 68 Aakheperkara Thutmose I 69 Aakheperenra Thutmose II 70 Menkheperra Thutmose III 71 Aakheperura Amenhotep II 72 Menkheperura Thutmose IV 73 Nebmaatra Amenhotep III 74 Djeserkheperura Setepenra Horemheb Nineteenth Dynastyedit Cartouches 75 and 76 n Name written in the list Common name Cartouches 75 and 76 Click to enlarge 75 Menpehtira Ramesses I 76 Menmaatra Seti I See alsoedit Karnak king list Palermo Stone Saqqara Tablet Turin King List Medinet Habu king list External linksedit Abydos Table Abydos King List Wikimedia Commons has media related to Abydos King List. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAbydosKingListoldid1211829091 Categories 
13 thcentury BC inscriptions Abydos Egypt Ancient Egyptian King lists Egyptian inscriptions Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 March 2024 at 1758 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width