Papyrus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 Etymology 
3 Documents written on papyrus 
4 Manufacture and use 
5 Collections of papyrus 
6 Individual papyri 
7 See also 
8 References Toggle References subsection 
8.1 Citations 
8.2 Sources 
9 Further reading 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Papyrus 88 languages Afrikaans   Asturianu Azrbaycanca      Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Froyskt Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa Kurd Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Luganda Magyar  Malagasy   Bahasa Melayu  Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan   Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Taqbaylit  Thuj  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Writing and implement This article is about the paperlike material. For the plant it is made from see Cyperus papyrus. For other uses see Papyrus disambiguation. Papyrus P. BM EA 10591 recto column IX beginning of lines 1317 Papyrus ppars pPYrs is a material similar to thick paper that was used in ancient times as a writing surface. It was made from the pith of the papyrus plant Cyperus papyrus a wetland sedge.1 Papyrus plural papyri or papyruses2 can also refer to a document written on sheets of such material joined side by side and rolled up into a scroll an early form of a book. An official letter on a papyrus of the 
3 rd century BCE Papyrus was first known to have been used in Egypt at least as far back as the First Dynasty as the papyrus plant was once abundant across the Nile Delta. It was also used throughout the Mediterranean region. Apart from writing material ancient Egyptians employed papyrus in the construction of other artifacts such as reed boats mats rope sandals and baskets.3 Historyedit A section of the Egyptian Book of the Dead written on papyrus Papyrus was first manufactured in Egypt as far back as the third millennium BCE.456 The earliest archaeological evidence of papyrus was excavated in 2012 and 2013 at Wadi alJarf an ancient Egyptian harbor located on the Red Sea coast. These documents the Diary of Merer date from c.25602550 BCE end of the reign of Khufu.5 The papyrus rolls describe the last years of building the Great Pyramid of Giza.7 In the first centuries BCE and CE papyrus scrolls gained a rival as a writing surface in the form of parchment which was prepared from animal skins.8 Sheets of parchment were folded to form quires from which bookform codices were fashioned. Early Christian writers soon adopted the codex form and in the GrecoRoman world it became common to cut sheets from papyrus rolls to form codices. Roman portraiture fresco of a young man with a papyrus scroll from Herculaneum 
1 st century AD Codices were an improvement on the papyrus scroll as the papyrus was not pliable enough to fold without cracking and a long roll or scroll was required to create largevolume texts. Papyrus had the advantage of being relatively cheap and easy to produce but it was fragile and susceptible to both moisture and excessive dryness. Unless the papyrus was of perfect quality the writing surface was irregular and the range of media that could be used was also limited. Papyrus was replaced in Europe by the cheaper locally produced products parchment and vellum of significantly higher durability in moist climates though Henri Pirennes connection of its disappearance with the Muslim conquest of Egypt between 639 and 646 CE is contested.9 Its last appearance in the Merovingian chancery is with a document of 692 though it was known in Gaul until the middle of the following century. The latest certain dates for the use of papyrus are 1057 for a papal decree typically conservative all papal bulls were on papyrus until 1022 under Pope Victor II10 and 1087 for an Arabic document. Its use in Egypt continued until it was replaced by less expensive paper introduced by the Islamic world which originally learned of it from the Chinese. By the 
12 th century parchment and paper were in use in the Byzantine Empire but papyrus was still an option.11 Papyrus was made in several qualities and prices. Pliny the Elder and Isidore of Seville described six variations of papyrus that were sold in the Roman market of the day. These were graded by quality based on how fine firm white and smooth the writing surface was. Grades ranged from the superfine Augustan which was produced in sheets of 13 digits 10 inches wide to the least expensive and most coarse measuring six digits four inches wide. Materials deemed unusable for writing or less than six digits were considered commercial quality and were pasted edge to edge to be used only for wrapping.12 Until the middle of the 
19 th century only some isolated documents written on papyrus were known and museums simply showed them as curiosities.13 They did not contain literary works.14 The first modern discovery of papyri rolls was made at Herculaneum in 1752. Until then the only papyri known had been a few surviving from medieval times.1516 Scholarly investigations began with the Dutch historian Caspar Jacob Christiaan Reuvens 17931835. He wrote about the content of the Leyden papyrus published in 1830. The first publication has been credited to the British scholar Charles Wycliffe Goodwin 18171878 who published for the Cambridge Antiquarian Society one of the Papyri Graecae Magicae V translated into English with commentary in 18
53.1 3 Etymologyedit The English word papyrus derives via Latin from Greek  papyros17 a loanword of unknown perhaps PreGreek origin.18 Greek has a second word for it  byblos19 said to derive from the name of the Phoenician city of Byblos. The Greek writer Theophrastus who flourished during the 
4 th century BCE uses papyros when referring to the plant used as a foodstuff and byblos for the same plant when used for nonfood products such as cordage basketry or writing surfaces. The more specific term  biblos which finds its way into English in such words as bibliography bibliophile and bible refers to the inner bark of the papyrus plant. Papyrus is also the etymon of paper a similar substance. In the Egyptian language papyrus was called wadj w3 tjufy wfy or djet t. Documents written on papyrusedit Bill of sale for a donkey papyrus 
19.3  by 
7.2  cm MS Gr SM2223 Houghton Library Harvard University The word for the material papyrus is also used to designate documents written on sheets of it often rolled up into scrolls. The plural for such documents is papyri. Historical papyri are given identifying names  generally the name of the discoverer first owner or institution where they are kept  and numbered such as Papyrus Harris I. Often an abbreviated form is used such as pHarris I. These documents provide important information on ancient writings they give us the only extant copy of Menander the Egyptian Book of the Dead Egyptian treatises on medicine the Ebers Papyrus and on surgery the Edwin Smith papyrus Egyptian mathematical treatises the Rhind papyrus and Egyptian folk tales the Westcar Papyrus. When in the 
18 th century a library of ancient papyri was found in Herculaneum ripples of expectation spread among the learned men of the time. However since these papyri were badly charred their unscrolling and deciphering are still going on today. Manufacture and useedit Men splitting papyrus Tomb of Puyemr Metropolitan Museum of Art Different ways of cutting papyrus stem and making of papyrus sheet Papyrus plants near Syracuse Sicily Drawing of a greater bird of paradise and the papyrus plant Papyrus is made from the stem of the papyrus plant Cyperus papyrus. The outer rind is first removed and the sticky fibrous inner pith is cut lengthwise into thin strips about 40 cm 16 in long. The strips are then placed side by side on a hard surface with their edges slightly overlapping and then another layer of strips is laid on top at right angles. The strips may have been soaked in water long enough for decomposition to begin perhaps increasing adhesion but this is not certain. The two layers possibly were glued together.20 While still moist the two layers are hammered together mashing the layers into a single sheet. The sheet is then dried under pressure. After drying the sheet is polished with a rounded object possibly a stone seashell or round hardwood.21 Sheets or Mollema could be cut to fit the obligatory size or glued together to create a longer roll. The point where the Mollema are joined with glue is called the kollesis. A wooden stick would be attached to the last sheet in a roll making it easier to handle.22 To form the long strip scrolls required several such sheets were united and placed so all the horizontal fibres parallel with the rolls length were on one side and all the vertical fibres on the other. Normally texts were first written on the recto the lines following the fibres parallel to the long edges of the scroll. Secondarily papyrus was often reused writing across the fibres on the verso.6 Pliny the Elder describes the methods of preparing papyrus in his Naturalis Historia. In a dry climate like that of Egypt papyrus is stable and formed as it is of highly rotresistant cellulose but storage in humid conditions can result in molds attacking and destroying the material. Library papyrus rolls were stored in wooden boxes and chests made in the form of statues. Papyrus scrolls were organized according to subject or author and identified with clay labels that specified their contents without having to unroll the scroll.23 In European conditions papyrus seems to have lasted only a matter of decades a 2
00 yearold papyrus was considered extraordinary. Imported papyrus once commonplace in Greece and Italy has since deteriorated beyond repair but papyri are still being found in Egypt extraordinary examples include the Elephantine papyri and the famous finds at Oxyrhynchus and Nag Hammadi. The Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum containing the library of Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus Julius Caesars fatherinlaw was preserved by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius but has only been partially excavated. Sporadic attempts to revive the manufacture of papyrus have been made since the mid
18 th century. Scottish explorer James Bruce experimented in the late 
18 th century with papyrus plants from Sudan for papyrus had become extinct in Egypt. Also in the 
18 th century Sicilian Saverio Landolina manufactured papyrus at Syracuse where papyrus plants had continued to grow in the wild. During the 19
20 s when Egyptologist Battiscombe Gunn lived in Maadi outside Cairo he experimented with the manufacture of papyrus growing the plant in his garden. He beat the sliced papyrus stalks between two layers of linen and produced successful examples of papyrus one of which was exhibited in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.2425 The modern technique of papyrus production used in Egypt for the tourist trade was developed in 1962 by the Egyptian engineer Hassan Ragab using plants that had been reintroduced into Egypt in 1872 from France. Both Sicily and Egypt have centres of limited papyrus production. Papyrus is still used by communities living in the vicinity of swamps to the extent that rural householders derive up to 75 of their income from swamp goods.26 Particularly in East and Central Africa people harvest papyrus which is used to manufacture items that are sold or used locally. Examples include baskets hats fish traps trays or winnowing mats and floor mats.27 Papyrus is also used to make roofs ceilings rope and fences. Although alternatives such as eucalyptus are increasingly available papyrus is still used as fuel.26 Collections of papyrusedit The Heracles Papyrus Amherst Papyri this is a collection of William TyssenAmherst 
1 st Baron Amherst of Hackney. It includes biblical manuscripts early church fragments and classical documents from the Ptolemaic Roman and Byzantine eras. The collection was edited by Bernard Grenfell and Arthur Hunt in 19001901. It is housed at the Morgan Library  Museum New York. Archduke Rainer Collection also known as the Vienna Papyrus Collection is one of the worlds largest collections of papyri about 180000 objects in the Austrian National Library of Vienna.28 Berlin Papyri housed in the Egyptian Museum and Papyrus Collection.29 Berliner Griechische Urkunden BGU a publishing project ongoing since 1895 Bodmer Papyri this collection was purchased by Martin Bodmer in 19551956. Currently it is housed in the Bibliotheca Bodmeriana in Cologny. It includes Greek and Coptic documents classical texts biblical books and writing of the early churches. Chester Beatty Papyri a collection of 11 codices acquired by Alfred Chester Beatty in 19301931 and 1935. It is housed at the Chester Beatty Library. The collection was edited by Frederic G. Kenyon. Colt Papyri housed at the Morgan Library  Museum New York. The Herculaneum papyri these papyri were found in Herculaneum in the eighteenth century carbonized by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius. After some tinkering a method was found to unroll and to read them. Most of them are housed at the Naples National Archaeological Museum.30 The Heroninos Archive a collection of around a thousand papyrus documents dealing with the management of a large Roman estate dating to the third century CE found at the very end of the 
19 th century at Kasr El Harit the site of ancient Theadelphia de in the Faiyum area of Egypt by Bernard Pyne Grenfell and Arthur Surridge Hunt. It is spread over many collections throughout the world. The Houghtons papyri the collection at Houghton Library Harvard University was acquired between 1901 and 1909 thanks to a donation from the Egypt Exploration Fund.31 Martin Schyen Collection biblical manuscripts in Greek and Coptic Dead Sea Scrolls classical documents Michigan Papyrus Collection this collection contains above 10000 papyri fragments. It is housed at the University of Michigan. Oxyrhynchus Papyri these numerous papyri fragments were discovered by Grenfell and Hunt in and around Oxyrhynchus. The publication of these papyri is still in progress. A large part of the Oxyrhynchus papyri are housed at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford others in the British Museum in London in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo and many other places. Princeton Papyri it is housed at the Princeton University32 Papiri della Societ Italiana PSI a series still in progress published by the Societ per la ricerca dei Papiri greci e latini in Egitto and from 1927 onwards by the succeeding Istituto Papirologico G. Vitelli in Florence. These papyri are situated at the institute itself and in the Biblioteca Laurenziana. Rylands Papyri this collection contains above 700 papyri with 31 ostraca and 54 codices. It is housed at the John Rylands University Library. Tebtunis Papyri housed by the Bancroft Library at the University of California Berkeley this is a collection of more than 30000 fragments dating from the 
3 rd century BCE through the 
3 rd century CE found in the winter 18991900 at the site of ancient Tebtunis Egypt by an expedition team led by the British papyrologists Bernard P. Grenfell and Arthur S. Hunt.33 Washington University Papyri Collection includes 445 manuscript fragments dating from the first century BCE to the eighth century AD. Housed at the Washington University Libraries. Yale Papyrus Collection housed by the Beinecke Library it contains over six thousand inventoried items. It is cataloged digitally scanned and accessible online.34 Individual papyriedit Brooklyn Papyrus this papyrus focuses mainly on snakebites and their remedies. It speaks of remedial methods for poisons obtained from snakes scorpions and tarantulas. The Brooklyn Papyrus currently resides in the Brooklyn Museum.35 Saite Oracle Papyrus this papyrus located at the Brooklyn Museum records the petition of a man named Pemou on behalf of his father Harsiese to ask their god for permission to change temples. Strasbourg papyrus Will of Naunakhte found at Deir elMedina and dating to the 
20 th dynasty it is notable because it is a legal document for a nonnoble woman.36 See alsoedit Other ancient writing materials Palm leaf manuscript India Amate Mesoamerica Paper Ostracon Wax tablets Clay tablets Birch bark document Parchment Pliny the Elder Papyrology Papyrus sanitary pad Palimpsest For Egyptian papyri List of ancient Egyptian papyri Other papyri Elephantine papyri Magdalen papyrus Nag Hammadi library New Testament papyri The papyrus plant in Egyptian art Palmette Referencesedit Citationsedit  Papyrus definition. Dictionary.com. Retrieved 20 November 2008.  Papyrus. MerriamWebster.com. Retrieved 27 March 2023.  Ebers Papyrus. Encyclopdia Britannica. Retrieved 8 March 2014.  Houston Keith The Book A CovertoCover Exploration of the Most Powerful Object of our Time W. W. Norton  Company 2016 pp. 48 excerpt 1  a b Tallet Pierre 2012. Ayn Sukhna and Wadi elJarf Two newly discovered pharaonic harbours on the Suez Gulf PDF. British Museum Studies in Ancient Egypt and Sudan. 18 14768. ISSN 20495021. Retrieved 21 April 2013.  a b H. Idris Bell and T.C. Skeat 1935. Papyrus and its uses British Museum pamphlet. Archived 18 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine  Stille Alexander. The Worlds Oldest Papyrus and What It Can Tell Us About the Great Pyramids. Retrieved 27 September 2015.  ern Jaroslav. 1952. Paper and Books in Ancient Egypt An Inaugural Lecture Delivered at University College London 29 May 1947. London H. K. Lewis  Co. Ltd. Reprinted Chicago Ares Publishers Inc. 1977.  Pirenne Mohammed and Charlemagne critiqued by R.S. Lopez Mohammed and Charlemagne a revision Speculum 19431438..  David Diringer The Book before Printing Ancient Medieval and Oriental Dover Publications New York 1982 p. 166.  Bompaire Jacques and Jean Irigoin. La paleographie grecque et byzantine Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 1977 389 n. 6 cited in AliceMary Talbot ed.. Holy women of Byzantium Dumbarton Oaks 1996 p. 227. ISBN 0884022
48 X.  Lewis N 1983. Papyrus and Ancient Writing The First Hundred Years of Papyrology. Archaeology. 36 4 3137.  a b Hans Dieter Betz 1992. The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation Including the Demotic Spells Volume 1. University of Chicago Press.  Frederic G. Kenyon Palaeography of Greek papyri Oxford Clarendon Press 1899 p. 1.  Frederic G. Kenyon Palaeography of Greek papyri Oxford Clarendon Press 1899 p. 3.  Diringer David 1982. The Book Before Printing Ancient Medieval and Oriental. New York Dover Publications. pp. 250256. ISBN 0486242439.   Henry George Liddell Robert Scott A GreekEnglish Lexicon on Perseus  Beekes R. S. P. 2009. Etymological Dictionary of Greek. Brill. p. 1151. ISBN 9789004174191.   Henry George Liddell Robert Scott A GreekEnglish Lexicon on Perseus  Introduction to Greek and Latin Palaeography Maunde Thompson. archive. org  Bierbrier Morris Leonard ed. 1986. Papyrus Structure and Usage. British Museum Occasional Papers 60 ser. ed. Anne Marriott. London British Museum Press.  Lyons Martyn 2011. Books A Living History. Los Angeles California Getty Publications. p. 21. ISBN 9781606060834.  Murray Stuart 2009. The Library An Illustrated History. New York NY Skyhorse. pp. 1012. ISBN 9781602397064.  Cerny Jaroslav 1947. Paper and books in Ancient Egypt. London H. K. Lewis  Co. Ltd.  Lucas A. 1934. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries 
2 nd Ed. London Edward Arnold and Co.  a b Maclean I.M.D. R. Tinch M. Hassall and R.R. Boar. 20
03 c. Towards optimal use of tropical wetlands an economic evaluation of goods derived from papyrus swamps in southwest Uganda. Environmental Change and Management Working Paper No. 200310 Centre for Social and Economic Research into the Global Environment University of East Anglia Norwich.  Langdon S. 2000. Papyrus and its Uses in Modern Day Russia Vol. 1 pp. 5659.  Department for Papyri. Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek.  gyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin.  Diringer David 1982. The Book Before Printing Ancient Medieval and Oriental. New York Dover Publications. p. 252 ff. ISBN 0486242439.  Digital Papyri at Houghton Library Harvard University. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Retrieved 30 July 2011.  Digital Images of Selected Princeton Papyri. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 13 December 2008.  The Center for the Tebtunis Papyri.  The Yale Papyrus Collection. Beinecke Rare Book  Manuscript Library. 14 December 2018. Retrieved 17 September 2023.  Ancient Egyptian Medical Papyri. Retrieved 17 June 2014.  ern Jaroslav. The Will of Naunakhte and the Related Documents. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 31 1945 2953. doi
10.1 177030751334503100104. JSTOR 3855381. Sourcesedit Leach Bridget and William John Tait. 2000. Papyrus. In Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology edited by Paul T. Nicholson and Ian Shaw. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. 227253. Thorough technical discussion with extensive bibliography. Leach Bridget and William John Tait. 2001. Papyrus. In The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt edited by Donald Bruce Redford. Vol. 3 of 3 vols. Oxford New York and Cairo Oxford University Press and The American University in Cairo Press. 2224. Parkinson Richard Bruce and Stephen G. J. Quirke. 1995. Papyrus. Egyptian Bookshelf. London British Museum Press. General overview for a popular reading audience. Further readingedit Horst Blanck Das Buch in der Antike. Beck Mnchen 1992 ISBN 3406366864 Rosemarie Drenkhahn Papyrus. In Wolfgang Helck Wolfhart Westendorf eds. Lexikon der gyptologie. vol. IV Wiesbaden 1982 Spalte 667670 David Diringer The Book before Printing Ancient Medieval and Oriental Dover Publications New York 1982 pp. 113169 ISBN 0486242439. Victor Martin Hrsg. Mnandre. Le Dyscolos. Bibliotheca Bodmeriana Cologny  Genve 1958 Otto Mazal Griechischrmische Antike. Akademische Druck und Verlagsanstalt Graz 1999 ISBN 3201017167 Geschichte der Buchkultur vol. 1 External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Papyrus. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Papyri. Leuven Homepage of Papyrus Collections Ancient Egyptian Papyrus  Aldokkan Yale Papyrus Collection Database at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University Lund University Library Papyrus Collection Ghent University Library Papyrus Collection Thompson Edward Maunde 1911. Papyrus . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 20 
11 th ed.. pp. 743745. Papyri.info Resource and Partner Organizations. papyri.info. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 26 October 2018. Finding aid to the Advanced Papyrological Information System records at Columbia University. Rare Book  Manuscript Library. Modern commercial Papyrus paper making photos Elbardy Papyrusmaking in Egypt video scidevnet via youtube April 2019. v t e Paper data storage media Antiquity Writing on papyrus c. 3000 BCE Paper 105 CE Modern Index card 16
40 s Punched tape mid18
00 s Punched card 18
80 s Edgenotched card 1904 Optical mark recognition 19
30 s Barcode 1948 v t e Writing and writing material Enduring Plantbased Amate Trema micrantha Ficus aurea Bamboo and wooden slips Birch bark Betula Foldingbook manuscript Streblus asper Broussonetia papyrifera Ola leaf Corypha umbraculifera Palm leaf Borassus Paper Papyrus Cyperus papyrus Other materials Animal skin Parchment Vellum Ink Metals Intaglio Stamping Oracle bone Photographic film Stone Geoglyph Petroglyph Tablets Clay tablet Slate Wax tablet Textile printing Silk text Impermanent Electronic paper Screen Skywriting Carrier objects Book Codex Notebook Electronic media HuShaku baton Inscription Basrelief Manuscript Palimpsest Microform Scroll Sign Related topics Writing systems History of writing List of writing systems Written language Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePapyrusoldid1216655860 Categories Papyrus Egyptian artefact types Nile Delta Papyrology Textual scholarship Writing media Egyptian inventions Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Commons link is on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 1 April 2024 at 0801 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width