New Date for the Second Persian Conquest, End of Pharaonic and Manethonian Egypt: 340/39 B.C.E. in: Journal of Egyptian History Volume 3 Issue 2 (2010)
Jump to Content  Deutsch English Login to my Brill account Create Brill Account Publications Subjects African Studies American Studies Ancient Near East and Egypt Art History Asian Studies Biblical Studies Biology Book History and Cartography Classical Studies Education History Human Rights and Humanitarian Law International Law International Relations Jewish Studies Languages and Linguistics Life Sciences Literature and Cultural Studies Media Studies Middle East and Islamic Studies Musicology Philosophy Religious Studies Slavic and Eurasian Studies Social Sciences Theology and World Christianity Imprints Brill Brill  Nijhoff Brill  Wageningen Academic Brill Germany  Austria Bhlau Brill  Fink Brill  mentis Brill  Schningh Vandenhoeck  Ruprecht VR unipress Services Authors Authors Author Portal How to publish with Brill Files  Guides Fonts Scripts and Unicode Publication Ethics  COPE Compliance Data Sharing Policy OASES Brill MyBook Ordering from Brill Author Newsletter Piracy Reporting Form Awards Librarians Librarians Catalogs Flyers and Price Lists EBook Collections Title Lists and MARC Records How to Manage your Online Holdings Sales Managers and Sales Contacts Ordering From Brill LibLynx Access Management Discovery Services KBART Files MARC Records Online User and Order Help Awards Trade Trade Sales Managers and Sales Contacts Ordering From Brill Titles No Longer Published by Brill Investors Investors Latest Key Figures Latest Financial Press Releases and Reports Annual General Meeting of Shareholders Share Information Products Products Books Textbooks Journals Specialty Products Catalogs Flyers and Price Lists Open Access Open Access Open Access for Authors Open Access and Research Funding Open Access for Librarians Open Access for Academic Societies Discover Brills Open Access Content About About us Organization Stay updated History Corporate Social Responsiblity Investor Relations Policies rights  permissions Review a Brill Book FAQ Contact Help Login to my Brill account Create Brill Account  Deutsch English Publications Subjects African Studies Education Media Studies American Studies History Middle East and Islamic Studies Ancient Near East and Egypt Human Rights and Humanitarian Law Musicology Art History International Law Philosophy Asian Studies International Relations Religious Studies Biblical Studies Jewish Studies Slavic and Eurasian Studies Biology Languages and Linguistics Social Sciences Book History and Cartography Life Sciences Theology and World Christianity Classical Studies Literature and Cultural Studies Imprints Brill Brill Germany  Austria Brill  Nijhoff Brill  Schningh Bhlau Brill  Wageningen Academic Brill  Fink Vandenhoeck  Ruprecht Brill  mentis VR unipress Services Authors Author Portal How to publish with Brill Files  Guides Fonts Scripts and Unicode Publication Ethics  COPE Compliance Data Sharing Policy OASES Brill MyBook Ordering from Brill Author Newsletter Piracy Reporting Form Awards Trade Sales Managers and Sales Contacts Ordering From Brill Titles No Longer Published by Brill Librarians Catalogs Flyers and Price Lists EBook Collections Title Lists and MARC Records How to Manage your Online Holdings Sales Managers and Sales Contacts Ordering From Brill LibLynx Access Management Discovery Services KBART Files MARC Records Online User and Order Help Awards Rights and Permissions Investors Latest Key Figures Latest Financial Press Releases and Reports Annual General Meeting of Shareholders Share Information Products Books Textbooks Journals Specialty Products Catalogs Flyers and Price Lists Press and Reviews Open Access Open Access Open Access for Authors Open Access and Research Funding Open Access for Librarians Open Access for Academic Societies Discover Brills Open Access Content About About Organization Stay Updated About Us Mission Statement News Imprints and Trademarks Careers Blog Partnerships Corporate Governance Catalogs Flyers and Price Lists Investor Relations Email Newsletter Signup Pages History Corporate Social Responsibility Social Media Overview FAQ Brill Podcasts Conference and Book Fairs Accessibility Contact Offices Worldwide Rights and Permissions Policies and Forms Departments Acquisition Editors Contact Search Help Share on facebook Share on linkedin Share on twitter Email this content Share link with colleague or librarian You can email a link to this page to a colleague or librarian Email this content or copy the link directly httpsbrill.comviewjournalsjeh
32 articlep1911.xml The link was not copied. Your current browser may not support copying via this button. Link copied successfully Copy link Stay informed about this journal Get New Issue Alerts Get Advance Article alerts Get Citation Alerts Save Share on facebook Share on linkedin Share on twitter Email this content Share link with colleague or librarian You can email a link to this page to a colleague or librarian Email this content or copy the link directly httpsbrill.comviewjournalsjeh
32 articlep1911.xml The link was not copied. Your current browser may not support copying via this button. Link copied successfully Copy link Stay informed about this journal Get New Issue Alerts Get Advance Article alerts Get Citation Alerts Save New Date for the Second Persian Conquest End of Pharaonic and Manethonian Egypt 34039 B.C.E. In Journal of Egyptian History Author Leo Depuydt Leo Depuydt Brown University Search for other papers by Leo Depuydt in Current site Google Scholar Close Online Publication Date 01 Jan 2010 Abstract Metadata Cited By Metrics Abstract Artaxerxes IIIs conquest of Egypt signified the end of Egypt of the Pharaohs. For more than half a century now the event has been dated to either 343 B.C.E. or 342 B.C.E. Detailed calibrations focus on the winter of 34342 B.C.E. especially early 342 B.C.E. Yet there is no evidence whatsoever for this date. The presumed evidence has escaped scrutiny in Egyptology because it involves subtle reasoning about the supposed purport of Classical Greek sources whose chronology is uncertain or whose authenticity is in doubt. The surviving sources instead unambiguously point to an interval lasting from November of 340 B.C.E. to the summer of 339 B.C.E. as the time when the conquest most probably took place. This date can be styled as 34039 B.C.E. The slash signifies a time interval shorter than two full years  in this case also shorter than a year  that spans two Julian years. The conquest is therefore dated here to roughly three years later than when everyone now assumes it took place. Access options Get access to the full article by using one of the access options below. Purchase Buy instant access PDF download and unlimited online access 
34.9 5 Add to Cart Other access options Rent on DeepDyve Redeem Access Token Institutional Login Log in with Open Athens Shibboleth or your institutional credentials Login via Institution Personal login Log in with your brill.com account Login with brill.com account Title New Date for the Second Persian Conquest End of Pharaonic and Manethonian Egypt 34039 B.C.E. Article Type Research Article DOI httpsdoi.org
10.1 1631874166
10 X541709 Language English Pages 191230 In Journal of Egyptian History In Volume 3 Issue 2 Publisher Brill EISSN 18741665 Print ISSN 18741657 Subjects History Ancient Near East and Egypt Codicology Papyrology  Philology All Time Past Year Past 30 Days Abstract Views 477 127 11 Full Text Views 118 9 1 PDF Views  Downloads 73 22 3 New Date for the Second Persian Conquest End of Pharaonic and Manethonian Egypt 34039 B.C.E. In Journal of Egyptian History Author Leo Depuydt Leo Depuydt Brown University Search for other papers by Leo Depuydt in Current site Google Scholar PubMed Close View More View Less Online Publication Date 01 Jan 2010 Download Citation Get Permissions Get Access Access options Get access to the full article by using one of the access options below. Institutional Login Log in with Open Athens Shibboleth or your institutional credentials Login via Institution Purchase Buy instant access PDF download and unlimited online access 
34.9 5 Add to Cart Other access options Rent on DeepDyve Redeem Access Token Abstract Metadata Abstract Artaxerxes IIIs conquest of Egypt signified the end of Egypt of the Pharaohs. For more than half a century now the event has been dated to either 343 B.C.E. or 342 B.C.E. Detailed calibrations focus on the winter of 34342 B.C.E. especially early 342 B.C.E. Yet there is no evidence whatsoever for this date. The presumed evidence has escaped scrutiny in Egyptology because it involves subtle reasoning about the supposed purport of Classical Greek sources whose chronology is uncertain or whose authenticity is in doubt. The surviving sources instead unambiguously point to an interval lasting from November of 340 B.C.E. to the summer of 339 B.C.E. as the time when the conquest most probably took place. This date can be styled as 34039 B.C.E. The slash signifies a time interval shorter than two full years  in this case also shorter than a year  that spans two Julian years. The conquest is therefore dated here to roughly three years later than when everyone now assumes it took place. Title New Date for the Second Persian Conquest End of Pharaonic and Manethonian Egypt 34039 B.C.E. Article Type Research Article DOI httpsdoi.org
10.1 1631874166
10 X541709 Language English Pages 191230 In Journal of Egyptian History In Volume 3 Issue 2 Publisher Brill EISSN 18741665 Print ISSN 18741657 Subjects History Ancient Near East and Egypt Codicology Papyrology  Philology Content Metrics All Time Past Year Past 30 Days Abstract Views 477 127 11 Full Text Views 118 9 1 PDF Views  Downloads 73 22 3 Get Access Download Citation Get Permissions Products Books Journals Reference Works Primary source collections COVID19 Collection Services Authors How to publish with Brill Trade Librarians Investors Open Access Open Access for Authors Open Access and Research Funding Open Access for Librarians Open Access for Academic Societies Open Access Content Contact  Info About us Contact us Sales contacts Publishing contacts FAQ Stay Updated Blog Newsletters News Catalogs Social Media Overview Terms and Conditions Privacy Statement Cookie Settings Accessibility Legal Notice Terms and Conditions  Privacy Statement  Cookie Settings  Accessibility  Legal Notice  Copyright  20162024 Copyright  20162024 Powered by PubFactory 1
56.2 
08.3 
9.2 15 1
56.2 
08.3 
9.2 15 Sign in to annotate Close Edit Annotation Character limit 500500 Delete Cancel Save  Character limit 500500 Cancel Save View Expanded View Table View Full Size