David Malcolm Lewis - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 Education 
3 Career 
4 Publications 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents David Malcolm Lewis 4 languages Deutsch slenska   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia British historian 19281994 For other people named David Lewis see David Lewis disambiguation. David Malcolm Lewis FBA 7 June 1928 London  12 July 1994 Oxford was an English historian who was Professor of Ancient History at the University of Oxford. He is most renowned for his monumental twovolume edition of the inscriptions of Archaic and Classical Athens and Attica. His breadth and depth of knowledge was so widely admired that for decades he was invited by other scholars to comment upon and improve a high proportion of all book manuscripts in the field of Greek history before they went to publication. Biographyedit Lewis was a student that is fellow of Christ Church Oxford and Professor of Ancient History at the University of Oxford. In his obituary in The Guardian newspaper 16 July 1994 it was stated that Prof. Lewis has been for the last two or three decades the worlds leading authority in the field of Greek epigraphy. He was also an authority in several ancillary fields a profoundly learned scholar in Greek history according to the Princeton Alumni Weekly memorial tribute. A native of London he attended the City of London School was an undergraduate at Corpus Christi College Oxford where he said he was one of the last people to be allowed to do postgraduate work without registering for a higher degree and studied for his PhD in classics at Princeton University. He also studied at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton New Jersey the British School in Athens and at Christ Church Oxford. Lewis was a scholar of ancient Greek history. Much of his work was concerned with inscriptions but he insisted in particular in an address to the epigraphic conference in University of Cambridge in 1967 that epigraphy should not be an activity for initiates only but should be one means among others to the end of understanding the ancient world as fully as possible. He took a particular interest in what could be learnt from texts which even those who venture into the world of inscriptions find intimidating accounts of expenditure and inventories of temple treasures and this interest was extended to oriental documents in particular the fortification tablets from Persepolis. His Jewish faith prompted the development of a second area of expertise Middle Eastern history. Lewis was very proud of his work in editing three volumes on Archaic and Classical Greek history in the second edition of the Cambridge Ancient History. He published a book Sparta and Persia in 1977 and a shorter work The Jews of Oxford in 1992. He also edited several Oxford publications in the classics including The Decrees of the Greek States published posthumously in 1997. He also published hundreds of book reviews as many as eighteen appearing in a single year 1977. Educationedit City of London School Corpus Christi College Oxford MA Princeton University PhD Careeredit National Service with RAEC 194951 Member Institute for Advanced Study Princeton 195152 196465 Student British School at Athens 195254 Research Fellow Corpus Christi College Oxford 195455 Tutor in Ancient History Christ Church Oxford 195585 Student of Christ Church Oxford 195694 University Lecturer in Greek Epigraphy Oxford 195685 Professor of Ancient History Oxford 198594 Publicationsedit Sir Arthur PickardCambridge The Dramatic Festivals of Athens 
2 nd edn 1968 ed with John Gould Greek Historical Inscriptions 1969 with Russell Meiggs Sparta and Persia 1977 Inscriptiones Graecae I Attica before 403 B.C. 
3 rd edition 198194 ed Cambridge Ancient History vol IV 1988 vol. V 1992 vol. VI 1994 The Jews of Oxford 1992 Selected Papers in Greek and Near Eastern History ed. P. J. Rhodes 1997 Referencesedit Who was Who External linksedit httpwww.iranicaonline.orgarticleslewisdavidmalcolm1 Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Norway Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Italy Israel United States Sweden Latvia Czech Republic Australia Greece 2 Netherlands Poland Vatican Academics CiNii 2 Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDavidMalcolmLewisoldid1200048739 Categories 1928 births 1994 deaths English Jews English classical scholars Fellows of the British Academy Alumni of Corpus Christi College Oxford Fellows of Christ Church Oxford People educated at the City of London School Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars 
20 thcentury English historians Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2022 Use British English from July 2012 Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 28 January 2024 at 1630 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width