Martin Ostwald - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Education  career 
3 External links 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Martin Ostwald 4 languages Deutsch Italiano   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia GermanAmerican classical scholar 19222010 Martin Ostwald Born 192201
15 January 15 1922 Dortmund Germany Died April 10 201020100410 aged 88 Swarthmore Pennsylvania United States Citizenship United States Alma mater University of Toronto B.A. University of Chicago M.A. Columbia University Ph.D. Scientific career Fields Classical studies Institutions Wesleyan University 19521953 Columbia University 19531958 Swarthmore College 19581992 University of Pennsylvania 1992 Doctoral advisor Kurt von Fritz Notable students Erich S. Gruen William O. Stephens Martin Ostwald January 15 1922  April 10 2010 was a GermanAmerican classical scholar who taught until 1992 at Swarthmore College and the University of Pennsylvania. His main field of study was the political structures of Ancient Greece. Early lifeedit Born the elder son of a GermanJewish lawyer Ostwald was raised in Dortmund where he attended the Municipal Gymnasium Stdtisches Gymnasium. He had always intended to become a classical scholar but when this possibility was removed by the passage of the Nuremberg Laws of 1935 which closed the German universities to Jews he decided instead to pursue his interests in teaching and scholarship by becoming a rabbi.1 But during the Reichskristallnacht on November 9 1938 Ostwald was arrested together with his father and his younger brother Ernst. Forced to leave his parents behind in Germany Ostwald and his brother were able to emigrate to England via the Netherlands on a Kindertransport. In England however Ostwald and other German refugees were in the wake of the British defeat at Dunkirk transferred to a concentration camp in Canada.2 Education  careeredit Following his release Ostwald enrolled at the University of Toronto where he was able to resume his original interest in classical studies. After graduation in 1946 he continued his studies in the at that time still quite new Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago where he wrote an M.A. thesis on the treatment of the Orestes myth by Aeschylus Sophocles and Euripides. In 1949 he became a doctoral student under fellow German immigrant Kurt von Fritz at Columbia University in New York City. In 1951 he published his first scholarly article on the Prytaneion Decree IG 13 1
31.3  The following year Ostwald received his Ph.D. after completing his dissertation on the Athenian constitution.4 After receiving his Ph.D. Ostwald taught for one year at Wesleyan University. He then returned to Columbia and taught there until 1958 when he joined the Classics Department at Swarthmore College. A few years later he transferred onethird of his teaching to the graduate programs in Classical Studies and Ancient History at the University of Pennsylvania an arrangement made possible by a special agreement between the two institutions. Ostwald continued to teach undergraduates at Swarthmore and graduate students at Penn until his retirement in 1992. In addition to these primary appointments Ostwald taught as visiting professor at Princeton University the University of California at Berkeley Balliol College Oxford at the cole des Hautes tudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris and for many years at Tel Aviv University. Among Ostwalds many publications some of the most notable include a translation of Aristotles Nicomachean Ethics5 a handbook on the meters of Greek and Roman poetry on which he collaborated with Thomas G. Rosenmeyer and James Halporn.6 and several books on ancient Greek constitutional history Nomos and the Beginnings of the Athenian Democracy7 Autonomia Its Genesis and Early History8 and his magnum opus From Popular Sovereignty to the Sovereignty of the Law9 for which Ostwald received the Goodwin Award of Merit from the American Philological Association in 1990. A selection of Ostwalds more important papers was published under the title Language and History in Ancient Greek Culture Philadelphia 20
09.1 0 Ostwald was elected President of the American Philological Association in 1987. In 1991 he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and in 1993 he was inducted into the American Philosophical Society. Ostwald was awarded honorary doctorates by the University of Fribourg Switzerland in 1995 and by the University of Dortmund Germany in 2001. Ostwald died of heart failure on April 10 2010. External linksedit Martin Ostwald at the Database of Classical Scholars Referencesedit  Ralph M. Rosen and Joseph Farrell eds. Nomodeiktes Greek Studies in Honor of Martin Ostwald Ann Arbor 1993 xixii.  North Helen F. Martin Ostwald 19222010. The Classical World 1
03.4  2010. pp.53940.  The Prytaneion Decree Reexamined American Journal of Philology 72 1951 2446.  The Unwritten Laws and the Ancestral Constitution of Ancient Athens. Diss. Columbia 1952.  Aristotle The Nicomachean Ethics. Translation with introduction notes and glossary Indianapolis and New York 1962.  The Meters of Greek and Latin Poetry with T. G. Rosenmeyer and J. W. Halporn London Indianapolis and New York 1963 revised edition Norman Oklahoma 1980 partial translation J. W. Halporn and M. Ostwald Lateinische Metrik tr. H. Ahrens Gttingen 1963 
2 d ed. 1980  Nomos and the Beginnings of the Athenian Democracy Oxford 1969  Autonomia Its Genesis and Early History Chico California 1982  From Popular Sovereignty to the Sovereignty of the Law Berkeley Los Angeles and London 1986  Ostwald Martin. Language and History in Ancient Greek Culture Philadelphia 2009. Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Norway Spain France BnF data Germany Italy Israel Belgium United States Latvia Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Vatican Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMartinOstwaldoldid1153806058 Categories 1922 births Kindertransport refugees German classical scholars University of Toronto alumni University of Chicago alumni Columbia University alumni Wesleyan University faculty Swarthmore College faculty University of Pennsylvania faculty 2010 deaths Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 8 May 2023 at 1245 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width