Manetho and the King Lists
73 captures 06 Jan 2002  24 Mar 2024 Dec JAN Feb 06 2001 2002 2003 success fail About this capture COLLECTED BY Organization Alexa Crawls Starting in 1996 Alexa Internet has been donating their crawl data to the Internet Archive. Flowing in every day these data are added to the Wayback Machine after an embargo period. Collection Alexa Crawl DI Crawl DI from Alexa Internet. This data is currently not publicly accessible. TIMESTAMPS The Wayback Machine  httpsweb.archive.orgweb200201060706
09 httpwww.egyptologyonline.com
80 manetho.htm For best results we recommend that you maximise this window. Manetho was a GrecoEgyptian priest born at Sebennytos in the Nile Delta and lived during the reign of Ptolemy I. He is of significant importance to the study of Egyptology because he wrote a detailed history of Egypt which gives us the basic structure for the chronology of Ancient Egypt that we use today. Manetho divided Egyptian history into dynasties which were essentially ruling houses of which 30 are recognised and used today dating from unification around 3100 BC up until the death of the last native Egyptian ruler Nectanebo II in 343 BC. Two additional dynasties were then added onto these the 
31 st or Second Persian Period and the 
32 nd or Macedonian rulers followed by the Ptolemies. It is ironic that although great reliance is placed upon Manetho and his Egyptian History no full text of his work actually survives. Manethos history is known to us because several writers whose works have survived quoted extensively from it. These writers included Josephus writing in the late 
1 st century AD Sextus Julius Africanus writing around the year 220 AD and Bishop Eusebius of Caesarea writing in the early 
4 th century AD. Around five hundred years later the works of Sextus Julius and Bishop Eusebius were used as a basis for a history of the world written by George the Monk who was the secretary to the Byzantine Patriarch Tarasius 784806 AD. All of these writers took only the extracts that they wanted from Manethos work so his account exists only in fragments within these later works. Other sources of evidence for the dating and chronology of Ancient Egypt The Palermo Stone. A 
5 th Dynasty black basalt slab in several pieces now in the Palermo Museum in Sicily with further fragments in the Egyptian Museum Cairo and the Flinders Petrie Museum London. Inscribed on both sides it records some of the last predynastic kings and the kings that followed up until the reign of Neferirkare in the mid 
5 th Dynasty. Royal List of Abydos. In the Hall of the Records at the Temple of Abydos Seti I and his young son the future Ramesses II are shown worshiping the cartouched names of 76 of their ancestors. Unacceptable predecessors such as Hatshepsut and Akhenaten and the pharaohs from the Amarna Period are conveniently omitted from the list. The list also does not have records of any of the kings from the Second Intermediate Period. Abydos King List. A badly damaged duplicate of the Royal List of Abydos was discovered in the nearby temple of Ramesses II. Royal List of Karnak. A list of kings from the first kings down to Tuthmosis III 15041450 BC. It records the names of many of the obscure kings from the Second Intermediate Period now in the Louvre Museum Paris. Royal List of Saqqara. Discovered in the tomb of the Royal Scribe Thunery at Saqqara. Originally this list had 58 cartouches but now only 47 remain running from Anedjib of the 
1 st Dynasty up to Ramesses II and once again omitting those names from the Second Intermediate Period. Royal Canon of Turin. This papyrus is the best surviving chronology of the Ancient Egyptian Pharaohs but is unfortunately the most damaged. Originally listing over 300 kings it is written in a fine literate hand around 1200 BC. It lists the dynasties of the kings with the lengths of each reign in years months and days. Because of the poor condition piecing the fragments together is like trying to solve an immense jigsaw and what should have been a premier source for Egyptian chronology is now more like a nightmare Close this window to return to the main site