Egyptian Journey 2003: History: King Lists
chronologies kingdoms dynasties pharaohs history manetho abydos turin tombs Valley of the Kings Valley of the Queens Valley of the Nobles Valley of the Workers other notes dating egyptologists King Lists Trying to unravel the chronology of a five thousandyearold culture must be a hard gig. With only scanty remains and inscriptions puzzling out who ruled when and where gets to be a guessing game. But egyptologists are lucky. Among the inscriptions and carvings and papyrus finds are a number of histories of Egypt which outline the pharaohs and their accomplishments. Even better lists of kings  a laundry list of whos who that can support the framework of Egyptian histor y have been found in several places. Some are more complete than others some are written by contemporaries and others by later historians. For example Greek historian Herodotus wrote a complete history of Egypt and Egyptian priest Manetho wrote his history at the behest of the pharaoh Ptolemy I. Lists of titles carved into the wall of the great Temple of Seti in Abydos provide a listing of kings up until his time and fragments of papyrus listing all the kings into the later dynasties called the Turin canon provide yet another reference. They dont always agree of course. Some pharaohs are left off entirely  for example Akhenaton is not mentioned in the abydos list nor is Queen Hatshepsut even though we know that these leaders were powerful and marked huge changes in history. The dates and lengths of reigns arent always the same  popular kings are often arbitrarily given longer reigns to enhance their importance. Names are often different too with Greek translations adding another twist to the problem. But backed up by archeological evidence the king lists provide some basis for writing the history of Egypt. The dynasties presented by Manetho are still used today albeit updated with new information for example. Heres a quick listing of who is where in what list Manethos King list Abydos King list Turin Canon There are a few standard chronologies as well and Ive used them to built the outline of the pharaohs. Yes Im a bit overly wound  and tend to have serious scope creep in all my projects  so Ive put together a site of all the pharaohs with their names dates history relationships and monuments. Ive linked it to most of the photos we took so it might be an interesting ride. Ive stuck with the generally accepted chronology and have used Claytons dates as a basis. Dating estimates vary wildly between egyptologists. For an explanation of how the dating works check here. You can start at any of these places to read through the history Egyptian Kingdoms Dynasties Pharaoh Index prev  history home  20022004 r. fingerson drop me a note manetho king list  next