Female Pharaohs in Anicent Egypt. Egyptian Queens.
Home Articles Downloads Games Movies Travel Info Travel Guides Fiction Books Multimedia Email ANCIENT NILES EGYPTIAN ARTICLE Ancient Egyptian Female Pharaohs MERYTNEITH 
1 st Dynasty c.3000 BC MerytNeith is believed to have ruled at the start of the dynastic period possibly the third ruler of the dynasty and is known principally for her funerary monuments. Her reign lasted less than three years. Her name means Beloved of the Goddess Neith and she has a funerary monument and solar boat at Sakkara. This boat would enable her spirit to travel to the Afterlife a honour reserved only for a king. She also has another funerary tomb at Abydos. Both these tombs are surrounded by over fifty graves of attendants and servants demonstrating that she was buried with the power of a king and was full honours of a powerful ruler. NITOCRIS 
6 th Dynasty 214844 BC Nitocris came to the throne during much dispute when there was no apparent male heir. But she has become entangled with romantic legend and myth so much so that very little true facts are known about her reign. She would be remembered later in Egyptian history as The bravest and most beautiful woman of her time. No structures were commissioned by her and she is left unmentioned in many Egyptian records. She is however referred to in the Turin Kinglist by the Greek traveller Herodotos who wrote that she caused the deaths of hundreds of Egyptians in revenge for the killing of her brother the king. This was done by inviting all those guilt of his murder to a banquet then when the party was in full swing she opened flood gates and let the River Nile in on them drowning them all. According to legend she then flung herself into a room of ashes to escape her punishment. Again her reign lasted less than three years. SOBEKNOFRU Neferusobek 
12 th Dynasty 17671759 BC Sobeknofru ruled only briefly at a time of civil unrest followed by a period of anarchy. Monuments which record the troubled times have allowed Egyptologist to piece together her reign. Manetho states she was probably the sister of Ammenemes whom she succeeded and he tells us that her reign lasted for 3 years and 10 months. She is mentioned in the Turin List of Kings and is mentioned at Karnak Temple Luxor and Saqqara near Cairo. Portraits show her wearing the royal head cloth and kilt over her female attire a way of declaring that she is as fit to rule as any man. HATSHEPSUT 
18 th Dynasty c.14731458 BC Hatshepsut was one of the most important female pharaohs of Egypt. She ruled during the early part of the 
18 th Dynasty an exciting time known as the Golden Age of Egypt that includes many of the best known pharaohs and queens including King Tutankhamen Amenhotep Tiye Akhenaton and Nefertiti. There are problems pinpointing the actual date of her reign with the following all being possible 15041482 14881468 14791457 and 14731458 B.C Hatshepsut was the daughter of Thutmose I and Queen Ahmose. Upon the death of her father his son Thutmose II succeeded him and as was the custom he married his stepsister Hatshepsut in order to preserve the royal blood line. When Thutmose II also died his son Thutmose III became Pharaoh. However as the new pharaoh was a minor Hatshepsut stepped in as his guardian and a coregency was formed. This lasted approximately a year before Hatshepsut took fully control and appointed herself Pharaoh. In order to legitimise her role she used a number of strategies including having herself depicted as a man wearing the traditional regalia of the pharaohs including false beard the head cloth with uraeus cobra royal flail and crook the crown of two lands and kilt. She also claimed that the god AmunRa had visited her mother whilst pregnant proclaiming that it was the will of the god that Hatshepsut be Pharaoh which effectively made her a divine child. During her very successful fifteenyear reign Hatshepsuts trade expeditions were ground breaking and her building work was on a scale that had never been seen before. She initiated a number of impressive projects including her superb funerary temple at Deir elBahari and several structures at Karnak and Luxor Temples. In fact its quite possible that she was the founder of the latter. Yet another remarkable achievement was the transportation of two huge granite obelisks on the River Nile from Aswan to the Temple of Karnak. During her sovereignty Hatshepsut mounted at least one military campaign but perhaps her greatest achievement was the expedition that she orchestrated to the Land of Punt which is recorded on the walls of her mortuary temple. Amongst other things it shows ebony ivory myrrh saplings animal skins incense gold perfumes and exotic animals being brought back from Punt a land believed to have been located near the Red Sea and presentday Somalia. Unlike the warlike temperament of many of her 
18 th dynasty counterparts Hatshepsut devoted herself to administration the encouragement of commerce and trade and will be forever immortalised by the illustrations at Deir el Bahri that are said to be so exquisitely detailed that even fish species can be identified from the drawings. Even though Hatshepsut was a powerful and admirable woman who increased her countrys wealth and brought great stability to Egypt she mysteriously disappears around 1458 BC when Thutmose III regained his title as Pharaoh. Its thought by many scholars that her stepson despised Hatshepsut for keeping him from the throne and ordered all reference to her be wiped from Egyptian history by defiling her images smashing her statues and removing her mummy from its tomb. Because of this Hatshepsuts name was nearly lost to the annals of history. Although her grandfather father husband and stepson mummies have all been found Hatshepsuts mummy has never been positively identified and remains one of Egypts many mysteries yet to be resolved. Hatshepsets MUmmy Found Not sure The tomb was documented by Belzoni but it was the English archaeologist Howard Carter who first excavated Hatshepsuts tomb KV20 whilst working at the Valley of the Kings in 1902. But it wasnt until 1920 that he decided to properly explore its interior which resulted in the discovery of two sarcophagi one for Hatshepsut and the second for her father both of which were empty. In 1903 he had also found and opened a separate tomb now known as KV60 where he found coffins of mummified geese and the partially disturbed and decaying coffins of two women lying side by side. One bore the inscription of SitreIn Hatshepsuts wet nurse the other was anonymous. As the tomb was not deemed to be Royal it received little attention until Egyptologist Donald Ryan reopened it in 1989. The sarcophagus marked with the name of the wet nurse was taken to Cairo museum and the second unnamed sarcophagus remained behind. In 2007 Egyptian Egyptologist Mr Hawass reopened the tomb for a Discovery television special and the remaining sarcophagus which taken to Cairo for a CT scan. The scan revealed that this mummy was an obese woman aged between 45 and 60 who had suffered with bad teeth and diabetes. It was determined that she had died from cancer evidence of which could be seen in the pelvic region and spine indicating that it had spread throughout her body. The scanner was also used to examine artefacts associated with the queen. One of those was a small wooden box that bore the cartouche or royal seal of Hatshepsut and contained a liver and tooth. Egyptian dentist Galal ElBeheri studied the scans of the tooth and noted that the fat lady from KV60 was also missing a tooth and that the hole left behind and the type of tooth that was missing was an exact match for the loose one in the box. It was determined that the molar tooth in the box fitted within a fraction of a millimetre within the space of the missing molar in the mouth of the mummy. Speculation was also fuelled by the fact the mummys left arm was bent in a pose thought to mark royal burials and it wore a wooden facepiece. Mr Hawass believes that the mummy in KV60 is that of Hatshepsut and has been quoted as saying We are 100 percent sure that the mummy is Hatshepsut In order to verify the identification a DNA laboratory was set up close to the Cairo museum funded by The Discovery Channel. However some archaeologists have expressed scepticism about the possibility of using DNA technology to identify the queen including US molecular biologist Scott Woodward who was quoted as saying Its a very difficult process to obtain DNA from a mummy. To make a claim as to a relationship you need other individuals from which you have obtained DNA to make a comparison between the DNA sequences. Also other Egyptologists did not see the left arm on the chest as a royal characteristic including Dr. Bard of Boston University who said that royal mummies were usually laid out with both hands crossed at the chest. It should be noted that at the time of completing the documentary the DNA evidence had not been conclusive and further DNA investigation has still not been published May 2010. It has to be said that there is some secrecy surrounding Egypts DNA testing as they are very reluctance to share or publish the results. Dr Hawass is also unwilling to have the results double checked by other DNA laboratories elsewhere in in the world and has been quoted as saying that the DNA of Egyptian mummies can only be tested by the Egyptians themselves. So far the science shown in the Discovery Channels television special Secrets of Egypts Lost Queen has not been published in a reputable peerreviewed scientific journal  the gold standard of scientific research worldwide. Egypt also lacks an independent second lab to review the testing. Before any DNA results can be published in a scientific journal the Egyptian Museum lab must have its initial findings duplicate by an independent lab. The ancientDNA world goes by a very stringent set of criteria one of which is replication by an independent lab. If you dont do this particularly with something so important then no peer review journal will publish it. And if you dont get it published then as a scientist you havent achieved anything. In conclusion Mummy identification is a very tricky job and it can be very difficult to positively ID a mummy solely from the sarcophagi or nearby funerary objects especially with the regular shifting of royal mummies in ancient times in order to protect them from tomb robbers. Also as long as Egyptian Egyptologists continue to refuse to let other reputable teams of international scientists examine their results then any claims to mummy identification will be less than meaningful. NEFERTITI 
18 th Dynasty c.1336 BC Nefertiti was the beautiful wife of Pharaoh Akhenaton who was also known as Amenophis IV and the Heritic king. They couple reigned for 17 years toward the end of the socalled Amarna period. A famous sculptured head of Nefertiti was found at Amarna which showed her remarkable beauty. She was actively involved in her husbands revolutionary policies and is often shown wearing kingly regalia and officiating at his side. It is believed that after the death of Akhenaten she ruled independently around 1336 BC. Although this is by no means certain and I have only inlcuded her name here as a possible female pharaoh not a certainty. TWOSRET Tausert 
19 th Dynasty c.11871185 BC As with Nitocris and Sobeknofru above Twosrets reign was during troubled times and lasted less than three years. She was the last Pharaoh of the 
19 th dynasty. Twosret was the wife of Seti II and even though she was not his first wife its believed he loved her so much that that he ordered her tomb to be built in the Valley of the Kings an honour given to very few queens. Again the evidence is sketchy however the general consensus is that upon the death of her husband Queen Twosret became coregent with the kings young son Siptah born to another of Setis wives. Then some six years later around 1190 BC Siptah died and in the absence of an acceptable male heir Twosret ascended to the throne proclaiming herself Pharaoh. Due to her new royal status work began immediately to widen the existing tomb to the proper dimensions fit for a king including the entrance and corridors that needed to be enlarged to accommodate the size of what was now to be a kings coffin. CLEOPATRA c 51 BC It was over one thousand years after Twosret during the Ptolemaic period that Cleopatra reigned as Pharaoh. However as the Ptolemaic kings were essentially Greek invaders Cleopatra unlike those mentioned above was not of true Egyptian lineage. Descended from Macedonians who had ruled Egypt ever since the death of Alexander the Great some 250 years earlier Cleopatra VII was born to Ptolemy XII in 69 B.C. She came to the throne when she was just 17 year old in 51 B.C. Its thought that she ruled jointly with her father then after he died with her younger brother Ptolemy XIII. It is said that Cleopatra captivated Julius Caesar Roman when he came to Alexandria and in order to assume sole power over Egypt she asked for Julius Caesars help which he willingly gave. However their relationship was doomed and when her liaison with Mark Anthony another powerful roman also ended disastrously Cleopatra also known as the Queen of the Nile. famously committed suicide in 30 BC. Not only was Cleopatra the last female to be called pharaoh her demise also brought to an end 3000 years of dynastic rule. GENERAL COMMENTS Almost certainly these female Pharaohs were all of royal blood and were at one time queenconsort to their husbands. It is also believed that most of them did not produce heirs and therefore upon the death of their husbandsbrothersfathers they ascended to the throne. Being a royal woman in Ancient Egypt obviously did not exclude you from the throne unlike the vast majority of kingdoms at that time. Women in Ancient Egypt had great advantages over their contemporaries in other cultures such as Mesopotamia and Greece. Egyptian women were allowed to own property and hold official positions. Women could also inherit their wealth and take any disputes to court and defend their legal rights. As Heroditus a famous Greek historian pointed out much to his horror that Egyptian women were free to move about in public unlike her Greece counterpart who were confined to her home. However it is general regarded that if a woman did become pharaoh it was most likely because she had the backing of some very influential men upon whom she relied to help her maintain power. RECOMMENDED WEBSITES BBC History  Egyptian Women Copyright 1995 www.ancientnile.co.uk United Kingdom. All Rights Reserved. Online since 1995 Email callancientnile.co.uk Terms Privacy Copyright Bibliography Disclaimer Cookie Policy Links