Manetho - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Life and work 
3 Aegyptiaca Toggle Aegyptiaca subsection 
3.1 Transmission and reception 
3.2 Sources and methods 

3.2.1 King lists 

3.2.2 Transcriptions of Pharaonic names 
3.3 Content 
3.4 Similarities with Berossos 
3.5 Effect of Aegyptiaca 

3.5.1 As a root of antisemitism 
4 See also 
5 Notes 
6 References 
7 Further reading 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Manetho 58 languages Afrikaans    Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa   Latina Lietuvi Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Mirands Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Aegyptiaca 
3 rdcentury BC Egyptian historian and priest This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Manetho  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR November 2023 Learn how and when to remove this message Plutarch linked Manetho with the Ptolemaic cult of Serapis.1 This is the head of an anonymous priest of Serapis in the Altes Museum Berlin. Manetho mno Koin Greek  Manthn gen.  is believed to have been an Egyptian priest from Sebennytos Coptic  romanized emnouti2 who lived in the Ptolemaic Kingdom in the early third century BC during the Hellenistic period. He authored the Aegyptiaca History of Egypt in Greek a major chronological source for the reigns of the kings of ancient Egypt. It is unclear whether he wrote his history and king list during the reign of Ptolemy I Soter or Ptolemy II Philadelphos but it was completed no later than that of Ptolemy III Euergetes. Nameedit The original Egyptian version of Manethos name is lost but some speculate it means Truth of Thoth Gift of Thoth Beloved of Thoth Beloved of Neith or Lover of Neith.3 Less accepted proposals are Myinyuheter Horseherd or Groom and MaaniDjehuti I have seen Thoth. In the Greek language the earliest fragments the inscription of uncertain date on the base of a marble bust from the temple of Serapis at Carthage4 and the Jewish historian Flavius Josephus of the 
1 st century AD wrote his name as  Manethn so the Latinised rendering of his name here is given as Manetho.5 Other Greek renderings include Maneths Maneth Manethos Manths Manthn and Manethth. In Latin it is written as Manethon Manethos Manethonus and Manetos.citation needed Life and workedit Although no sources for the dates of his life and death remain Manetho is associated with the reign of Ptolemy I Soter 323283 BC by Plutarch c. 46120 AD while George Syncellus links Manetho directly with Ptolemy II Philadelphus 285246 BC. That Manetho links himself directly to Ptolemy II is depicted in Ptolemy Philadelphus in the Library of Alexandria by Vincenzo Camuccini 1813 If the mention of someone named Manetho in the Hibeh Papyri dated to 241240 BC is in fact the celebrated author of the Aegyptiaca then Manetho may well have been working during the reign of Ptolemy III Euergetes 246222 BC as well but at a very advanced age. Although the historicity of Manetho of Sebennytus was taken for granted by Josephus and later authors the question as to whether he existed remains problematic. The Manetho of the Hibeh Papyri has no title and this letter deals with affairs in Upper Egypt not Lower Egypt where our Manetho is thought to have functioned as a chief priest. The name Manetho is rare but there is no reason a priori to presume that the Manetho of the Hibeh Papyri is the priest and historian from Sebennytus who is thought to have authored the Aegyptiaca for Ptolemy Philadelphus. Manetho is described as a native Egyptian and Egyptian would have been his mother tongue. Although the topics he supposedly wrote about dealt with Egyptian matters he is said to have written exclusively in the Greek language for a Greekspeaking audience. Other literary works attributed to him include Against Herodotus The Sacred Book On Antiquity and Religion On Festivals On the Preparation of Kyphi and the Digest of Physics. The treatise Book of Sothis has also been attributed to Manetho. These works are not attested during the Ptolemaic period when Manetho of Sebennytus is said to have lived and are only mentioned in another source in the first century AD leaving a gap of 200300 years between the composition of the Aegyptiaca and its first attestation. The gap is even larger for the other works attributed to Manetho such as The Sacred Book that is mentioned for the very first time by Eusebius in the fourth century AD.6 Manetho of Sebennytus was probably a priest of the sungod Ra at Heliopolis according to George Syncellus he was the chief priest. He was considered by Plutarch to be an authority on the cult of Serapis a derivation of Osiris and Apis. Serapis was a GrecoMacedonian version of the Egyptian cult probably started after Alexander the Greats establishment of Alexandria in Egypt. A statue of the deity was imported in 286 BC by Ptolemy I Soter or in 278 BC by Ptolemy II Philadelphus as Tacitus and Plutarch attest.7 There was also a tradition in antiquity that Timotheus of Athens an authority on Demeter at Eleusis directed the project together with Manetho but the source of this information is not clear and it may originate from one of the literary works attributed to Manetho in which case it has no independent value and does not corroborate the historicity of Manetho the priesthistorian of the early third century BC. Aegyptiacaedit The Aegyptiaca  Aigyptiaka the History of Egypt may have been Manethos largest work and certainly the most important. It was organised chronologically and divided into three volumes. His division of rulers into dynasties was an innovation. However he did not use the term in the modern sense by bloodlines but rather introduced new dynasties whenever he detected some sort of discontinuity whether geographical Dynasty Four from Memphis Dynasty Five from Elephantine or genealogical especially in Dynasty One he refers to each successive king as the son of the previous to define what he means by continuity. Within the superstructure of a genealogical table he fills in the gaps with substantial narratives of the kings. Some have suggested citation needed that Aegyptiaca was written as a competing account to Herodotus Histories to provide a national history for Egypt that did not exist before. From this perspective Against Herodotus may have been an abridged version or just a part of Aegyptiaca that circulated independently. Neither survives in its original form today. Two English translations of the fragments of Manethos Aegyptiaca have been published by William Gillan Waddell in 19408 and by Gerald P. Verbrugghe and John Moore Wickersham in 20
01.9  Transmission and receptionedit Despite the reliance of Egyptologists on him for their reconstructions of the Egyptian dynasties the problem with a close study of Manetho is that not only was Aegyptiaca not preserved as a whole but it also became involved in a rivalry among advocates of Egyptian Jewish and Greek histories in the form of supporting polemics. During this period disputes raged concerning the oldest civilizations and so Manethos account was probably excerpted during this time for use in this argument with significant alterations. Material similar to Manethos has been found in Lysimachus of Alexandria a brother of Philo and it has been suggested citation needed that this was inserted into Manetho. We do not know when this might have occurred but scholars citation needed specify a terminus ante quem at the first century AD when Josephus began writing. The earliest surviving attestation to Manetho is that of Contra Apionem Against Apion by Flavius Josephus nearly four centuries after Aegyptiaca was composed. Even here it is clear that Josephus did not have the originals and constructed a polemic against Manetho without them. Avaris and Osarseph are both mentioned twice 
1.7 8 8687 238 250. Apion 
1.9 597 is merely a list of kings with no narratives until 
1.9 8 while running across two of Manethos dynasties without mention dynasties eighteen and nineteen. Contemporaneously or perhaps after Josephus wrote an epitome of Manethos work must have been circulated. This would have involved preserving the outlines of his dynasties and a few details deemed significant. For the first ruler of the first dynasty Menes we learn that he was snatched and killed by a hippopotamus. The extent to which the epitome preserved Manethos original writing is unclear so caution must be exercised. Nevertheless the epitome was preserved by Sextus Julius Africanus and Eusebius of Caesarea. Because Africanus predates Eusebius his version is usually considered more reliable but there is no assurance that this is the case. Eusebius in turn was preserved by Jerome in his Latin translation an Armenian translation and by George Syncellus. Syncellus recognized the similarities between Eusebius and Africanus so he placed them side by side in his work Ecloga Chronographica. Africanus Syncellus and the Latin and Armenian translations of Eusebius are what remains of the epitome of Manetho. Other significant fragments include Malalass Chronographia and the Excerpta Latina Barbari a bad translation of a Greek chronology. Sources and methodsedit W. M. Flinders Petrie quoted a Dr. Borchardt saying Manetho had really good sources and his copyists have not altogether spoilt him.10 Manethos methods involved the use of kinglists to provide a structure for his history. There were precedents to his writing available in Egypt plenty of which have survived to this day and his Hellenistic and Egyptian background would have been influential in his writing. Josephus records him admitting to using nameless oral tradition 
1.1 05 and myths and legends 
1.2 29 for his account and there is no reason to doubt this as admissions of this type were common among historians of that era. His familiarity with Egyptian legends is indisputable but how he learned Greek legends is more open to debate. He must have been familiar with Herodotus and in some cases he even attempted to synchronize Egyptian history with Greek for example equating King Memnon with Amenophis and Armesis with Danaos. This suggests he was also familiar with the Greek Epic Cycle for which the Ethiopian Memnon is slain by Achilles during the Trojan War and the history of Argos in Aeschyluss Suppliants. However it has also been suggested that these were later interpolations particularly when the epitome was being written so these guesses are at best tentative. At the very least he wrote in fluent Koin Greek. King listsedit At the behest of Ptolemy Philadelphus 266228 BC Manetho copied down a list of eight successive Persian kings beginning with Cambyses the son of Cyrus the Great.11 Manethos record of regnal years for these kings is mostly corroborated by Ptolemy of Alexandria in his Canon excepting for the fact that Artabanus who reigned for only 7 months is omitted by Ptolemy while Ptolemy puts 8 years instead of 5 for Cambyses reign. Cambyses Artaxerxes b. Cyrus  reigned over Persia his own kingdom for 5 years and over Egypt for 6 years. Darius II the son of Hystaspes  reigned 36 years. Xerxes Artaxerxes the Great b. Darius  reigned 21 years. Artabanus  reigned 7 months. Artaxerxes Cyrus b. Xerxes the Great  reigned 41 years. Xerxes  reigned 2 months. Sogdianus  reigned 7 months. Darius III the son of Xerxes  reigned 19 years. It is to be noted here that between Cambyses reign and Darius the son of Hystaspes there was an interim period whereby the Magi ruled over Persia. This important anecdote is supplied by Herodotus who wrote the Magian ruled Persia for 7 months after the death of Cambyses.12 Josephus on the other hand says they obtained the government of the Persians for a year. The kinglist that Manetho had access to is unknown to us but of the surviving kinglists the one most similar to his is the Turin Royal Canon or Turin Papyrus. The oldest source with which we can compare to Manetho are the Old Kingdom Annals c. 25002200 BC. From the New Kingdom are the list at Karnak constructed by order of Thutmose III two at Abydos by Seti I and Ramesses II the latter a duplicate but updated version of the former and the Saqqara list by the priest Tenry. The provenance of the Old Kingdom Annals is unknown surviving as the Palermo Stone. The differences between the Annals and Manetho are great. The Annals only reach to the fifth dynasty but its predynastic rulers are listed as the kings of Lower Egypt and kings of Upper Egypt. By contrast Manetho lists several Greek and Egyptian deities beginning with Hephaistos and Helios. Secondly the Annals give annual reports of the activities of the kings while there is little probability that Manetho would have been able to go into such detail. The New Kingdom lists are each selective in their listings that of Seti I for instance lists seventysix kings from dynasties one to nineteen omitting the Hyksos rulers and those associated with the heretic Akhenaten. The Saqqara king list contemporaneous with Ramesses II has fiftyeight names with similar omissions. If Manetho used these lists at all he would have been unable to get all of his information from them alone due to the selective nature of their records. Verbrugghe and Wickersham argue ... The purpose of these lists was to cover the walls of a sacred room in which the reigning Pharaoh or other worshiper as in the case of Tenry and his Saqqara list made offerings or prayers to his or her predecessors imagined as ancestors. Each royal house had a particular traditional list of these ancestors different from that of the other houses. The purpose of these lists is not historical but religious. It is not that they are trying and failing to give a complete list. They are not trying at all. Seti and Ramesses did not wish to make offerings to Akhenaten Tutankhamen or Hatshepsut and that is why they are omitted not because their existence was unknown or deliberately ignored in a broader historical sense. For this reason the Pharaonic kinglists were generally wrong for Manethos purposes and we should commend Manetho for not basing his account on them 2000105. These large stelae stand in contrast to the Turin Royal Canon such as Saqqara contemporaneous with Ramesses II written in hieratic script. Like Manetho it begins with the deities and seems to be an epitome very similar in spirit and style to Manetho. Interestingly the opposite side of the papyrus includes government records. Verbrugghe and Wickersham suggest that a comprehensive list such as this would be necessary for a government office to date contracts leases debts titles and other instruments 2000106 and so could not have been selective in the way the kinglists in temples were. Despite numerous differences between the Turin Canon and Manetho the format must have been available to him. As a priest or chief priest he would have had access to practically all written materials in the temple. While the precise origins for Manethos kinglist are unknown it was certainly a northern Lower Egyptian one. This can be deduced most noticeably from his selection of the kings for the Third Intermediate Period. Manetho consistently includes the Tanite Dynasty Twentyone and Dynasty Twentytwo lineage in his Epitome such as Psusennes I Amenemope and even such shortlived kings as Amenemnisu five years and Osochor six years. In contrast he ignores the existence of Theban kings such as Osorkon III Takelot III Harsiese A Pinedjem I and kings from Middle Egypt such as Peftjaubast of Herakleopolis. This implies that Manetho derived the primary sources for his Epitome from a local citys temple library in the region of the River Nile Delta which was controlled by the Tanitebased Dynasty Twentyone and Dynasty Twentytwo kings. The Middle and Upper Egyptian kings did not have any effect upon this specific region of the delta hence their exclusion from Manethos kinglist. Transcriptions of Pharaonic namesedit By the Middle Kingdom Egyptian kings each had five different names the Horus name the Two Ladies name the Gold Horus name the praenomen or throne name and a nomen the personal name given at birth also called a Son of Ra name as it was preceded by Sa Re. Some kings also had multiple examples within these names such as Ramesses II who used six Horus names at various times. Because Manethos transcriptions agree with many kinglists it is generally accepted that he was reliant on one or more such lists and it is not clear to what extent he was aware of the different pharaonic names of rulers long past and he had alternate names for some. Not all of the different names for each king have been uncovered. Manetho did not choose consistently from the five different types of names but in some cases a straightforward transcription is possible. Egyptian Men or Meni Son of Ra and kinglist names becomes Menes officially this is Pharaoh I.1 NarmerI represents Dynasty I and 1 means the first king of that dynasty while MenkauhorMenkahor Throne and kinglist names the Horus names is Menkhau and the Son of Ra name is Kaiu Horkaiu... is transcribed as Menkheres V.7 Menkauhor. Others involve a slight abbreviation such as AakheperenRe Throne and kinglist names becoming Khebron XVIII.4 Thutmose II. A few more have consonants switched for unknown reasons as for example Tausret becoming Thouoris XIX.6 TwosreTausret. One puzzle is in the conflicting names of some early dynastic kings although they did not have all five titles they still had multiple names. I.34 Djer whose Son of Ra name is Itti is considered the basis for Manethos I.2 Athothis. I.4 Oenephes then is a puzzle unless it is compared with Djers Gold Horus name Ennebu. It may be that Manetho duplicated the name or he had a source for a name unknown to us. Finally there are some names where the association is a complete mystery to us. V.6 RhathouresNiuserres complete name was Setibtawi SetibNebty Netjeribiknebu NiuserRe Ini NiuserRe but Manetho writes it as Rhathoures. It may be that some kings were known by names other than even just the five official ones. Thus how Manetho transcribed these names varies and as such we cannot reconstruct the original Egyptian forms of the names. However because of the simplicity with which Manetho transcribed long names see above they were preferred until original kinglists began to be uncovered in Egyptian sites translated and corroborated. Manethos division of dynasties however is still used as a basis for all Egyptian discussions. Contentedit Volume 1 begins from the earliest times listing deities and demigods as kings of Egypt. Stories of Isis Osiris Set or Horus might have been found here. Manetho does not transliterate either but gives the Greek equivalent deities by a convention that predates him Egyptian Ptah  Greek Hephaistos Isis  Demeter Thoth  Hermes Horus  Apollo Seth  Typhon etc. This is one of the clues as to how syncretism developed between seemingly disparate religions. He then proceeds to Dynastic Egypt from Dynasty One to Eleven. This would have included the Old Kingdom the First Intermediate Period and the early Middle Kingdom. Volume 2 covers Dynasties TwelveNineteen which includes the end of the Middle Kingdom and the Second Intermediate Period FifteenSeventeenthe Hyksos invasion and then their expulsion and the establishment of the New Kingdom Eighteen onward. The Second Intermediate Period was of particular interest to Josephus where he equated the Hyksos or shepherdkings as the ancient Israelites who eventually made their way out of Egypt Apion 
1.8 292. He even includes a brief etymological discussion of the term Hyksos. Volume 3 continues with Dynasty Twenty and concludes with Dynasty Thirty or Thirtyone see below. The Saite Renaissance occurs in Dynasty Twentysix while Dynasty Twentyseven involves the Achaemenid interruption of Egyptian rule. Three more local dynasties are mentioned although they must have overlapped with Persian rule. Dynasty Thirtyone consisted of three Persian rulers and some have suggested that this was added by a continuator. Both Moses of Chorene and Jerome end at Nectanebo II last king of the Egyptians and destruction of the Egyptian monarchy respectively but Dynasty Thirtyone fits within Manethos schemata of demonstrating power through the dynasteia well. The Thirtysecond dynasty would have been the Ptolemies. Similarities with Berossosedit Most of the ancient witnesses group Manetho together with Berossos and treat the pair as similar in intent and it is not a coincidence that those who preserved the bulk of their writing are largely the same Josephus Africanus Eusebius and Syncellus. Certainly both wrote about the same time and both adopted the historiographical approach of the Greek writers Herodotus and Hesiod who preceded them. While the subjects of their history are different the form is similar using chronological royal genealogies as the structure for the narratives. Both extend their histories far into the mythic past to give the deities rule over the earliest ancestral histories. Syncellus goes so far as to insinuate that the two copied each other If one carefully examines the underlying chronological lists of events one will have full confidence that the design of both is false as both Berossos and Manetho as I have said before want to glorify each his own nation Berossos the Chaldean Manetho the Egyptian. One can only stand in amazement that they were not ashamed to place the beginning of their incredible story in each in one and the same year.13 While this does seem an incredible coincidence the reliability of the report is unclear. The reasoning for presuming they started their histories in the same year involved some considerable contortions. Berossos dated the period before the Flood to 120 saroi 3600 year periods giving an estimate of 432000 years before the Flood. This was unacceptable to later Christian commentators so it was presumed he meant solar days. 432000 divided by 365 days gives a rough figure of 118312 years before the Flood. For Manetho even more numeric contortions ensued. With no flood mentioned they presumed that Manethos first era describing the deities represented the antediluvian age. Secondly they took the spurious Book of Sothis for a chronological count. Six dynasties of deities totalled 11985 years while the nine dynasties with demigods came to 858 years. Again this was too long for the Biblical account so two different units of conversion were used. The 11985 years were considered to be months of 2912 days each a conversion used in antiquity for example by Diodorus Siculus which comes out to 969 years. The latter period however was divided into seasons or quarters of a year and reduces to 21412 years another conversion attested to by Diodorus. The sum of these comes out to 118312 years equal to that of Berossos. Syncellus rejected both Manethos and Berossos incredible timespans as well as the efforts of other commentators to harmonise their numbers with the Bible. Ironically as we see he also blamed them for the synchronicity concocted by later writers. Effect of Aegyptiacaedit It is speculated that Manetho wrote at the request of Ptolemy I or Ptolemy II to give an account of the history of Egypt to the Greeks from a native perspective. However there is no evidence for this hypothesis. If such were the case Aegyptiaca was a failure since Herodotus Histories continued to provide the standard account in the Hellenistic world. It may also have been that some nationalistic sentiments in Manetho provided the impetus for his writing but that again is a conjecture. It is clear however that when it was written it would have proven to be the authoritative account of the history of Egypt superior to Herodotus in every way. The completeness and systematic nature in which he collected his sources was unprecedented. Syncellus similarly recognised its importance when recording Eusebius and Africanus and even provided a separate witness from the Book of Sothis. Unfortunately this material is likely to have been a forgery or hoax of unknown date. Every king in Sothis after Menes is irreconcilable with the versions of Africanus and Eusebius. Manetho should not be judged on the factuality of his account but on the method he used to record history and in this he was as successful as Herodotus and Hesiod. Finally in modern times the effect is still visible in the way Egyptologists divide the dynasties of the Egyptian kings. The French explorer and Egyptologist JeanFranois Champollion reportedly held a copy of Manethos lists in one hand as he attempted to decipher the hieroglyphs he encountered. Most modern scholarship that mentions the names of the kings will render both the modern transcription and Manethos version and in some cases Manethos names are even preferred to more authentic ones. Today his division of dynasties is used universally and this has permeated the study of nearly all royal genealogies by the conceptualization of succession in terms of dynasties or houses. As a root of antisemitismedit Manetho has been cited as an early example of antisemitism. Manethos history of Egypt potentially presented as a counternarrative14 to the traditional story of Exodus portrays Jews negatively Manethos depiction of Jews  or Lepers and Shepherds  exudes antiJewish themes.15 While the Old Testaments Exodus tells of the Jews escaping Egypt liberating themselves Manetho tells a different story that Egypt under the reign of Amenophis who was the son of Ramses and the father of Sethos Seti whom he later named Ramses after his father16 expelled lepers because of their impurity who then chose to revolt against Egypt pioneered by leader Osarsiph  later revealing himself as Moses  who imposed various antiEgyptian laws.17 Together with the Shepherds they conquered Egypt in a barbarous manner...setting the cities and villages on fire...roasting those sacred animals...and forced the priests and prophets to be the executioners and murderers of those sacred animals.18 Negative themes of the Jews followed such as being characterized as misanthropic or tyrannical.19 Osarsiph also declared that they should neither worship the Egyptian gods nor should abstain from any one of those sacred animals which they have in the highest esteem.18 See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal Berossus History of Ancient Egypt Hierombalus List of lists of ancient kings Ptolemaic dynasty Notesedit  Manetho 2018. Delphi Complete Works of Manetho. Delphi Classics. p. 251. ISBN 9781786563941.             StTakla.org. sttakla.org.  Waddell 1940 p. ix n. 1.  Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum viii. 1007   The same way that Platn is rendered Plato see Greek and Latin third declension.  Waddell 1940 pp. 188189.  Tacitus Histories 
4.8 3 Plutarch De Iside et Osiride 28.  Manetho with an English translation by W.G. Waddell Harvard University Press 1940.  Verbrugghe Gerald P. Wickersham John Moore 2001. Berossos and Manetho Introduced and Translated Native Traditions in Ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt. University of Michigan Press. pp. 207. ISBN 0472086871. Waddells Manetho is the only other English translation of Manetho. It was originally published in the Loeb Classical Library in 1940 together with the Tetrabiblos Treatise in Four Books of the astronomer Ptolemy.  httpsia801005.us.archive.org
4 itemsPetrie19
39 Petrie
2 C
20 Flinders
20 WE20
20 The
20 making
20 of
20 Egypt2028193929
20 LR.pdf. Retrieved 20240409. cite web Missing or empty title help  Cory I.P. 1828. The Ancient Fragments. London William Pickering. p. 65. OCLC 1000992106.  Herodotus 1921. G.P. Goold ed.. Herodotus The Persian Wars. Vol. 2 Books IIIIV. Translated by A.D. Godley. Cambridge Massachusetts London Harvard University Press William Heinemann Ltd. p. 87 s. 6568 Book III. ISBN 0674991311.  ISBN 0 434 99118 X  British  Ecloga Chronographica 30  Nirenberg David 2013. AntiJudaism The Western Tradition. New York City W.W. Norton. ISBN 9780393239430.  Van der Horst Pieter 10 October 2007. The Egyptian Beginning of AntiSemitisms Long History. Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs. Retrieved 12 October 2022.  Against Apion 126  Ilany Ofri 17 April 2020. The Ancient Origin of antiSemitic Conspiracy Theories Blaming Jews for Plagues. Haaretz.  a b FlaviusJosephus. Against Apion.  Berthelot Katell 3 March 2009. Hecataeus of Abdera and Jewish misanthropy. Bulletin du Centre de recherche franais  Jrusalem 19. Referencesedit Josephus Titus Flavius ca 7090 B.C.E Against Apion Barclay John M.G. 2011. Flavius Josephus Translation and Commentary Volume 10 Against Apion. Brill ISBN 9789004117914. Palmer W. 1861. Egyptian Chronicles Vol. II. London. Waddell William Gillian ed. 1940. Manetho. The Loeb Classical Library 350 ser. ed. George P. Goold. London and Cambridge William Heinemann ltd. and Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674993853. Further readingedit Helck Hans Wolfgang. 1975. Manethon 1. In Der kleine Pauly Lexikon der Antike auf der Grundlage von Paulys Realencyclopdie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft edited by Konrat Ziegler Walter Sontheimer and Hans Grtner. Vol. 3. Mnchen Alfred Druckenmller Verlag. 952953. ISBN 0828867763. Laqueur Richard. 1928. Manethon. In Paulys RealEncyclopdie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft edited by August Friedrich von Pauly Georg Wissowa and Wilhelm Kroll. Vol. 14 of 24 vols. Stuttgart Alfred Druckenmller Verlag. 10601106. ISBN 3476010
18 X. Cerqueiro Daniel 2012. Aegyptos fragmentos de una aegyptiaca recndita. Buenos AiresEd.Peq.Ven. ISBN 9789879239223. M.A. Leahy. 1990. Libya and Egypt c1300750 BC. London School of Oriental and African Studies Centre of Near and Middle Eastern Studies and The Society for Libyan Studies. Redford Donald Bruce. 19
86 a. The Name Manetho. In Egyptological Studies in Honor of Richard A. Parker Presented on the Occasion of His 
78 th Birthday December 10 1983 edited by Leonard H. Lesko. Hannover and London University Press of New England. 118121. ISBN 0874513219. . 19
86 b. Pharaonic KingLists Annals and DayBooks A Contribution to the Study of the Egyptian Sense of History. Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities Publications 4 ser. ed. Loretta M. James. Mississauga Benben Publications. ISBN 0920168086. . 2001. Manetho. In The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt edited by Donald Bruce Redford. Vol. 2 of 3 vols. Oxford New York and Cairo Oxford University Press and The American University in Cairo Press. 336337. ISBN 0195102347. Thissen HeinzJosef. 1980. Manetho. In Lexikon der gyptologie edited by Hans Wolfgang Helck and Wolfhart Westendorf. Vol. 3 of 7 vols. Wiesbaden Otto Harrassowitz. 11801181. ISBN 3447014415. Verbrugghe Gerald P. and John Moore Wickersham. 1996. Berossos and Manetho Introduced and Translated Native Traditions in Ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt. Ann Arbor University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0472086871. External linksedit Chronologie de Manthon showing the names given by Manetho and the names used now in French Manetho History of Egypt Sacred Book etc. Whos Who in Ancient Egypt Manetho The First Egyptian Narrative History Manetho and Greek Historiography ZPE 127 1999 pp.93116 by J. Dillery Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 WorldCat National Norway Spain France BnF data Germany Italy Israel United States Sweden Czech Republic Australia Greece Netherlands Poland Vatican Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleManethooldid12217146
10 Aegyptiaca Categories 
3 rdcentury BC births 
3 rdcentury BC deaths 
3 rdcentury BC clergy 
3 rdcentury BC Egyptian people 
3 rdcentury BC historians Ancient Egyptian historians Ancient Egyptian priests Texts in Koine Greek Hellenistic writers Hellenisticera historians Regnal lists Hidden categories CS1 errors missing title CS1 errors bare URL CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Koin Greeklanguage text Articles containing Copticlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 Articles with Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 1 May 2024 at 1550 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width