Double Falcon - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestation 
2 Name 
3 See also 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Double Falcon 24 languages  Deutsch  Espaol Franais Galego Bahasa Indonesia  Magyar  Nederlands Occitan Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina   srpski Suomi Tagalog   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ruler of Lower Egypt from Naqada III during the 
32 nd century BCE Double Falcon Dju Nebwy Serekh of Double Falcon. Redrawing of an inscription on a vessel found in elBeda. Pharaoh Reign 
32 nd century BC Predecessor Scorpion I Successor IryHor Royal titulary Horus name w nb.wy Dynasty Naqada III Double Falcon also possibly Dju and Nebwy was a ruler of Lower Egypt from Naqada III. He may have reigned during the 
32 nd century BC. The length of his reign is unknown. Attestationedit In 1910 Egyptologist M. J. Cldat discovered the first evidence of Double Falcons existence. Cldat was excavating the site of elMehemdiah in the northeastern Nile Delta when a peasant brought him a jar and some incised fragments that he had uncovered during the planting of a palmgrove in nearby elBeda. Investigating the site Cldat soon discovered four serekhs of Double Falcon.12 The next attestation of Double Falcon was discovered in 1912 during excavations by Hermann Junker on the site of Tura where a tomb yielded a complete jar bearing a serekh topped by two falcons.3 More recently serekhs of Double Falcon have been found in the Sinai Peninsula4 in Tell Ibrahim Awad in the eastern Delta5 in Adaima and Abydos in Upper Egypt6 and in the Palmahim quarry in southern Israel.35 The concentration of Double Falcons serekhs in Lower Egypt and the northwestern Sinai indicates that his rule may have been limited to these regions. Nonetheless the wider geographic presence of his serekhs notably in Upper Egypt and the Southern Levant suggests that the longdistance authority of the Naqada III kings had already commenced towards the end of the period be it through trading or warfare.3 If the inscriptions on the recto side of the Libyan Palette are indeed royal names Double Falcon may be listed alongside either Scorpion I or Scorpion II in the second row of inscribed symbols. Nameedit The serekh of Double Falcon is unique in its layout and composition. Firstly it is the only serekh topped by two Horus falcons facing each other. Secondly the serekh does not have a name compartment being filled by the vertical lines which usually represent the niched facade of a palace. The serekh also lacks the horizontal line that delimits the palace facade from the name of the ruler above. Finally each falcon stands on its own peak. Socalled anonymous serekhs have been found somewhat frequently all over Upper and Lower Egypt some even finding provenance in Rafah located in southern Palestine.7 Many were discovered in the tombs of Abydos namely in the tombs Us and Ut.8 In addition to the original Double Falcon serekh M. J. Cldat also found a number of other similarly styled serekhs from artifacts at elBeda one of which he postulated represented a name of a queen KaNeith.9 As for Double Falcon a pharaoh Cldat and fellow Egyptologists Gnter Dreyer and Edwin van den Brink suspect that a deeper symbolism explains these peculiarities. The two falcons could represent Lower Egypt and the Sinai as it seems that Double Falcon reigned over both regions.2 Dreyer believes that the falcons stand on a representation of the mountain sign N26 of Gardiners sign list and reads the name as Dju w so that the name of the king is represented by a pair of falcons on mountains above a plain serekh.4 In contrast Alejandro Jimnez Serrano reads the name as Nebwy nb.wy the two lords and sees a similarity with a much earlier paletteclarification needed on display in the BarbierMueller Museum of Geneva.1011 See alsoedit List of pharaohs Referencesedit  M. J. Cldat Les vases de elBeda ASAE 13 1914 pp. 115121  a b KaiserDreyer in Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo. MDAIK 38 1982 Deutsches Archologisches Institut OrientAbteilung p. 9.  a b c Raffaele Francesco 2003. Dynasty 0 PDF. Aegyptiaca Helvetica. 17 99141.  a b Gnter Dreyer Ein Gefss mit Ritzmarke des Narmer in MDAIK 55 1999 pp. 16  a b E. C. M. van den Brink Potteryincised SerekhSigns of Dynasties 01 Part II Fragments and Additional Complete Vessels in ArchoNil 11 2001  EvaMaria Engel Ein weiterer Beleg fr den Doppelfalken auf einem Serech Bulletin of the Egyptian Museum 2 2005 pp. 6569.  Cfr. ref. in KaiserDreyer M.D.A.I.K. 38 1982 268 fig. 
16.1  
16.2  van den Brink op. cit. 1996 n. 3 and 4.  Us Dreyer et al. MDAIK 46 59 fig. 
3 ab Ut Dreyer et al. MDAIK 49 fig. 9 Dreyer M.D.A.I.K. 55 1999 
1 ff.  Cledat op. cit. 1914 fig. 5 KaiserDreyer M.D.A.I.K. 38 1982 marke 12.  Image of the palette  JimnezSerrano 2000 pp. 123124 apud Edwin van den Brink The PotteryIncised SerekhSigns of Dynasties 01. Part II Fragments and Additional Complete Vessels in Archo Nil 11 2002 p. 33. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDoubleFalconoldid1219796153 Categories 
32 ndcentury BC Pharaohs 1910 archaeological discoveries Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2024 Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 19 April 2024 at 2139 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width