Scorpion II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identity Toggle Identity subsection 
1.1 Name 
1.2 Historical figure 
2 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
2.1 Macehead 
2.2 Ivory tags 
2.3 Rock and vessel inscriptions 
3 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
3.1 Political situation 
3.2 Religious and cultic situation 
4 Mesopotamian influences under Scorpion II 
5 Tomb 
6 Scorpions name in popular culture 
7 See also 
8 References 
9 Sources 
10 Bibliography 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Scorpion II 47 languages     Brezhoneg Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Oromoo Polski Portugus Romn   Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Protodynastic Egyptian king This article is about Scorpion II. For the first see Scorpion I. For other uses see Scorpion King disambiguation. Scorpion Weha Selk Pharaoh Scorpion II on the Scorpion Macehead Ashmolean Museum Pharaoh Reign Uncertain Predecessor Ka Successor Narmer Royal titulary Horus name Weha  Selk W  Srq Scorpion  Dynasty Dynasty 0 Scorpion II Ancient Egyptian possibly Selk or Weha1 also known as King Scorpion was a ruler during the Protodynastic Period of Upper Egypt c. 32003000 BCE. Identity Name Torso of a man with the Horus name of King Scorpion below the left breast. Anorthositic gneiss Protodynastic period circa 3200 BCE. Munich Staatliches Museum gyptischer Kunst S 7149 King Scorpions name and title are of great dispute in modern Egyptology. His name is often introduced by a six or sevenleafed golden rosette or flower sign. This emblem can be found on numerous objects from the Dynasty 0 and Dynasty I periods it vanishes until the end of the Third Dynasty when it reappears under highranked officials such as Khabawsokar and Aaakhty both dated to the end of the Third Dynasty. Its precise meaning has been intensely discussed the most common interpretation is that of an emblem meaning nomarch or high lord. During the protodynastic and early dynastic eras it was evidently used as a designation for kings in much later periods it was bestowed on highranked officials and princes especially on those who served as priests for the goddess Seshat. Thus the golden rosette became an official emblem of Seshat.2 The reading of the rosette sign is also disputed. Most linguists and Egyptologists read it Neb for lord or Nesw for king and they are convinced that the golden rosette was some kind of forerunner to the later serekh.34 The scorpion fetish which underlies the name of Scorpion II is generally linked to the laterintroduced goddess Selket but Egyptologists and linguists such as L.D. Morenz H. Beinlich Toby Wilkinson and Jan Assmann have pointed out that the goddess was introduced no earlier than the late Old Kingdom period. In this view the scorpion fetish of the protodynastic period should not be associated with Selket. Morenz points out that in cases where a fetish animal is included in a rulers name the animal generally has a different rather cultic and political meaning. The scorpion animal commonly stood for dangerous things such as poison and illness but it could also mean bad breath or in military contexts storm or attack. Since it is unclear what actual meaning was reserved for the serekh animal of Scorpion II scholars usually refer to him as King Scorpion II.356 Historical figure There are several theories regarding his identity and chronological position. Some Egyptologists such as Bernadette Menu argue that because Egyptian kings of the First Dynasty seem to have had multiple names Scorpion was the same person as Narmer simply with an alternative name or additional title. They also argue that the artistic style seen on the macehead of Scorpion II shows conspicuous similarities to that on the famous Narmer macehead.7 Other scholars including T. H. Wilkinson Rene Friedman and Bruce Trigger have identified king Scorpion II as the Gegenknig opponent ruler of Narmer and Ka or Sekhen. At the time of Scorpion II Egypt was divided into several minor kingdoms that were fighting each other. It is likewise conjectured that Narmer simply conquered the realms of Ka and Scorpion II thus unifying the whole of Egypt for the first time.6 Attestations Macehead Main article Scorpion Macehead Scorpion Macehead Macehead of Scorpion II Scorpion II on the macehead drawing The only pictorial evidence of his existence is the socalled Scorpion Macehead which was found in the Main deposit by archeologists James E. Quibell and Frederick W. Green in a temple at Nekhen Hierakonpolis during the dig season of 189718
98.8  It is currently on display at the Ashmolean Museum Oxford. The stratigraphy of this macehead was lost due to the methods of its excavators but its style seems to date it to the very end of the Predynastic Period.9 The Scorpion Macehead depicts a single large figure wearing the White Crown of Upper Egypt. He holds a hoe which has been interpreted as a ritual either involving the pharaoh ceremonially cutting the first furrow in the fields or opening the dikes to flood them. The use and placement of the iconography is similar to the depiction of the pharaoh Narmer on the obverse side of the Narmer Palette. The king is preceded by servants the first in row seems to throw seeds from a basket into the freshly hacked ground. A second servant his depiction is partially damaged wears a huge bundle of grain sheafs which strengthens the interpretation of a seed sowing ceremony possibly connected to the Sed festival or a founding ceremony. Maybe Scorpion II was the founder of Nekhen or Buto which would explain why the macehead was found in Hierakonpolis. Above the servants a row of standard bearers who carry the same standards as seen on the Narmer palette precede the king. Below the royal servants a road and a landscape with people and houses is preserved.1011 Behind the king on the left side two fan bearers follow the king. Left of the fan bearer bundles of papyrus groves are depicted. Behind these in the upper section a group of dancers and a priest are visible the priest guards a Repw.tpalanquin. The lower section is lost due to damage. The festive parade looks into the opposite direction of the king and his standard bearers an outstretched complete view reveals that both processions meet each other in the center of the whole macehead relief scene. In this very center scholars such as K. M. Ciaowicz E. J. Baumgrtel and T. H. Wilkinson believe that they see the tiny traces of the feet and the coil of the Red Crown a second golden rosette is clearly visible. The traces strengthen the presumption that the scene on the Scorpion macehead once contained the depiction of a second figure of the king wearing the Red Crown of Lower Egypt. In this case the Scorpion macehead would show king Scorpion II as the ruler of the whole of Egypt.1011 The uppermost scene on the macehead shows a row of divine standards. Each standard is surmounted by a god Set Min and Nemty for example or nome crest. The original number of standards is unknown but it is clearly visible that one half shows hanged lapwings the other shows hanged hunting bows. Both standard rows face each other. Lapwings stood for Lower Egyptian folks or common folks and the bows stood for folk of archers pointing to hostile Asian tribes. Their hanging is interpreted as evidence that Scorpion II began the attacks on Lower Egypt and Egyptian enemies at the border lands which eventually resulted in Narmers victory and unification of the country.10 Ivory tags Numerous small ivory tags showing the depiction of a scorpion were found. They come from Abydos Minshat Abu Omar and Tarkhan. Some of them show the scorpion holding the hieroglyphic sign for nomegardenland Gardiner sign N24 and it is disputed if this clear sign combination has a deeper meaning the scorpion could represent King Scorpion II in his role as a ruler of a certain but unnamed nome. Some other tags show the scorpion close over a swallow sign which reads the scorpion is great. One unique tag shows the scorpion holding a long stick smiting an enemy. Since many of the tags show a shrine with a heron on the roof at the backsite it is thought that Scorpion II originated from Buto.121314 Rock and vessel inscriptions Clay mark with the name of king Scorpion II after Dietrich Wildung15 At Tarkhan and Minshat Abu Omar several stone and clay vessels were found. They have royal serekhs incarved at their bellies and the reading of the name inside is disputed. Several Egyptologists including Thomas Schneider Dietrich Wildung and Herman TeVelde are convinced that the serekhs present a strongly stylized figure of a scorpion. Others such as Gnter Dreyer and Wolfgang Helck are not so sure and read it as a sloppily drawn version of the name of King Ka.121314 At the second cataract of the Nile not far from the Nasserreservoire at Gebel Sheikh Suliman Sudan a large rock cutting depicts a big scorpion figure striding over killed enemies. Their death is demonstrated by depicting them standing upsidedown and being hit by arrows two further figures are still holding their own bows and shooting. Thanks to the ostrich feathers and the bows the enemies can be identified as Nubians since ostrich feather and bow were the typical attributes for the Egyptians to mark the Nubians. The scorpion faces a human figure with an artificial beard and ceremonial knife in a belt the figure holds a long cord to which captured Nubians are tied. The whole scene is interpreted as representing King Scorpion II celebrating his victory against the hostile Nubians.1617 Reign Political situation Numerous artifacts with relief decoration and pottery markings made of black ink point to a flourishing trade economy at the time of Scorpions rulership. For the first time the inscriptions give the hieroglyphic writings for Lower Egypt andor Upper Egypt. Therefore both parts of Egypt slowly started to work together. But since it seems clear that Egypt was divided into at least two coexisting kingdoms scholars wonder on which kind of power factor the rulership of protodynastic kings was based. Conquering and warfare had to be economically promoted warriors and guardians had to be fed. Based on this cognition scholars such as K. M Ciaowitz T. H. Wilkinson Karl Butzer and Michael A. Hoffman point to the irrigation systems which were founded in huge quantities. Numerous palettes such as the Hunters Palette the Libyan Palette and the Narmer Palette for example and the maceheads of Scorpion II and Narmer show depictions of rivers plants trees and several different animals birds mammals and fishes in surprising natural detail. Alongside these motifs human figures performing agricultural work are depicted. Ciaowitz Wilkinson Butzer and Hoffman see the power source of the protodynastic kings in these agricultural developments. Irrigation systems allowed increasing settlements cattle possessions and vegetable cultivation. The scholars wonder if the kings kept the irrigations scarce on purpose to ensure their power influence and wealth.101819 Religious and cultic situation The numerous decorations on the artifacts also depict large numbers of fetishes and standards surmounted by gods which reveals an already very complex religion and cult system. Since the standards often guide the battle scenes battles and conquests might have been seen as cultic events as well. The earliest recognizable gods are Horus Seth Min Nemty Nekhbet Bat and Wepwawet. But it is unknown where these gods had their cultic centers and shrines because the hieroglyphs depicting the place names were not introduced yet.10111820 Another aspect of cultic and religious beliefs under Scorpion II are the numerous depictions of mythical creatures such as the serpopard and the winged chimera. The serpopard appears on the Narmer palette and the Two Dogs Palette. He was named Swdja which means undestroyable. In Egyptian mythology the serpopard was described as the one who moves the sun. On the Narmer palette two serpopards are entwining their necks. This picture is thought to be an allegoric display of the unification of Egypt. Under Scorpion II two serpopards are lacerating a gazelle which might imply that the serpopards were under the control of the king they attack on command.1011182021 The winged chimeras were named Sefer in Egyptian and they represent chaos and violence. They appear on the Twodogspalette and on several ivory artifacts. Scholars point to the fact that creatures such as the chimera and the serpopards were of Mesopotamian origin.1011182021 A further motif of Scorpions era that is clearly of Mesopotamian origin is that of a warrior fighting two lions with his bare hands. He holds one lion in each hand both at his sides. A similar motif shows the warrior with two giraffes. In later dynasties this motif became a hieroglyph registered as Gardiner A38 and Gardiner A39. It reads Qjs and it was used as the emblem of the city of Cusae.1011182021 Mesopotamian influences under Scorpion II Main article EgyptMesopotamia relations Possible MesopotamiaEgypt trade routes from the 
4 th millennium BCE2223 All listed motifs and emblems but also tomb architecture and traded items such as tools bead collars and cylinder seals prove a surprisingly strong and extensive influence of Mesopotamian culture and religion to the early Egyptians. This cognition is promoted by the evaluations of architectural developments visible at burial places such as Minshat Abu Omar Hierakonpolis and Naqada. The architectural methods used for building complex and stable tombs were clearly copied from Mesopotamian buildings. It is not fully clarified why the Egyptians fostered their amicable relationship with Mesopotamia so intensively proponents of the Dynastic race theory believe that the first Egyptian chieftains and rulers were themselves of Mesopotamian origin but this view has been abandoned among modern scholars.2425 The current position of modern scholarship is that the Egyptian civilization was an indigenous Nile Valley development and that the archaeological evidence strongly supports an African origin26 of the ancient Egyptians.24272829 During the rulership of King Scorpion II and his immediate successors the influence seems to decrease and Egypt begins to foster its own more independent culture. This surely was a further important step toward Egypts future as a powerful and wealthy kingdom.1011182021 Hierakonpolis revetment of Temple basement Hierakonpolis cylindrical limestone vase Hierakonpolis ivory cylinder with kneeling men with impression drawing Tomb The exact burial place of Scorpion II is unknown. There are two tombs that are both seen as candidates. The first one is registered as Tomb B50 and lies at Umm El Qaab close to Abydos. It is a nearly quadratic chamber divided into four rooms by a simple crossshaped mud wall. Several ivory tags with scorpion figures were found here. The second one is located at Hierakonpolis and is registered as Tomb HK61. It measures 
3.5  m  
6.5  m has a depth of 
2.5  m and is strengthened with mud. Several ivory tags with scorpion figures were found here.30 Scorpions name in popular culture William Goldings 1971 novella The Scorpion God is loosely based upon this period of Egyptian history. The Scorpion Kings name was used in the 2001 film The Mummy Returns and its spinoffs The Scorpion King 2002 The Scorpion King 2 Rise of a Warrior 2008 The Scorpion King 3 Battle for Redemption 2012 The Scorpion King 4 Quest for Power 2015 and The Scorpion King Book of Souls 2018. An actionadventure video game The Scorpion King Rise of the Akkadian based on the franchise was released in 2002. The 2007 childrens novel Pharaoh by Jackie French deals with events in the court of King Scorpion and the rivalry between his sons Narmer and Prince Hawk. See also List of pharaohs Naqada culture Naqada III Scorpion Macehead References  Hannig 2006 pp. 225 790  1281.  Moortgat 1994 pp. 359371.  a b Ludwig David Morenz BildBuchstaben und symbolische Zeichen Die Herausbildung der Schrift der hohen Kultur Altgyptens.  Orbis Biblicus et Orientalis vol. 205. Fribourg 2004 ISBN 3727814861 pp. 151154.  Hannig 2006 p. 455.  Assmann 2003 p. 91.  a b Toby Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Strategy Society and Security. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 pp. 38 56  57.  Menu 1996 pp. 339342.  The Narmer Palette The Ancient Egypt archived from the original on June 15 2006 retrieved September 19 2007.  Shaw  Nicholson 1995 p. 254.  a b c d e f g h i Krzysztof Marek Ciaowicz La naissance dun royaume LEgypte ds la priode prdynastique  la fin de la Ire dynastie. Institute of Archaeology Jagiellonian University Krakw 2001 ISBN 8371884834 pp. 9798.  a b c d e f g Elise Jenny Baumgrtel Ludwig David Morenz Scorpion and Rosette and the Fragment of the Large Hierakonpolis Macehead. In Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde ZS Vol. 93. AkademieVerlag Berlin 1998 pp. 913.  a b Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 p. 276.  a b Gnter Dreyer Horus Krokodil Ein Gegenknig der Dynastie 0. In Renee Friedman Barbara Adams The Followers of Horus Studies dedicated to Michael Allen Hoffman 19491990. Oxford 1992 ISBN 0946897441 pp. 259263.  a b Peter Kaplony Die Inschriften der gyptischen Frhzeit. Bd. 2  gyptologische Abhandlungen. Bd. 8 2. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1963 p. 1090.  Wildung 1981 obj. 36.  Kaiser  Dreyer 1982 p. 70.  Needler 1967 pp. 8791.  a b c d e f Michael Allan Hoffman Egypt before the pharaohs The prehistoric foundations of Egyptian Civilization. Routledge and Kegan Paul London 1980 ISBN 0710004958 pp. 312326.  Jochem Kahl Ober und Untergypten Eine dualistische Konstruktion und ihre Anfnge. In Rainer Albertz Hrsg. Rume und Grenzen Topologische Konzepte in den antiken Kulturen des stlichen Mittelmeerraums. Utz Mnchen 2007 ISBN 3831606994 p. 16.  a b c d e Whitney Davis Masking the Blow The Scene of Representation in Late Prehistoric Egyptian Art. Berkeley Oxford Los Angeles 1992 ISBN 0520074882 pp. 67 97113.  a b c d Batrix MidantReynes The prehistory of Egypt. From the first Egyptians to the first pharaohs. WileyBlackwell Oxford 2000 ISBN 0631217878 pp. 240242.  Redford Donald B. Egypt Canaan and Israel in Ancient Times. Princeton University Press 1992 p. 22.  Hartwig Melinda K. 2014. A Companion to Ancient Egyptian Art. John Wiley  Sons. p. 427. ISBN 9781444333503.  a b Wilkinson Toby 1999. Early dynastic Egypt. London Routledge. p. 15. ISBN 0415186331.  Pg8485 major burial sites of those founding locales of ancient Egypt in the fourth millennium BCE notably ElBadari as well as Naqada show no demographic indebtedness to the Levant. They reveal instead a population with cranial and dental features with closest parallels to those of other longtime populations of the surrounding areas of northeastern Africa such as Nubia and the northern Horn of Africa. Ehret Christopher 20 June 2023. Ancient Africa A Global History to 300 CE. Princeton Princeton University Press. pp. 8386 167169. ISBN 9780691244099.  Smith Stuart Tyson 1 February 2001. Redford Donald ed.. Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt  Volume 3 p.28.  Yurco Frank 1996. An Egyptological Review. 1996. Black Athena revisited. Chapel Hill University of North Carolina Press. pp. 62100. ISBN 0807845558.cite book CS1 maint numeric names authors list link  Zakrzewski Sonia R. 2007. Population continuity or population change Formation of the ancient Egyptian state. Highfield Southampton Department of Archaeology University of Southampton.  Pg
33 Early Nile Valley populations were primarily coextensive with indigenous African populations. Linguistic and archaeological data provide key supporting evidence for a primarily African origin. Shomarka Keita and A.J. Boyce The Geographic and Origins and Population Relationships of Early Ancient Egyptians. Celenko Theodore ed. 1996. Egypt in Africa. Indianapolis Ind. Indianapolis Museum of Art. pp. 2033. ISBN 0936260645.  Michael Allan Hoffman Before the Pharaohs How Egypt Became the Worlds First NationState. In The Sciences. New York Academy of Sciences New York 1988 pp. 4047. Sources Assmann Jan 2003. Stein und Zeit Mensch und Gesellschaft im Alten gypten in German. Mnchen W. Fink. ISBN 9783770526819. Hannig Rainer 2006. Groes Handwrterbuch gyptischDeutsch 2800950 v. Chr. die Sprache der Pharaonen. Kulturgeschichte der antiken Welt in German. Vol. 64. Mainz Philip von Zabern. ISBN 9783805317719. Kaiser Werner Dreyer Gnter 1982. Umm elQaab Nachuntersuchungen im frhzeitlichen Knigsfriedhof. 2. Vorbericht. Mitteilungen des Deutschen archologischen Instituts MDAIK. Abteilung Kairo. in German. 38. Mainz Philipp von Zabern. ISBN 9783805305525. Menu Bernadette 1996. Enseignes et portetendarts. Bulletin de lInstitut Franais dArchologie Orientale in French. 96. Cairo Institut Franais dArchologie Orientale 339342. Moortgat Anton 1994. Die Goldrosette  ein Schriftzeichen. Altorientalische Forschungen in German. 21. Berlin Institut fr Orientforschung 359371. Needler Winifred 1967. A Rockdrawing on Gebel Sheikh Suliman near Wadi Halfa showing a Scorpion and human Figures. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 6. Winona Lake Eisenbrauns 8791. doi
10.2 30740000735. JSTOR 40000735. Shaw Ian Nicholson Paul 1995. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. London The British Museum Press. ISBN 9780714119090. Wildung Dietrich 1981. gypten vor den Pyramiden  Mnchner Ausgrabungen in gypten in German. Mainz Philipp von Zabern. ISBN 9783805305235. Bibliography Clayton Peter A 2006. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500286280. Edwards IES 1965. The Early Dynastic Period in Egypt. In Edwards IES et al. eds.. The Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. External links Media related to King Scorpion II at Wikimedia Commons Preceded by Ka King of Thinis Protodynastic Succeeded by Narmer v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Rulers of the Ancient Near East Territories dates 12345 Egypt Canaan Ebla Mari Kish Assur Akshak Akkad Uruk Adab Umma Lagash Ur Elam 40003200 BCE Naqada I Naqada II EgyptMesopotamia relations PreDynastic period 40002900 BCE Susa I Uruk period 40003100 BCE Anu Ziggurat 4000 BCE Anonymous Kingpriests Susa II Uruk influence or control 32003100 BCE ProtoDynastic period Naqada III Early or legendary kings Upper Egypt Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Lower Egypt Hedju Hor NyHor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner NatHor Mekh Double Falcon Wash 31002900 BCE Early Dynastic Period First Dynasty of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer Menes Neithhotep regent HorAha Djer Djet Merneith regent Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird Canaanites Jemdet Nasr period 31002900 BCE ProtoElamite period Susa III 31002700 BCE 2900 BCE Second Dynasty of Egypt Hotepsekhemwy NebraRaneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Early Dynastic Period I 29002700 BCE First Eblaite Kingdom First kingdom of Mari Kish I dynasty Jushur Kullassinabel Nangishlishma Entarahana Babum Puannum Kalibum 2800 BCE Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab Mashda Arwium Etana Balih Enmenuna MelemKish Barsalnuna Uruk I dynasty Meshkianggasher Enmerkar conqueror of Aratta 2700 BCE Early Dynastic Period II 27002600 BCE Zamug Tizqar Ilku Iltasadum Lugalbanda Dumuzid the Fisherman Enmebaragesi made the land of Elam submit6 Aga of Kish Gilgamesh Old Elamite period 27001500 BCE IndusMesopotamia relations 2600 BCE Third Dynasty of Egypt Djoser First Egyptian pyramids Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni Early Dynastic Period III 26002340 BCE Sagisu Aburlim Agurlim IbbiDamu BabaDamu Kish II dynasty 5 kings Uhub Mesilim UrNungal Udulkalama Labashum Lagash Enhegal Lugal shaengur Ur AImdugud UrPabilsag Meskalamdug Queen Puabi Akalamdug Enundaraanna Meshe Melamanna Lugalkitun Adab Ninkisalsi Medurba Lugaldalu 2575 BCE Old Kingdom of Egypt Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis Ur I dynasty Mesannepada King of Ur and Kish victorious over Uruk 2500 BCE Phoenicia 2500539 BCE Second kingdom of Mari IkunShamash IkuShamagan Ansud Saumu IshtupIshar IkunMari IblulIl Nizi Kish III dynasty KuBaba Akshak dynasty Unzi Undalulu Uruk II dynasty Ensha kushanna Mugsi Umma I dynasty Pabilgagaltuku Lagash I dynasty UrNanshe Akurgal Aannepada Meskiagnun Elulu Balulu Awan dynasty Peli Tata Ukkutahesh Hishur 2450 BCE Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas EnarDamu IsharMalik Ush Enakalle Elamite invasions 3 kings6 Shushun tarana Napilhush 2425 BCE KunDamu Eannatum King of Lagash Sumer Akkad conqueror of Elam 2400 BCE AdubDamu IgrishHalam IrkabDamu Kish IV dynasty PuzurSuen UrZababa Urur Lugalkinishedudu Lugalkisalsi Eiginimpae Meskigal UrLumma Il Gishakidu Queen Barairnun Enannatum Entemena Enannatum II Enentarzi Ur II dynasty Nanni MeshkiangNanna II Kikusiwetempti 2380 BCE Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Adab dynasty Lugalannemundu King of the four quarters of the world 2370 BCE IsarDamu EnnaDagan IkunIshar IshqiMari Invasion by Mari Anbu Anba Bazi Zizi of Mari Limer Sharrumiter6 Ukush Lugalanda Urukagina Luhishan 2350 BCE PuzurNirah IshuIl ShuSin Uruk III dynasty Lugalzagesi Governor of Umma King of all Sumer 2340 BCE Akkadian Period 23402150 BCE Akkadian Empire Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu Akkadian Governors Eshpum Ilshurabi Epirmupi Iliishmani 2250 BCE NaramSin Lugalushumgal vassal of the Akkadians 2200 BCE First Intermediate Period Seventh Dynasty of Egypt Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Second Eblaite Kingdom Third kingdom of Mari Shakkanakku dynasty Ididish ShuDagan IshmaDagan Vassals of the Akkadians SharKaliSharri Igigi Imi Nanum Ilulu 3 years Dudu Shuturul Uruk IV dynasty Urnigin Urgigir Lagash II dynasty PuzerMama UrNingirsu I Pirigme LuBaba Lugula Kaku HishepRatep Helu Khita PuzurInshushinak 2150 BCE Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Ur III period 21502000 BCE NrMr IshtupIlum IshgumAddu Apilkin Gutian dynasty 21 kings Laerabum Sium Kuda Uruk Puzurili UrUtu Umma II dynasty Lugalannatum vassal of the Gutians UrBaba Gudea UrNingirsu Urgar Nammahani Tirigan 2125 BCE Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Uruk V dynasty Utuhengal 2100 BCE Vassals of UR III Iddiilum IliIshar TuraDagan PuzurIshtar Vassals of Ur III7 Ur III dynasty Kings of Ur Sumer and Akkad UrNammu Shulgi AmarSin ShuSin 20251763 BCE Amorite invasions IbbiSin Elamite invasions Kindattu Shimashki Dynasty Middle Kingdom of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Third Eblaite Kingdom Amorites IbbitLim Immeya Indilimma Amorite Shakkanakkus HitialErra HanunDagan ... Lim Dynasty of Mari Amorites YaggidLim YahdunLim YasmahAdad ZimriLim Queen Shibtu Old Assyria PuzurAshur I Shalimahum Ilushuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I PuzurAshur II NaramSin Erishum II IsinLarsa period Amorites Dynasty of Isin IshbiErra ShuIlishu IddinDagan IshmeDagan LipitEshtar UrNinurta BurSuen LipitEnlil Erraimitti Enlilbani Zambiya Iterpisha Urdukuga Suenmagir Damiqilishu Dynasty of Larsa Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel NurAdad SinIddinam SinEribam SinIqisham SilliAdad WaradSin RimSin I ... RimSin II Uruk VI dynasty Alilahadum Sumubinasa NaramSin of Uruk Snkid Sniribam Sngmil Ilumgamil Anam of Uruk Irdanene RimAnum Nabiiliu Sukkalmah dynasty SiwePalarKhuppak Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu 18001595 BCE Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abraham Biblical Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Yamhad Yamhad dynasty Amorites Old Assyria ShamshiAdad dynasty 18081736 BCE Amorites ShamshiAdad I IshmeDagan I MutAshkur Rimush Asinum Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Nondynastic usurpers 17351701 BCE PuzurSin Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Adaside dynasty 1700722 BCE Belbani Libaya SharmaAdad I IptarSin Bazaya Lullaya ShuNinua SharmaAdad II Erishum III ShamshiAdad II IshmeDagan II ShamshiAdad III Ashurnirari I PuzurAshur III Enlilnasir I Nurili Ashurshaduni Ashurrabi I Ashurnadinahhe I EnlilNasir II Ashurnirari II Ashurbelnisheshu Ashurrimnisheshu Ashurnadinahhe II First Babylonian dynasty Old Babylonian Period Amorites Sumuabum SumulaEl SinmuballitSabium ApilSin Sinmuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna Abieshuh Ammiditana Ammisaduqa SamsuDitana Early Kassite rulers Second Babylonian dynasty Sealand Dynasty Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Second Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hyksos Pharaoh Ahmose I slaying a Hyksos Semqen AperAnati SakirHar Khyan Apepi Khamudi Mitanni 16001260 BCE Kirta Shuttarna I Parshatatar 15311155 BCE Tutankhamun New Kingdom of Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ahmose I Amenhotep I Third Babylonian dynasty Kassites AgumKakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashmanharbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I Burnaburiash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliashu IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak II Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Elamite period 15001100 BCE Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty UntashNapirisha Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb Hittite Empire Ugarit Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret Elamite Empire Shutrukid dynasty ShutrukNakhunte 11551025 BCE Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI Third Intermediate Period Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II Phoenicia Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Kingdom of Israel Saul Ishbosheth David Solomon SyroHittite states Middle Assyria EribaAdad I Ashuruballit I Enlilnirari Arikdenili Adadnirari I Shalmaneser I TukultiNinurta I Ashurnadinapli Ashurnirari III Enlilkudurriusur NinurtaapalEkur Ashurdan I NinurtatukultiAshur MutakkilNusku Ashurreshishi I TiglathPileser I AsharidapalEkur Ashurbelkala EribaAdad II ShamshiAdad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashurnirari IV Ashurrabi II Ashurreshishi II TiglathPileser II Ashurdan II Fourth Babylonian dynasty Second Dynasty of Isin Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur NeoElamite period 1100540 BCE 1025934 BCE Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Babylonian dynasties Period of Chaos Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna Marbitiaplausur Nabmukinapli 911745 BCE Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht Bakenranef Kingdom of Samaria Kingdom of Judah NeoAssyrian Empire Adadnirari II TukultiNinurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III ShamshiAdad V Shammuramat regent Adadnirari III Shalmaneser IV AshurDan III Ashurnirari V Ninth Babylonian Dynasty Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina five kings NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabushumaukin II Nabumukinzeri HumbanTahrid dynasty Urtak Teumman Ummanigash Tammaritu I Indabibi Humbanhaltash III 745609 BCE Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa Black Pharaohs Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun NeoAssyrian Empire Sargonid dynasty TiglathPileser Shalmaneser Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Ashurnadinshumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal Ashuretililani Sinsharishkun Sinshumulishir Ashuruballit II Assyrian conquest of Egypt Assyrian conquest of Elam 626539 BCE Late Period Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III NeoBabylonian Empire Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Median Empire Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages 539331 BCE Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Achaemenid Empire Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III Twentyeighth Dynasty of Egypt Twentyninth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 331141 BCE Argead dynasty and Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV Hellenistic Period Seleukos I Nikator Tetradrachm from Babylon Argead dynasty Alexander III Philip III Alexander IV Antigonid dynasty Antigonus I Seleucid Empire Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes 14130 BCE Kingdom of Judea Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Parthian Empire Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I 30 BCE116 CE Roman Empire Roman conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Judea Syria 116117 CE Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan Parthamaspates of Parthia 117224 CE Syria Palaestina Province of Mesopotamia Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV 224270 CE Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Coin of Ardashir I Hamadan mint. Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm 270273 CE Palmyrene Empire Vaballathus Zenobia Antiochus 273395 CE Roman Empire Province of Egypt Syria Palaestina Syria Province of Mesopotamia 395618 CE Byzantine Empire Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 618628 CE Sasanian conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Shahrbaraz Sahralanyozan Shahrbaraz Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Khosrow II Kavad II 628641 CE Byzantine Empire Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran Shapuri Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 639651 CE Muslim conquest of Egypt Muslim conquest of the Levant Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia Chronology of the Neolithic period Rulers of Ancient Central Asia  Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.  Hallo W. Simpson W. 1971. The Ancient Near East. New York Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 4849.  Rulers of Mesopotamia. cdli.ox.ac.uk. University of Oxford CNRS.  Thomas Ariane Potts Timothy 2020. Mesopotamia Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 9781606066492.  Roux Georges 1992. Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532534 Chronological Tables. ISBN 9780141938257.  a b c Per Sumerian King List  Unger Merrill F. 2014. Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 9781625646064. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleScorpionIIoldid1208684518 Category 
32 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint numeric names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semiprotected pages Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 18 February 2024 at 1353 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width