Semerkhet - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Length of reign 
2 Name sources 
3 Identity 
4 Reign 
5 Tomb 
6 References 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Semerkhet 43 languages  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Ripoarisch   Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Semerkhet Semempses Mempses Alabaster vase of Semerkhet the inscription reads King IryNebty visits the houseofthepleasedking oil jars for it National Archaeological Museum France Pharaoh Reign 8 years ca. 2920 BC Predecessor Anedjib Successor Qaa Royal titulary Horus name HorSemerkhet rsmr.t Companion of the divine community Alternative Companion of the gods1 Abydos King List IrySemsu irysmsw Turin King List Semsem smsm The elder of Horus Prenomen Praenomen NisutBityNebtyIry nsw.tbtynb.tyiry King of Upper and Lower Egypt he of the two ladies he who belongs to them Alternative He whom the two ladies guard1 Father Anedjib  Den  Mother Betrest Burial Tomb U Umm elQaab Dynasty First Dynasty Semerkhet is the Horus name of an early Egyptian king who ruled during the First Dynasty. This ruler became known through a tragic legend handed down by the historian Manetho who reported that a calamity of some sort occurred during Semerkhets reign. The archaeological records seem to support the view that Semerkhet had a difficult time as king and some early archaeologists questioned the legitimacy of Semerkhets succession to the Egyptian throne. Length of reignedit Manetho named Semerkhet Semmpss and credited him with a reign of 18 years2 whilst the Royal Canon of Turin credited him with an implausibly long reign of 72 years.3 Egyptologists and historians now consider both statements as exaggerations and credit Semerkhet with a reign of 8 years. This evaluation is based on the Cairo Stone inscription where the complete reign of Semerkhet has been recorded. Additionally they point to the archaeological records which strengthen the view that Semerkhet had a relatively short reign.4 Name sourcesedit Semsu cartouche name of Semerkhet in the Abydos king list Semerkhet is well attested in archaeological records. His name appears in inscriptions on vessels made of schist alabaster breccia and marble. His name is also preserved on ivory tags and earthen jar seals. Objects bearing Semerkhets name and titles come from Abydos and Sakkara.45 Semerkhets serekh name is commonly translated as companion of the divine community or thoughtful friend. The latter translation is questioned by many scholars since the hieroglyph khet Gardinersign F32 normally was the symbol for body or divine community.456 Pottery shard inscribed with Semerkhets serekh name originally from his tomb now in the Petrie Museum UC 36756 Semerkhets birth name is more problematic. Any artefact showing his birth name curiously lacks any artistic detail of the used hieroglyphic sign a walking man with waving cloak or skirt a nemes head dress and a long plain stick in his hands. The reading and meaning of this special sign is disputed since it doesnt appear in this form before association with king Semerkhet. Indeed the hieroglyph of the cloaked man is extremely rare. It appears only twice in relief inscriptions depicting ceremonial processions of priests and standard bearers.45 Egyptologists such as Toby Wilkinson Bernhard Grdseloff and Jochem Kahl read IryNetjer meaning divine guardian. During the Old Kingdom period this word is written with uniliteral signs of a netjer flag Gardinersign R8 and a human eye Gardinersign D4 nearby the ideogram of the man. Some contemporary ivory tags show the Nebty name written with the single eye symbol only. Thus the scholars also read Semerkhets throne name as Iry meaning guardian and the Nebty name as IryNebty meaning guardian of the Two Ladies. This reconstruction is strengthened by the observation that Semerkhet was the first king using the Nebty title in its ultimate form. For unknown reason Semerkhet did not use the Nebuy title of his predecessor. It seems that he felt connected with the Two Ladies a title referring to the goddesses Nekhbet and Wadjet the patron deities of the Ancient Egyptians who were worshiped by all after the unification of its two parts Lower Egypt and Upper Egypt. The Nebty title in turn was thought to function as an addition to the NisutBity title.567 His prenomen is NisutBityNebtyIry nsw.tbtynb.tyiry meaning King of Upper and Lower Egypt he of the two ladies and he who belongs to them or He whom the two ladies guard.1 Scribes and priests of the Ramesside era were also confused because the archaic ideogram that was used during Semerkhets lifetime was very similar to the sign of an old man with a walking stick Gardiner sign A19. This had been read as Semsu or Sem and means the eldest. It was used as a title identifying someone as the head of the house. Due to this uncertainty it seems that the compiler of the Abydos king list simply tried to imitate the original figure whilst the author of the Royal Canon of Turin seems to have been convinced about reading it as the Gardinersign A19 and he wrote Semsem with uniliteral signs. The Saqqara King List omits Semerkhets throne name. The reason for that is unknown but all kings from Narmer up to king Den also are missing their throne names.567 Identityedit See also First Dynasty of Egypt family tree Nebty name of Semerkhet from Djosers pyramid complex at Saqqara8 Virtually nothing is known about Semerkhets family. His parents are unknown but it is thought that one of his predecessors king Den might have been his father. Possibly Semerkhet was born to queen Betrest. On the Cairo Stone she is described as his mother but definite evidence for that view has not yet been found. It would be expected that Semerkhet had sons and daughters but their names have not been preserved in the historical record. A candidate as a possible member of his family line is his immediate successor king Qaa.9 Reignedit Ivory label of Semerkhet Ivory label of Semerkhet on display in the British Museum. The right section introduced by the yearsign Renpet a bald palm stem reports from top to bottom a feast of the Sokarbark a visitation to the temple of the ancestordeity WerWadyt and the travelling in a royal boat. The left part of the label shows the throne name IryNebty of Semerkhet with a blessing wish below. On the upper left corner is described the content of the jar to which the label was once adjusted. Also the name of the high official Henuka is preserved who was obviously responsible for the delivery of the mentioned jar. An old theory supported by Egyptologists and historians such as JeanPhilippe Lauer Walter Bryan Emery Wolfgang Helck and Michael Rice once held that Semerkhet was a usurper and not the rightful heir to the throne. Their assumption was based on the observation that a number of stone vessels with Semerkhets name on them originally were inscribed with king Adjibs name. Semerkhet simply erased Adjibs name and replaced it with his own. Furthermore they point out that no high official and priest associated with Semerkhet was found at Sakkara. All other kings such as Den and Adjib are attested in local mastabas.41011 Today this theory has little support. Egyptologists such as Toby Wilkinson I. E. S. Edwards and Winifred Needler deny the usurping theory because Semerkhets name is mentioned on stone vessel inscriptions along with those of Den Adjib and Qaa. The objects were found in the underground galleries beneath the Pyramid of Djoser at Saqqara. The inscriptions show that king Qaa immediate successor of Semerkhet and sponsor of the vessels accepted Semerkhet as a rightful ancestor and heir to the throne. Furthermore the Egyptologists point out that nearly every king of First Dynasty had the habit of taking special vessels socalled anniversary vessels from their predecessors tomb and then replacing their predecessors name with their own. Semerkhet not only confiscated Adjibs vessels in his tomb several artefacts from the necropolis of queen Meritneith and king Den also were found. The lack of any high officials tomb at Saqqara might be explained by the rather short reign of Semerkhet. It seems that the only known official of Semerkhet HenuKa had survived his king His name appears on ivory tags from Semerkhets and Qaas tomb.59 Seal impressions from Semerkhets burial site show the new royal domain Hor wepkhet meaning Horus the judge of the divine community and the new private household HutIpty meaning house of the harem which was headed by Semerkhets wives. Two ivory tags show the yearly Escort of Horus a feast connected to the regular tax collections. Other tags report the cult celebration for the deity of the ancestors WerWadyt the Great White. And further tags show the celebration of a first and only Sokar feast.51213 While the Cairo Stone reports the whole of Semerkhets reign unfortunately the surface of the stone slab is badly worn and most of the events are now illegible. The following chart follows the reconstructions by Toby A. H. Wilkinson John D. Degreef and Hermann Alexander Schlgl Cairo Stone main fragment Year of coronation Appearance of the king of Lower and Upper Egypt unifying the two realms circumambulation of the White Wall of Memphis first year Escort of Horus destruction of Egypt second year Appearance of the king creation of a statue for Seshat and Sed third year Escort of... rest is missing fourth year Appearance of the king of Upper Egypt creation of... rest is missing fifth year Escort of... rest is missing sixth year Appearance of the king of Upper Egypt... rest is missing seventh year Escort of... rest is missing eighth year Appearance of the king of Lower and Upper Egypt... rest is missing year of death The ...th month and ...th day. damaged 71314 Egyptologists and historians pay special attention to the entry Destruction of Egypt in the second window of Semerkhets year records. The inscription gives no further information about that event but it has a resemblance to Manethos report. The Eusebian version says His son Semmpss who reigned for 18 years in his reign a very great calamity befell Egypt. The Armenian version sounds similar Mempsis 18 years. Under him many portents happened and a great pestilence occurred. None of the documents from after Semerkhets reign provide any details about this calamity.2713 Tombedit Map of Semerkhets tomb in the Umm elQaab15 Semerkhets burial site was excavated in 1899 by archaeologist and Egyptologist Sir William Matthew Flinders Petrie at Abydos and is known as Tomb U. While excavating Petrie found no stairways as he did at the necropolis of Den and Adjib. He found a ramp four metres wide and leading straight into the main chamber. The ramp starts approximately ten metres east outside the tomb and has a base slope of 12. Inside the tomb the ramp shows irregular graduations. Petrie was also confused by the small number of clay seals. Only 17 seals were found. For archaeologists and Egyptologists the complete arrangement of the burial site suggests that the builders were pressed for time. When Petrie freed the ramp from sand he found that the complete ramp was thickly covered in aromatic oil which still gave off a scent. Beside the ramp several wooden and handmade baskets and earthen jars were found. These were dated to the Ramesside era. Scholars now think that Semerkhets tomb was reopened and restored when Ramesside priests and kings saw the tomb of king Djer as the ritual burial of Osiriss head. The findings inside the main chamber included precious objects such as inlays and fragments of furniture especially pedestals coppermade armatures and jewelry made of ebony amethyst and turquoise. Some vessels originating from the Levant were also found. They once contained Bescha oil which was of great value to the Egyptians. Outside the tomb close to the entrance a damaged tomb stela made of black granite displaying Semerkhets serekh name was excavated.511161718 The burial chamber measures 
29.2   
20.8  metres and is of simple construction. Petrie found that the kings mastaba once covered the whole of the subsidiary tombs. Now the royal burial formed a unit with the 67 subsidiary tombs. Egyptologists such as Walter Bryan Emery and Toby Wilkinson see this architectural development as proof that the royal family and household were killed willingly when their royal family head had died. Wilkinson goes further and thinks that Semerkhet as the godlike king tried to demonstrate his power over the death and life of his servants and family members even in their afterlife. The tradition of burying the family and court of the king when he died was abandoned at the time of king Qaa one of the last rulers of the First Dynasty. The tombs of Second Dynasty founder Hotepsekhemwy onward have no subsidiary tombs.111618 Calcite dish from Royal Tomb U  Semerkhet at Abydos Egypt First Dynasty The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Pottery shard bearing Semerkhets serekh on display at the Muse du Louvre Clay jar incised with Semerkhets serekh Muse du Louvre Fragment of a vessel of white marble bearing the serekh of Semerkhet at the left of the serekh a per bja meaning brazen house or house of ore is mentioned Egyptian Museum Cairo Tomb stela of Semerkh Referencesedit  a b c Nicolas Grimal Ian Shaw translator A History of Ancient Egypt 1992 Oxford Blackwell publishing ISBN 9780631193968 p. 54  a b William Gillan Waddell Manetho The Loeb Classical Library Volume 350. Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 Reprint ISBN 0674993853 page 3337.  Alan H. Gardiner The royal Canon of Turin. Griffith Institute of Oxford Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 page 15  Table I.  a b c d e Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. gyptologische Abhandlungen Volume 45 Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 124 160  162  212  214.  a b c d e f g h Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 78 79  275.  a b c Jochem Kahl Markus Bretschneider Barbara Kneissler Frhgyptisches Wrterbuch Band 1. Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2002 ISBN 3447045949 Seite 46.  a b c d Toby A. H. Wilkinson Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt the Palermo Stone and its Associated Fragments. Kegan Paul International London 2000 ISBN 0710306679 page 76.  Pierre Lacau J.Ph. Lauer La Pyramide a Degrees. Band 4 Inscriptions graves sur les vases. Fasc. 1 Planches. Institut Franais dArchologie Orientale Kairo 1959 Abb. 37.  a b Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards Early History of the Middle East The Cambridge Ancient History Vol. 1 Pt. 2. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2006 ISBN 0521077915 page 2731.  Michael Rice Egypts Making the Origins of Ancient Egypt 50002000 BC. Taylor  Francis LondonNew York 1990 ISBN 0415050928 page 127.  a b c Walter Bryan Emery gypten Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit 32002800 v. Chr. Fourier Wiesbaden 1964 ISBN 0415186331 page 1517  9495.  EvaMaria Engel The Domain of Semerkhet. In Stan Hendrickx Studies in Memory of Barbara Adams Proceedings of the International Conference Origin of the State Predynastic and Early Dynastic Egypt Krakow 
28 th August  
1 st September 2002. Peeters Leuven 2004 ISBN 9042914696 page 705710.  a b c Hermann A. Schlgl Das alte gypten. Beck Mnchen 2008 ISBN 3406480055 page 7172.  Ian Shaw  Paul T. Nicholson The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. Harry N. Abrams New York 2003 ISBN 0810990962 page 202.  Dieter Arnold Lexikon der gyptischen Baukunst Patmos Verlag 2000 S. 11  a b Ian Shaw The Oxford history of ancient Egypt. University Press Oxford UK 2003 ISBN 0192804588 page 69.  G. Dreyer A. Effland U. Effland E.M. Engel H. Hartmann R. Hartung Lacher Mller Pokorny Excavations in the Tomb of Semerkhet. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Institut Kairo vol. 62. von Zabern Mainz 2006 page 9597.  a b Gnter Dreyer Zur Rekonstruktion der Oberbauten der Knigsgrber der 1. Dynastie in Abydos Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Kairo 47. von Zabern Mainz 1991 page 56. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Semerkhet. Francesco Raffaele Semerkhet  nisutbity Iry Preceded by Anedjib Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Qaa v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e First Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Pharaohs MenesNarmer HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Regents Neithhotep Merneith Queen consorts Benerib Herneith Penebui Nakhtneith Khenthap Semat Serethor Seshemetka Betrest Officials Amka Hemaka Sabef Meriiti Other people Ahaneith Artefacts and monuments Narmer macehead Narmer palette Den seal impressions Abydos boats MacGregor plaque Mastabas S3503 and S3504 Capital Thinis Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSemerkhetoldid1197971128 Categories 
30 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the First Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2013 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 January 2024 at 1649 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width