Qa'a - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identity 
2 Family 
3 Reign 
4 End of reign 
5 Tomb 
6 See also 
7 References Toggle the table of contents Qaa 46 languages    Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Ripoarisch   Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian ruler For the use in Islamic architecture see Qaa room. For other uses see Qaa disambiguation. Qaa Binechs ubinthis Vbenthis Restored tomb stele of Qaa Pharaoh Reign 33 years ca. 2910 BC Predecessor Semerkhet Successor Hotepsekhemwy most likely or Sneferka Horus Bird Royal titulary Horus name HorQaa rq3 Raised arm of Horus Abydos King List Qebeh qb He from the north Saqqara Tablet Qebehukhenti qb.wntj He from the cool north Turin King List ...beh ...b Prenomen Praenomen NisutBityNebtySen nsw.tbtynb.tysn King of Lower and Upper Egypt he of the two ladies he is kissed by them Father Semerkhet most likely or Anedjib Burial Tomb Q Umm elQaab Dynasty 
1 st Dynasty Qaa also Qa or Kaa literal meaning his arm is raised1 was the last king of the First Dynasty of Egypt. He reigned for 33 years at the end of the 
30 th century BC. Identityedit Qebeh cartouche name of Qaa in the Abydos king list. Manetho calls Qaa Binechs and gives him a reign of 26 years according to the version preserved by Sextus Julius Africanus.2 Other versions of copies of Manethos epitomes give other hellenized names such as ubinthis for versions by Eusebius and Vbenthis by Armenian versions of Eusebius.342 Familyedit See also First Dynasty of Egypt family tree The parents of Qaa are unknown but it is thought that either his predecessor Anedjib or Semerkhet was his father since it was tradition to leave the throne to the eldest son. If Manetho suggested correctly remembering the tradition Semerkhet was the father.4 Reignedit There is not much known about Qaas reign but it seems that he reigned for a long time around 33 years. Several stone vessel inscriptions mention a second Sed festival for Qaa which points to at least 33 years of reign. The first festival was usually not celebrated before 30 years of reign and subsequent festivals could be repeated every third year. The Palermo Stone only mentions the year of coronation and some usual cultic events that were celebrated under every king. The numerous ivory tags dating to his reign also mention only typical arrangements such as depicting and counting burial offerings and personal possessions of the king. Several mastaba tombs of high officials date into Qaas reign Merka S3505 Henuka burial unknown Neferef burial also unknown and Sabef buried in the royal necropolis of Qaa.56 Ivory label of Qaa with his serekh and Nebty name sn. End of reignedit Despite Qaas long and prosperous reign evidence shows that after his death a dynastic war between different royal houses began over the newly empty throne. In the tomb of the high official Merka a stone vessel with the name of a king Sneferka was found. It is unclear whether Sneferka was an alternate name of Qaa or if he was a separate ephemeral ruler. Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck and Toby Wilkinson point to a further mysterious ruler named Horus Bird whose name was found on vessel fragments dating to the end of the first dynasty. It is postulated that Sneferka and Horus Bird fought for power and that Hotepsekhemwy ended the fight and finally ascended the throne of Egypt thus starting the Second Dynasty. Strong clues to that theory are traces of grave robberies and arsons found in the royal tombs of Abydos. Clay seals of Hotepsekhemwy found in Qaas tomb suggest that he restored the tomb or buried Qaa maybe in an attempt to legitimize his rule.46 Tombedit Map of Qaas tomb. Note the subsidiary burial around the main chamber. Qaa had a fairly large tomb in Abydos which measures 
98.5  X 
75.5  feet or 30 X 23 meters.7 A long reign is supported by the large size of this rulers burial site at Abydos. This tomb was excavated by German archaeologists in 1993 and proved to contain 26 satellite i.e. sacrificial burials. A seal impression bearing Hotepsekhemwys name was found near the entrance of the tomb of Qaa Tomb Q by the German Archaeological Institute in the mid19
90 s.8 The discovery of the seal impression has been interpreted as evidence that Qaa was buried and therefore succeeded by Hotepsekhemwy the founder of the second dynasty of Egypt as Manetho states. The beautiful tomb stela of Qaa is now on display at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. The tomb of one of Qaas state officials at Saqqaraa certain nobleman named Merkacontained a stele with many titles. There is a second Sed festival attested. This fact plus the high quality of a number of royal steles depicting the king implies that Qaas reign was a fairly stable and prosperous period of time. A number of year labels have also been discovered dating to his reign at the First Dynasty burial site of Umm elQaab in Abydos. Qaa is believed to have ruled Egypt around 2916 BCE. A dish inscribed with the name and titles of Qaa was discovered in the tomb of SethPeribsen Tomb P of Petrie.9 See alsoedit List of pharaohs Referencesedit  Qaa  Ancient Egypt Online.  a b LacusCurtius  Manethos History of Egypt  Book I.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs. Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. p.25  a b c Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. In gyptologische Abhandlungen Band 35 Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 124.  P. Lacau J. P. Lauer La Pyramide a Degeres IV Inscriptions Gravees sur les Vases. Cairo 1959 page 12.  a b Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London New York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 8183.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 2006 paperback p.25 the tomb is now fully published EvaMaria Engel Das Grab des Qaa Architektur und Inventar Wiesbaden 2017 ISBN 9783447108768  G. Dreyer et al. MDAIK 521996 pp.7172 fig. 25 pl. 
14 a  B. Porter and R.L.B. Moss. Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Reliefs and Paintings V. Upper Egypt Sites. Oxford 1937 pg 81 Preceded by Semerkhet Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Sneferka v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e First Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Pharaohs MenesNarmer HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Regents Neithhotep Merneith Queen consorts Benerib Herneith Penebui Nakhtneith Khenthap Semat Serethor Seshemetka Betrest Officials Amka Hemaka Sabef Meriiti Other people Ahaneith Artefacts and monuments Narmer macehead Narmer palette Den seal impressions Abydos boats MacGregor plaque Mastabas S3503 and S3504 Capital Thinis Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleQa
27 aoldid1190591011 Categories 
30 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the First Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 18 December 2023 at 1932 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width