Djer - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Length of reign 
3 Reign 
4 Family 
5 Tomb 
6 Gallery 
7 See also 
8 References 
9 Bibliography 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Djer 50 languages Afrikaans   Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Bahasa Melayu   Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Ripoarisch Romn   Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia First dynasty Pharaoh of Egypt Djer Zher Sekhty Cylinder seal impression depicting Djer before canine standards wearing the Hedjet and Deshret crowns and holding the flail Pharaoh Reign 41 years c.3000 BC Predecessor HorAha or Menes Successor Djet Royal titulary Horus name Djer r Defender of Horus Abydos King List Itetj Jttj A ruler Turin King List It... Jtj... ...damaged... Cairo stone Itetj Jttj The ruler has come Golden Horus Nynebu njnbw He who belongs to the Golden One Consort Nakhtneith Herneith Penebui Children Merneith Djet  Father HorAha Mother Khenthap  Neithhotep  Burial Tomb O Umm elQaab Dynasty middle of the 
1 st Dynasty Djer or Zer or Sekhty1 is considered the third pharaoh of the First Dynasty of ancient Egypt in current Egyptology. He lived around the mid 
31 st century BC2 and reigned for c. 40 years. A mummified forearm of Djer or his wife was discovered by Egyptologist Flinders Petrie3 but was discarded by mile Brugsch.4 Nameedit Iti cartouche name of Djer in the Abydos King List. The Abydos King List lists the third pharaoh as Iti the Turin King List lists a damaged name beginning with It... while Manetho lists Kenkens. Jrgen von Beckerath in the Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 1999 translates the hieroglyphs of the name Djer as Defender of Horus.5 Length of reignedit Although the Egyptian priest Manetho writing in the third century BC stated that Djer ruled for 57 years modern research by Toby Wilkinson in Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt stresses that the nearcontemporary and therefore more accurate Palermo Stone ascribes Djer a reign of 41 complete and partial years.6 Wilkinson notes that years 110 of Djers reign are preserved in register II of the Palermo Stone while the middle years of this pharaohs reign are recorded in register II of Cairo stone fragment C
1.7  Reignedit Djers queens bracelet is the only surviving royal jewellry of the early dynasty period of Egypt. It bears his royal serekh or name. Djers reign was preceded by a regency controlled by Neithhotep possibly his mother or grandmother. The evidence for Djers life and reign is8 Tomb in Umm elQaab Abydos Seal prints from graves 2185 and 3471 in Saqqara Inscriptions in graves 3503 3506 and 3035 in Saqqara Seal impression and inscriptions from Helwan9 Jar from Turah with the name of Djer10 UC 16182 ivory tablet from Abydos11 subsidiary tomb 612 of the enclosure of Djer12 UC 16172 copper adze with the name of Djer13 Inscription of his name of questioned authenticity however at Wadi Halfa Sudan The inscriptions on ivory and wood are in a very early form of hieroglyphs hindering complete translation but a label at Saqqarah may depict the First Dynasty practice of human sacrifice.14 An ivory tablet from Abydos mentions that Djer visited Buto and Sais in the Nile Delta. One of his regnal years on the Cairo Stone was named Year of smiting the land of Setjet which often is speculated to be Sinai or beyond. Manetho claimed that Athothes who is sometimes identified as Djer had written a treatise on anatomy that still existed in his own day over two millennia later.15 Familyedit See also First Dynasty of Egypt family tree Stone vase bearing the serekh of Djer National Archaeological Museum France. Djer was a son of the pharaoh HorAha and his wife Khenthap.citation needed His grandfather was probably Narmer. Djer fathered Merneith wife of Djet and mother of Den. Women carrying titles later associated with queens such as Great One of the HetesSceptre and She who SeesCarries Horus were buried in subsidiary tombs near the tomb of Djer in Abydos or attested in Saqqara. These women are thought to be the wives of Djer and include Nakhtneith or Nekhetneith buried in Abydos and known from a stela.1617 Herneith possibly a wife of Djer. Buried in Saqqara.17 Seshemetka buried in Abydos next to the king.18 She was said to be a wife of Den in Dodson and Hilton.17 Penebui her name and title were found on an ivory label from Saqqara.16 bsu known from a label in Saqqara and several stone vessels reading of name uncertain name consists of three fish hieroglyphs.16 Tombedit Tomb stela of Djer Similarly to his father HorAha Djer was buried in Umm elQaab at Abydos. Djers tomb is tomb O of Petrie. His tomb contains the remains of 318 retainers who were buried with him.19 At some point Djers tomb was devastated by fire possibly as early as the Second Dynasty.20 During the Middle Kingdom the tomb of Djer was revered as the tomb of Osiris20 and the entire First Dynasty burial complex which includes the tomb of Djer was very important in the Egyptian religious tradition. An image of Osiris on a funerary bier was placed in the tomb possibly by the Thirteenth dynasty pharaoh Djedkheperu.20 Several objects were found in and around the tomb of Djer21 A stela of Djer now in the Cairo Museum probably comes from Abydos. Labels mentioning the name of a palace and the name of Meritneith. Fragments of two vases inscribed with the name of Queen Neithhotep. Bracelets of a Queen were found in the wall of the tomb. In the subsidiary tombs excavators found objects including stelae representing several individuals ivory objects inscribed with the name of Neithhotep and various ivory tablets.21 Manetho indicates that the First Dynasty ruled from Memphis  and indeed Herneith one of Djers wives was buried nearby at Saqqara. Galleryedit Small ivory label of Djer mentioning the name of a fortress or domain of the king HorDjerib. Seal impression with the serekh of Djer found in Abydos on display at the British Museum Ceremonial flint knife with the Horus name of Djer inscribed on its gold handle on display at the Royal Ontario Museum. Closeup view of Djers serekh on the ceremonial flint knife of the Royal Ontario Museum. Label from Tomb of King Djer Abydos Label from Tomb of King Djer Abydos See alsoedit Ancient Egyptian retainer sacrifices List of pharaohs Referencesedit  Trigger Bruce 1983. Ancient Egypt A Social History. Cambridge University Press. p. 70. ISBN 9780521284271.  Grimal Nicolas 1994. A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell. p. 528. ISBN 0631193960.  W. M. Flinders Petrie The Royal Tombs of the Earliest Dynasties 1901 Part II London 1901 p.1617  Salima Ikram and Aidan Dodson The Mummy in Ancient Egypt Equipping the Dead for Eternity Thames  Hudson 1998 p. 109  Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 1999 3839 
3 H  Toby Wilkinson Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt The Palermo Stone and Its Associated Fragments Kegan Paul International 2000. p.79  Wilkinson Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt p.258  King Djer page from digitalegypt.  Saad 1947 165 Saad 1969 82 pl. 94  Kaiser 1964 103 fig.3  King Djer. www.ucl.ac.uk. Retrieved March 16 2024.  Petrie 1925 pl. II.8 XII.1  tomb 461 in Abydos Petrie 1925 pl. III.1 IV.8  Rice Michael The Power of the Bull Routledge 1 edition 4 Dec 1997 ISBN 9780415090322 p123 1  Manetho with an English translation by W.G. Waddell. 1940.  a b c W. Grajetzki Ancient Egyptian Queens a hieroglyphic dictionary  a b c Dodson and Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt 2004  W. M. Flinders Petrie The Royal Tombs of the Earliest Dynasties 1901 Part II London 1901 pl. XXVII 96  Thomas Khn Die Knigsgrber der 1.  2. Dynastie in Abydos. In Kemet. Issue 1 2008.  a b c Baker Darrell D. 2008. Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume 1 Predynastic to the Twentieth DYnasty 33001069 BC. Egypt The American University in Cairo Press. p. 93.  a b B. Porter and R.L.B. Moss. Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Reliefs and Paintings V. Upper Egypt Sites. Oxford 1937 Bibliographyedit Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 7173 Toby Wilkinson Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt The Palermo Stone and Its Associated Fragments Kegan Paul International 2000. External linksedit Media related to Djer at Wikimedia Commons Preceded by Neithhotep regent Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Djet v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e First Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Pharaohs MenesNarmer HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Regents Neithhotep Merneith Queen consorts Benerib Herneith Penebui Nakhtneith Khenthap Semat Serethor Seshemetka Betrest Officials Amka Hemaka Sabef Meriiti Other people Ahaneith Artefacts and monuments Narmer macehead Narmer palette Den seal impressions Abydos boats MacGregor plaque Mastabas S3503 and S3504 Capital Thinis Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDjeroldid1214006482 Categories Djer 
31 stcentury BC Pharaohs 
30 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the First Dynasty of Egypt HorAha Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 March 2024 at 1256 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width