Sneferu - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign length 
2 Family and succession Toggle Family and succession subsection 
2.1 Children 
3 Building projects 
4 Foreign relations 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sneferu 58 languages Afrikaans   Azrbaycanca   Brezhoneg Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh and founder of the 
4 th dynasty of Ancient Egypt This article is about the Egyptian pharaoh. For the cryptographic hash function see Snefru. Sneferu Snefru Seneferu Snofru Soris Limestone statue of Sneferu Egyptian Museum Pharaoh Reign 24 30 or 48 years1 c. 2600 BC Predecessor Huni2 Successor Khufu Royal titulary Horus name HorNebmaat rnbmt Horus Lord of the Maat Second Horus name HorNebmaat Snefru rnbmtsnfrwj Horus Lord of Maat has perfected me Nebty name Nisut Bity Nebmaat Nebty Nsw.tbtynbt.jnbmt King of Upper and Lower Egypt he of the two ladies Lord of the Maat Golden Horus Biknebu Bjknb.w Golden Falcon Abydos King List Snefru snfrwj He has perfected me Saqqara Tablet Snefru snfrwj He has perfected me Turin King List Snefer... S.nfr... He has perfected... 3 Prenomen Praenomen Snefru Snfr.w He has perfected me Alternative spelling Consort Hetepheres I Children Khufu Ankhhaf Kanefer Nefermaat Netjeraperef Rahotep Ranefer Iynefer I Hetepheres A Nefertkau I Nefertnesu Meritites I Henutsen Mother Meresankh I Burial Red Pyramid possibly Monuments Meidum Pyramid Bent Pyramid Red Pyramid Dynasty Fourth Dynasty Sneferu snfrwj He has perfected me from rnbmtsnfrwj Horus Lord of Maat has perfected me also read Snefru or Snofru4 well known under his Hellenized name Soris Koin Greek  by Manetho was the founding pharaoh of the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt during the Old Kingdom. Estimates of his reign vary with for instance The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt suggesting a reign from around 2613 to 2589 BC5 a reign of 24 years while Rolf Krauss suggests a 
30 year reign6 and Rainer Stadelmann a 
48 year reign.7 He built at least three pyramids that survive to this day and introduced major innovations in the design and construction of pyramids. Reign lengthedit Detail of a relief showing Sneferu wearing the white robe of the Sedfestival from his funerary temple of Dahshur and now on display at the Egyptian Museum The 
24 year Turin Canon figure for Sneferus reign is considered today to be an underestimate since this kings highestknown date is an inscription discovered at the Red Pyramid of Dahshur and mentioning Sneferus 
24 th cattle count corresponding to at least 24 full years.8 Sneferu however was known to have a minimum of at least three years after the cattle count dates his years after the 
10 th the 
13 th and the 
18 th count are attested at his Meidum pyramid.9 This would mean that Sneferu ruled Egypt a minimum of 27 full years. However in the Palermo Stone recto 6 at the bottom of the fragment shows the year of the 
7 th count of Sneferu while recto 7 on the same following row shows the year of the 
8 th count of Sneferu.10 Significantly there is a previous mostly intact column for Sneferu in recto 5 which also mentions events in this kings reign in a specific year but does not mention the previous 
6 th year.11 This column must therefore be dated to the year after the 
6 th count of Sneferu. Hence Sneferus reign would be a minimum of 28 years. Since there are many periods in Sneferus reigns for which Egyptologists have few datesonly the years of the 
2 nd 
7 th 
8 th 
12 th 
13 th 
14 th 
15 th 
16 th 
17 th 
18 th 
23 rd and 
24 th count are known for Sneferu before one considers the years after his cattle counts
12 this pharaoh is most likely to have had a reign in excess of 30 years to manage to build three pyramids in his long rule but not 48 years since the cattle count was not regularly biannual during his kingship. There are fewer years after the count dates known for Sneferu compared to year of the count or census dates. Family and successionedit See also Fourth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Cartouche name Sneferu in the Abydos King List Sneferu was the first king of the Fourth Dynasty of ancient Egypt who according to Manetho reigned for 24 years 26132589 BC. Manetho was an Egyptian priest living in the third century BC who categorized the pharaohs of dynastic Egypt into thirtyone dynasties.13 Though his schematic has its flaws modern scholars conventionally follow his method of grouping. The Papyrus Prisse a Middle Kingdom source supports the fact that King Huni was indeed Sneferus predecessor. It states that the majesty of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt Huni came to the landing place i.e. died and the majesty of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt Sneferu was raised up as a beneficent king in this entire land...14 Aside from Sneferus succession we learn from this text that later generations considered him to be a beneficent ruler. This idea may stem from the etymology of the kings name for it can be interpreted as the infinitive to make beautiful.15 It is uncertain whether Huni was Sneferus father however the Cairo Annals Stone denotes that his mother may have been a woman named Meresankh.16 Hetepheres I was Sneferus main wife and the mother of Khufu17 the builder of the Great Pyramid on the Giza Plateau. Childrenedit Sons of Sneferu Khufu  son of Sneferu and Hetepheres I successor to Sneferu. Ankhhaf  Kings Son of his Body Kings vizier under his nephew Khafre. Buried in G 7510. A famous bust of Ankhhaf is now in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts. Ankhhaf was married to the Kings Daughter Hetepheres.18 Kanefer  Kings eldest son and Son of his Body. Buried in tomb 28 in Dashur. Second Vizier of Sneferu who continued to serve under Khufu.19 Nefermaat I  eldest son of Sneferu and husband of Itet. Titles included Priest of Bastet Hereditary Prince Guardian of Nekhen great one of the five at the house of Thoth. First Vizier of Sneferu.19 Netjeraperef buried in Dashur.20 Rahotep  Kings Son of his Body High Priest of Re in Heliopolis. Buried in Meidum with his wife Nofret. Owner of the famous statues now in the Cairo Museum.20 Ranefer. Buried in Meidum.20 Iynefer I. Buried in Dashur.21 Daughters of Sneferu Hetepheres A married Ankhhaf. She was named after her mother Queen Hetepheres. Nefertkau I  Kings Daughter of his Body eldest daughter of Sneferu. Buried in mastaba G 7050 at Giza. Her tomb dates to the time of Khafra. In the tomb Sneferu is mentioned as well as Nefertkaus son Nefermaat II and her grandson Sneferukhaf.2223 Nefertnesu  Kings daughter Gods Daughter. Had a son named Kaemqed who is known from a false door. He was buried in Dashur during the 
5 th dynasty.22 Meritites I Great of Sceptre and Kings Wife married to her brother Khufu.22 Henutsen  Kings daughter married to Khufu.17 Building projectsedit The Meidum pyramid Sneferu Pyramid waste limestone block. Hole in bottom used as pivot block on which to turn heavy levers in moving stones. 
4 th Dynasty. From Meidum Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London The most well known monuments from Sneferus reign are the three pyramids he is considered to have built. In Dahshur the Bent Pyramid and the Red Pyramid and in Meidum the Meidum pyramid. Under Sneferu there was a major evolution in monumental pyramid structures which would lead to Khufus Great Pyramid which would be seen as the pinnacle of the Egyptian Old Kingdoms majesty and splendour and as one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. The first of Sneferus massive undertakings is the Pyramid at Meidum. There is some debate among scholars as to Sneferus claim to the Meidum pyramid and many credit its origin to King Huni. Nonetheless the pyramid is a remarkable example of the progression of technology and ideology surrounding the kings burial site. The immense stone structure serves as physical testimony to the transition from the stepped pyramid structure to that of a true pyramid structure. Archaeological investigations of the pyramid show that it was first conceived as a sevenstepped structure built in a similar manner to the Djoser complex at Saqqara. Modifications later were made to add another platform and at an even later stage limestone facing was added to create the smooth angled finish characteristic of a true pyramid.24 Complete with a descending northern passage two underground chambers and a burial vault the pyramid mainly follows the conventions of previous tombs in most aspects other than one instead of being situated underneath the colossal structure the burial chamber is built directly within the main body albeit very near ground level.25 Sneferus Bent Pyramid at Dahshur The Bent Pyramid also known as the Rhomboidal or Blunted Pyramid attests to an even greater increase in architectural innovations. As the name suggests the angle of the inclination changes from 55 to about 43 in the upper levels of the pyramid. It is likely that the pyramid initially was not designed to be built this way but was modified during construction due to unstable accretion layers. As a means of stabilising the structure the top layers were laid horizontally marking the abandonment of the step pyramid concept.26 The internal components of the Rhomboidal pyramid have also evolved. There are two entrances one from the north and another from the west. The subterranean chambers are much larger and distinguished by corbel walls and ceilings with more complex diagonal portcullis systems in place. J.P Lepre asserts It is apparent that with the interior design of the Bent Pyramid the architect was groping and experimenting taking maximum advantage of the huge volume of the monument 50 million cubic feet the largest pyramid constructed to that date.27 The satellite pyramid complementing Sneferus Bent Pyramid introduces more change in the architecture of the time when the passageway is built ascending westward as opposed to the conventionally descending northward direction of the passages of previously built pyramids towards the burial chambers.28 Egypt decided to open the Bent Pyramid for tourism in July 2019 for the first time since 1965. Tourists will be able to reach two 46
00 yearold chambers through a 
79 meter narrow tunnel built from the northern entrance of the pyramid. 
18 meterhigh side pyramid which is assumed that have been built for Sneferus wife Hetepheres will also be accessible. It is the first time for this adjacent pyramid opened to the public after its excavation in 19
56.2 930313233 The Red Pyramid of Sneferu With the increase of innovation in Sneferus building projects one expects that his last pyramid the Red Pyramid will show the greatest complexity and change in architecture yet. Upon first glance one may be disappointed seeing that the construction of the Red Pyramid seemingly is simpler than its predecessor. Lepre points out that some of the internal innovations that the previous pyramids boast seem to be missing in the kings last monument. Although the chambers and burial vaults are all present in the monuments main body no ascending passageway has been excavated nor is there evidence of a western entrance or diagonal portcullis. Although the absence of these features have dissuaded many archaeologists from further studying the Red Pyramid Lepre is convinced that there are secret chambers waiting to be uncovered within the stone superstructure. In 1950 fragments of human remains were found in the passage way of the Red Pyramid and examined by Dr. Ahmed Mahmud el Batrawi. The remains and wrappings were found to be consistent with 
4 th dynasty mummification techniques. Whether these humain remains belong to Sneferu is uncertain.34 Considering that the remains of King Sneferu have not yet been found or positively identified it still may be possible that his sarcophagus and actual mummy lie hidden in his Red Pyramid in a hidden chamber. Lepre claims the Red pyramid remains one of the chief pyramids that may possibly contain secret chambers not the least of which may be the true burial chamber of King Sneferu himself.35 Whether or not this conjecture is true is left to modern archaeologists to determine. Sneferus architectural innovations served as a catalyst for later pyramid builders to build on. The first king of the fourth dynasty set a challenging precedent for his successors to match and only Khufus Great Pyramid can rival Sneferus accomplishments. As time progressed and ideology changed in Ancient Egypt the monuments of the kings decreased greatly in size. As the Pyramid of Menkaure is only a fraction of the size of the previous pyramids the focus of Egyptian ideology might have shifted from the worship of the king to the direct worship of the sun god Ra.36 Foreign relationsedit To enable Sneferu to undertake such massive building projects he would have had to secure an extensive store of labour and materials. According to Guillemette Andreu this is where the kings foreign policy played a large part. Sneferus conquests into Libya and Nubia served two purposes the first goal was to establish an extensive labour force and the second goal was to gain access to the raw materials and special products that were available in these countries.36 This is alluded to in the Palermo Stone Reign of Sneferu. Year ... The building of Tuataua ships of mer wood of a hundred capacity and 60 royal boats of sixteen capacity. Raid in the Land of the Blacks and the bringing in of seven thousand prisoners men and women and twenty thousand cattle sheep and goats... The bringing of forty ships of cedar wood or perhaps laden with cedar wood...37 Reused building materials found at the pyramid complex of Amenemhat I that are thought originally to have been a depiction of the Sed festival for Sneferu According to this inscription Sneferu was able to capture large numbers of people from other nations make them his prisoners and then add them into his labour force. During his raids into Nubia and Libya he also captured cattle for the sustenance of his massive labour force. Such incursions must have been incredibly devastating to the populations of the raided countries and it is suggested that the campaigns into Nubia may have contributed to the dissemination of the AGroup culture of that region. Sneferus military efforts in ancient Libya led to the capture of 11000 prisoners and 13100 head of cattle.38 Aside from the extensive import of cedar most likely from Lebanon described above there is evidence of activity in the turquoise mines on the Sinai Peninsula.39 There would also have been largescale quarrying projects to provide Sneferu with the stone he needed for his pyramids. Sneferus ancient cedar wood ship Praise of the Two Lands is the first known instance of a ship being referred to by name.40 See alsoedit List of Egyptian pyramids List of megalithic sites 4906 Seneferu a minor planet named for the pharaoh Referencesedit  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 pp. 278279  A. Dodson  D. Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames and Hudson Ltd London 2004.  Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin  Homs George. Snefru . Pharaoh of Egypt  2620 2547  Stamboom Homs  Genealogie Online. Genealogie Online. Retrieved 20190305.  Jaromir Malek in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 87  Krauss Rolf 1996. The length of Sneferus reign and how long it took to build the Red Pyramid. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 82 4350. doi
10.2 3073822113. JSTOR 3822113.  Rainer Stadelmann Beitrge zur Geschichte des Alten Reiches Die Lnge der Regierung des Snofru. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Institutes Kairo MDAIK Vol. 43. von Zabern Mainz 1987 ISSN 03421279 pp. 229240.  Miroslav Verner Archaeological Remarks on the 
4 th and 
5 th Dynasty Chronology Archiv Orientln. vol. 69 Praha 2001 p. 367  Verner pp. 367  H. Schfer Ein Bruchstck altgyptischer Annalen 1902 APAW Phil.hist Kl. 4 3031  see Christine Hobson Exploring the World of the PharaohsA Complete Guide to Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson paperback 1993 p. 15  Verner pp. 365367  An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt p. 36  The Instructions of Kagemni Papyrus Prisse  The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 93  The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt p. 51  a b The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt p. 57  Porter and Moss Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Reliefs and Paintings Part III.  a b NicolasChristophe Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt p. 68  a b c The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt p. 61  The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt p. 58  a b c The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt p. 60  Porter and Moss Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Reliefs and Paintings Part III  An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt pg.134  The Egyptian Pyramids... p. 51  An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt p. 135  The Egyptian Pyramids... p. 53  The Egyptian Pyramids... pp. 5354  Bent pyramid Egypt opens ancient oddity for tourism. The Guardian. Reuters. 20190714. ISSN 02613077. Retrieved 20190715.  Egypt opens Sneferus Bent Pyramid in Dahshur to public. Reuters. 20190713. Archived from the original on July 14 2019. Retrieved 20190715.  Egyptian bent pyramid dating back 4600 years opens to public. The Independent. 20190713. Retrieved 20190715.  Egypts 46
00 yo Bent Pyramid opens to the public after more than half a century. ABC News. 20190714. Retrieved 20190715.  Egypts Bent Pyramid opens to visitors. 20190713. Retrieved 20190715.  httpsgrahamhancock.comphorumread.php1263224263387  The Egyptian Pyramids... p. 54  a b An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt p. 144  The Literature of the Ancient Egyptians p. 100 emphasis added  Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 107  The Complete Royal Families p. 50  Anzovin item  5393 p. 385 Reference to a ship with a name appears in an inscription of 2613 BCE that recounts the shipbuilding achievements of the fourthdynasty Egyptian pharaoh Sneferu. He was recorded as the builder of a cedarwood vessel called Praise of the Two Lands. Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seneferu. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Meidum Pyramid. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Red Pyramid. Anzovin Steven et al. Famous First Facts International Edition H. W. Wilson Company 2000 ISBN 0824209583 Andreu Guillemette. Egypt in the Age of the Pyramids. Cornell University Press Ithaca 1997. Bard A. Kathryn. An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Publishing Ltd Malden 2008. Budge Wallis. The Literature of the Ancient Egyptians. The Project Gutenberg. November 16 2008 httpswww.gutenberg.orgfiles15932159
32 h159
32 h.htmPg100 Lepre J.P. The Egyptian Pyramids A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference. McFarland  Company London 1990. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Ed. Aidan Dodson  Dylan Hilton. Thames and Hudson Ltd London 2004. The Instruction of Kagemni. Ancient Egyptian Books of Wisdom. November 16 2008 httpsweb.archive.orgweb200810131151
57 httpegypt.thetao.infokagemni.htm The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Ed. Ian Shaw. Oxford University Press Oxford 2000 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSneferuoldid1221988390 Categories Sneferu 
27 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
26 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
26 thcentury BC deaths Pharaohs of the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Koin Greeklanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 3 May 2024 at 0542 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width