Sekhemkhet - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign 
2 Family 
3 Tomb Toggle Tomb subsection 
3.1 The pyramid 
3.2 Subterranean structure 
3.3 Necropolis complex 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sekhemkhet 40 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh of 
3 rd dynasty Sekhemkhet Djosertety Djoserty Tyreis Relief of Sekhemkhet from Wadi Maghareh Pharaoh Reign 6 or 7 years c.2650 BC Predecessor Djoser Successor Sanakht most likely or Khaba Royal titulary Horus name HorSekhemkhet rsm.t Powerful body of Horus Nebty name NebtyHetepren Nb.tjhtp.rn The two ladies are pleased with his name Abydos King List Teti ttj Of true greatness Saqqara Tablet Djosertety srttj The blessed one of true greatness Turin King List Djoserty srtj The blessed one comes 1 Consort Djeseretnebti  Father Khasekhemwy  Mother Nimaathap  Burial Buried Pyramid Dynasty 
3 rd Dynasty Sekhemkhet also read as Sechemchet was an ancient Egyptian king pharaoh of the 
3 rd Dynasty during the Old Kingdom. His reign is thought to have been from about 2648 BC until 2640 BC. He is also known under his later traditioned birth name Djosertety and under his Hellenized name Tyreis by Manetho derived from Teti in the Abydos King List. Sekhemkhet was probably the brother or eldest son of king Djoser. Little is known about this king since he ruled for only a few years. However he erected a step pyramid at Saqqara and left behind a well known rock inscription at Wadi Maghareh Sinai Peninsula. Reignedit Cartouche name Teti from the Abydos king list. The duration of Sekhemkhets reign is believed to have been six to seven years. The royal Turin Canon attributes six years of reign to Sekhemkhet2 a figure also proposed by Myriam Wissa based on the unfinished state of Sekhemkhets pyramid.3 Using his reconstruction of the Palermo Stone 
5 th Dynasty Toby Wilkinson assigns seven years to this king. This figure is based on the number of year registers preserved in Cairo Fragment I de register V.4 Wilkinson states that this figure is fairly certain since the kings titulary begins immediately after the dividing line marking the change of reign..5 Similarly the historian Manetho lists Sekhemkhet under the name of Tyreis and indicates that he reigned for seven years. Nabil Swelim by contrast proposed a reign of nineteen years because he believed that Sekhemkhet might be the Tosertasis mentioned by Manetho.6 However such a long reign is at odds with the unfinished state of the buried pyramid and this view is generally rejected by Egyptologists. Clay seal from the island of Elephantine showing Sekhemkhet horus and nebty names. Little is known about activities conducted during Sekhemkhets reign. The only preserved documents showing Sekhemkhet are two rock inscriptions at Wadi Maghareh in the Sinai peninsula. The first one shows Sekhemkhet twice once wearing the Hedjet crown another wearing the Deshret crown. The second inscription depicts a scene known as smiting the enemy Sekhemkhet has grabbed a foe by its hair and raises his arm in an attempt to club the enemy to death with a ceremonial sceptre. The presence of these reliefs at Wadi Maghareh suggests that local mines of copper and turquoise were exploited during Sekhemkhets reign.78 These mines were apparently active throughout the early 
3 rd Dynasty since reliefs of Djoser and Sanakht were also discovered in the Wadi Maghareh. Several clay seals presenting an unusual Nebty name together with Sekhemkhets Horus name were found at the eastern excavation site on the island of Elephantine. The Egyptologist Jean Pierre Ptznik reads the Nebty name as Ren nebty meaning The two ladies are pleased with his name. It is not entirely clear whether this is indeed Sekhemkhets nebty name or that of a yet unknown queen.8 Familyedit Sekhemkhets wife may have been Djeseretnebti but this name appears without any queens title and Egyptologists dispute the true meaning and reading of this name.9 The name has alternatively been read as DjeserTi and identified with the cartouchename DjeserTeti presented in the Saqqara King List as the direct successor of Djoser.10 Sekhemkhet surely had sons and daughters but up to this date no personal name was found. Some consider Sekhemkhet to be the brother of Djoser making him another son of Khasekhemwy who was the final king of the Second Dynasty. If this is true his mother would be Nimaathap.1112 Tombedit Main article Buried Pyramid Schematical depiction of Sekhemkhets step pyramid Sekhemkhets pyramid is sometimes referred to as the Buried Pyramid and was first excavated in 1952 by Egyptian archaeologist Zakaria Goneim. A sealed sarcophagus was discovered beneath the pyramid but when opened was found to be empty. The pyramidedit Sekhemkhets pyramid was planned as a step pyramid from the first. Its base was a square measuring 378 ft x 378 ft 220 x 220 cubits. If the pyramid had been completed it would have had six or seven steps and a final height of 2
40.5  ft 140 cubits. These proportions would have given the pyramid an angle of elevation of 5150 identical to the pyramid at Meidum and the Great Pyramid of Giza. Like Djosers pyramid Sekhemkhets was built of limestone blocks. The monument was not finished possibly because of the pharaohs sudden death. Only the first step of the pyramid was completed leaving a monument in the shape of a large square mastaba. Subterranean structureedit The entrance to Sekhemkhets burial lies on the northern side of the pyramid. An open passage leads down for 200 ft. Halfway down the track a vertical shaft meets the passage from above. It opens on the surface and its entrance would lie at the second step of the pyramid if the monument had been completed. At the meeting spot of the passage and shaft another passageway leads down to a subterranean Ushaped gallery containing at least 120 magazines. The whole gallery complex has the appearance of a giant comb. Shortly before the burial chamber is reached the main passage splits into two further magazine galleries surrounding the burial chamber like a U similar to the big northern gallery but they were never finished. The burial chamber has a base measurement of 29 ft x 17 ft and a height of 15 ft. It was also left unfinished but surprisingly a nearly completely arranged burial was found. The sarcophagus in the midst of the chamber is made of polished alabaster and shows an unusual feature its opening lies on the front side and is sealed by a sliding door which was still plastered with mortar when the sarcophagus was found. The sarcophagus was empty however and it remains unclear whether the site was ransacked after burial or whether King Sekhemkhet was buried elsewhere. A shell shaped container made of gold was found by an Egyptian Antiquities Service excavation team in 19
50.1 3 The object has a length of 
1.4  in and is currently on display in Room 4 of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.14 An ivory plaque bearing the form of Sekhemkhets Saqqara King List name of Djoserti found in the remains of his step pyramid tomb. Necropolis complexedit Because the necropolis of Sekhemkhet was never finished it is hard to say which planned cultic building had already existed. The pyramid courtyard was surrounded by a niched enclosure wall facing northwest. It was 
1.8 50 ft long 607 ft wide and 33 ft high. The only archaeologically preserved cultic building is the Southern Tomb its base measurement is estimated to be 105 ft x 52 ft. The subterranean structure included a tight corridor beginning on the western side of the tomb and ending in a double chamber. In this chamber in 1963 JeanPhilippe Lauer excavated the burial of a twoyearold toddler. The identity of this child remains a mystery. The only fact known for certain about it is that it cannot be king Sekhemkhet himself since the king was always depicted as a young man. No further cultic buildings were detected but Egyptologists and archaeologists are convinced that once upon a time a mortuary temple and a serdab existed but were destroyed due to the looting of stone from his cult buildings in antiquity. See alsoedit List of Egyptian pyramids List of megalithic sites Referencesedit  Alan H. Gardiner The Royal Canon of Turin Griffith Institute Oxford 1997 ISBN 0900416483.  Alan H. Gardiner The Royal Canon of Turin Griffith Institute Oxford 1997 ISBN 0900416483 Vol. 2.  Myriam Wissa  propos du sarcophage de Skhemkhet in Catherine Berger tudes sur lAncien empire et la ncropole de Saqqra ddies  JeanPhilippe Lauer Orientalia Monspeliensia. Vol. 9 2 Universit Paul Valry  Montpellier III Montpellier 1997 ISBN 2842690
46 X p. 445448.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt The Palermo Stone and Its Associated Fragments. Kegan Paul International London 2000 page 115.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt The Palermo Stone and Its Associated Fragments. Kegan Paul International London 2000 page 7980.  Nabil Swelim Some Problems on the History of the Third Dynasty Archaeological and historical Studies Vol. 7 ZDBID 8000153 Archaeological Society of Alexandria Alexandria 1983 p. 221  Morsi Saad ElDin u. a. Sinai. The site  the history. Essays. Photographs by Ayman Taher. New York University Press New York NY 1998 ISBN 0814722032 page 30.  a b JeanPierre Ptznick Die Abfolge der Horusnamen der 3. Dynastie. In JeanPierre Ptznick Die Siegelabrollungen und Rollsiegel der Stadt Elephantine im 3. Jahrtausend v.Chr. Spurensicherung eines archologischen Artefaktes  BAR. International Series. Vol. 1339. Archaeopress Oxford 2005 ISBN 1841716855 page 7679.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 pp 108 117.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 98.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London 2001 ISBN 0415260116 p. 80  82 94  97.  Silke Roth Die Knigsmtter des Alten gypten von der Frhzeit bis zum Ende der 12. Dynastie  gypten und Altes Testament vol. 46. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2001 ISBN 3447043687 p. 5961  6567.  Alessandro Bongioanni  Maria Croce ed. The Treasures of Ancient Egypt From the Egyptian Museum in Cairo Universe Publishing a division of Ruzzoli Publications Inc. 2003. p.344  Bongioanni  Croce p.344 Bibliographyedit Hawass Zahi. Excavating the Old Kingdom. in Egyptian Art in the Age of the Pyramids The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1999. Leclant Jean. A Brief History of the Old Kingdom. in Egyptian Art in the Age of the Pyramids The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1999. Wilkinson Toby. Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt The Palermo Stone and Its Associated Fragments Kegan Paul International 2000. External linksedit Media related to Sekhemkhet at Wikimedia Commons v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSekhemkhetoldid1175900792 Categories 
27 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Third Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 18 September 2023 at 0508 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width