Qahedjet - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 The stela Toggle The stela subsection 
1.1 Description 
1.2 Authenticity 
2 Identity of Qahedjet 
3 References Toggle the table of contents Qahedjet 12 languages Deutsch Espaol Euskara    Polski  Svenska Tagalog   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Horus name of an ancient Egyptian king pharaoh Qahedjet Huni  Stela of Qahedjet Pharaoh Reign unknown Predecessor unknown Successor Huni Sneferu Royal titulary Horus name HorQahedjet rQ
3 j.t Raised crown of Horus1 He with the raised White Crown2 Dynasty 
3 rd Dynasty Qahedjet also HorQahedjet could be the Horus name of an ancient Egyptian king pharaoh who may have ruled during the 
3 rd Dynasty or could be a voluntarily archaistic representation of Thutmose III.3 Since the only artifact attesting to the ruler and his name is a small stela made of polished limestone of uncertain origin and authenticity4 Egyptologists are discussing the chronological position and historical figure of Qahedjet. The stelaedit Descriptionedit The stela of king Qahedjet is 
50.5  cm high 
31.0  cm wide and 
3.0  cm thick and made of finely polished limestone. It was bought in 1967 by the Louvre at Paris where it is now on display. The front shows king Qahedjet embracing an anthropomorphic form of the god Horus. King Qahedjet wears the White crown of Upper Egypt and an artificial kings beard and looks directly into Horus eyes both figures being the same height. His face looks remarkable with his crooked nose the bulging lips and his square chin. The king wears a kilt with a dagger in a belt. In his left hand he holds a mace while in his right hand he holds a staff with a winglike mark at middle height. Horus has laid his right arm around Qahedjets shoulder and holds Qahedjets elbow in his left hand. The hieroglyphic inscription describes the kings visit to the northern shrine of the god Ra at Heliopolis.15 Authenticityedit The authenticity of Qahedjets stela is questioned by Egyptologists such as JeanPierre Ptznik and Jacques Vandier. They point to several stylistic contradictions that can be found within the relief motif. Firstly they stress that the earliest known depiction of an anthropomorphic Horus is found in the pyramid temple of Sahure second pharaoh of the 
5 th Dynasty. Secondly they argue that the motif of a king embracing a god or a god embracing a king would be highly unusual for the Old Kingdom since the king was then seen as the living representation of Horus and Seth but not seen on a par with them in this way. Depictions showing a king in an intimate pose with a god would therefore be heretical and provocative at the same time. Detail of the stela. Further arguments of Ptznik and Vandier concern the inscriptions right of Qahedjets serekh. The hieroglyphic signs are unusually shifted to the right and they are not square in arrangement. This contradicts the Egyptian rules of calligraphy on royal monuments. Additionally the details on the owlsign value m of the stele do not appear before the first half of the 
18 th Dynasty and the stele would represent the earliest formulation Horus  m  toponym. Finally serekh names involving a royal crown as a hieroglyphic symbol are otherwise only known from king Thutmose III of the 
18 th Dynasty onwards and Ptznik and Vandier remark that Qahedjet is known to be a variant of Thutmose IIIs Horus name so that the stele if authentic could be an archaistic work of the New Kingdom.1 Alternatively the square face of Qahedjet that reminds the viewer so much of that of king Djoser makes them think that the stela could be an archaistic production from the much later Saite period. During this era reliefs with clear hommages to the art of the Old Kingdom were seen as en vogue. As an example Ptznik and Vandier point to a naos of Djoser found at Heliopolis now in fragments that shows Djoser sitting on a Hebsedthrone. Djoser appears nearly identical in the reliefs of his necropolis at Saqqara but a small guiding inscription reveals that the naos was built in the 
7 th
6 th century BCE during the Saitic period.1 Their last argument concerns the word Hutaa meaning great palace the place which Qahedjet is represented visiting. The way Hutaa is written on the stela is known not to be in use before the very end of the Old Kingdom and become common only from the time of king Senwosret I of the 
12 th Dynasty onwards. Furthermore Hutaa is generally identified with the temple of Ra in Heliopolis which is located in Lower Egypt while Qahedjet wears the crown of Upper Egypt. On the other hand reliefs from Djosers pyramid complex always depict the king wearing the crown corresponding to the places he is shown visiting. Thus the several contradictions in the reliefs artistic program make Jaques Vandier and JeanPierre Ptznik wonder if the stela is authentic or just a modern fake. The uncertain origins of the stela which was acquired by the Louvre in 1967 from a private antique dealer in Cairo 4 only lends more weight to this possibility. Identity of Qahedjetedit Assuming its authenticity Jacques Vandier proposed in his first study of the stele in 1968 that it be dated to the 
3 rd Dynasty on stylistic grounds suggesting that Qahedjet be identified with king Huni the last ruler of the dynasty. Toby A.H. Wilkinson and Ian Shaw are of the same opinion they think that HorQahedjet was the serekh name of Huni although this assumption is only based on that Huni is the only king of this dynasty whose Horus name is unknown the name Huni is a cartouche name only. Thus their theory is not commonly accepted.67 Similarly Jrgen von Beckerath Rainer Stadelmann and Dietrich Wildung considered Qahedjet to have ruled toward the end of the 
3 rd Dynasty. Again their theory is based on the stylistic resemblances between Qahedjets face and that of king Djoser on reliefs from his pyramid complex.28 Finally one must mention that Peter Kaplony dated the stela to the First Intermediate Period of Egypt.9 Referencesedit  a b c d JeanPierre Ptznik Jacques Vandier LHorus Qahedjet Souverain de la IIIe dynastie. page 14551472.  a b Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533. page 315.  JeanPierre Ptznick LHorus Qahedjet souverain de la 
3 eme dynasty  Proceedings of the Ninth Congress of Egyptologists Orientalia Lovaniensa Analecta Ch. 
2.1  p. 1455 Online  a b Chr. Ziegler Catalogue des steles peintures et reliefs egyptiens de lAncien Empire et de la Premiere Periode Intermediaire Musee du Louvre Paris 1990 pp. 5457  Toby Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 104105.  Ian Shaw The Oxford history of ancient Egypt. page 88.  Jacques Vandier Comptes Rendus de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et des BellesLettres. 1968 page 1622.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen. Deutscher Kunstverlag Mnchen Berlin 1984 ISBN 3422008322. page 52  117.  Peter Kaplony Die Rollsiegel des Alten Reiches  Monumenta Aegyptiaca vol. 3. Fondation gyptologique Reine Elisabeth Bruxelles 1981 p. 155 com. 271 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleQahedjetoldid1141144921 Categories 
27 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Third Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 February 2023 at 1600 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width