Khaba - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 Identity Toggle Identity subsection 
2.1 Royal name 
2.2 Identification with Ramesside kinglists 
2.3 Identification with Manethos king list 
3 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
3.1 Chronology 
3.2 Duration 
3.3 Events 
4 Tomb 
5 Other buildings from Khabas reign Toggle Other buildings from Khabas reign subsection 
5.1 Mastaba Z500 
5.2 Quesna Tomb 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Khaba 40 languages  Azrbaycanca Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh of 
3 rd dynasty Khaba Hudjefa II. Sedjes Huni Serekh of Khaba on a stone bowl of unknown provenance Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology UC 15800. Pharaoh Reign duration unknown ca. 2670 BC1 Predecessor Sekhemkhet or Sanakht Successor Huni if not identical to him Sanakht Qahedjet Royal titulary Horus name HorKhaba rjb3 The soul of Horus appears Golden Horus Netjernub Nrnwb Golden falcon Abydos King List Sedjes S Omitted Burial Layer Pyramid at Zawyet elAryan Monuments Layer Pyramid Dynasty Later 
3 rd Dynasty Khaba also read as HorKhaba was a pharaoh of Ancient Egypt active during the 
3 rd Dynasty of the Old Kingdom period.23 The exact time during which Khaba ruled is unknown23 but may have been around 2670 BC1 and almost definitely towards the end of the dynasty. King Khaba is considered to be difficult to assess as a figure of ancient Egypt. His name is archaeologically wellattested by stone bowls and mud seal impressions. Khabas reign is securely dated to the Third Dynasty. Because of the contradictions within Ramesside king lists and the lack of contemporary festive inscriptions his exact chronological position within the dynasty remains disputed.23 These problems originate in part from contradictory king lists which were all compiled long after Khabas death especially during the Ramesside era4 which is separated from the Third Dynasty by 1400 years. It is also a matter of debate as to where Khaba might have been buried. Many Egyptologists and archaeologists propose that an unfinished Layer Pyramid at Zawyet elAryan belongs to him. Others believe instead that his tomb is a large mastaba close to the Layer Pyramid where numerous stone vessels bearing Khabas serekh have been found.56 Attestationsedit Khabas name appears on nine polished stone bowls variously made of magnesite travertine and diorite which were found at the archaeological locales of Zawyet elAryan Abusir and NagaedDeir. The bowls were found mostly intact they show only the kings serekh name on their polished surfaces. As was conventional at the time they were made they contain no additional inscriptions for context.37 His name also appears on several mud seal impressions found at Quesna in the Delta8 Zawyet elAryan Hierakonpolis and Elephantine. Most of the mud seals were excavated at modernday Elephantine it is possible that more of them lie under the garden of the current museum of Elephantine. These seal impressions bear more inscriptions than the stone bowls however most of the seals are only preserved as small fragments and their surfaces have been roughened over the years.37 Only one seal bears a wellpreserved complete row of names or titles the seal numbered UC11755 is undated and is now on display in the Petrie Museum London. The inscription alternates between Horus and Golden Horus names.37 Identityedit Royal nameedit Khaba is known by his serekh and Golden Horus name only. His NisutBity title and his Nebty name are unknown.3 Additionally Khaba is one of the very few kings from Early Dynastic and Old Kingdom times with an archaeologically proven Gold name a likely predecessor to the Golden Horus name which Khaba may also have introduced. Aside from Khaba the only kings with Gold names who lived before king Sneferu founder of the 
4 th dynasty were Djer Den Nynetjer Khasekhemwy and Djoser.3 From Snefru onward the Golden Horus name became a fixed royal title to any ruling king no matter how long the king ruled. Khabas Golden Horus name can be found on several seal impressions although its correct reading and translation are disputed. Peter Kaplony interprets it as Nubiret or Nub iretdjedef though he is unsure whether the syllable djedef was an inherent part of the name or an additional honorary title.9 Thomas Schneider and Jrgen von Beckerath in contrast see Khabas Golden Horus as Netjernub which means golden falcon. Khabas Gold name is the first to show the infinitive form of the royal Gold name.1 Identification with Ramesside kinglistsedit Scholars face several problems in attempting to connect Khaba to royal names known from the Ramesside era the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties. Unfortunately these lists offer no clear consensus about the number or names of the kings of the 
3 rd dynasty. The Abydos king list gives Nebka Djoser Teti Sedjes and Neferkar while the Turin Canon offers Nebka Djoser Djoserteti Hudjefa and Huni. The kinglist of Saqqara lists Djoser Djoserteti Nebkar and Huni. The ancient historian Manetho gives nine names Necherphes Tosorthrs Treis Meschris Sphis Tsertasis Achs Sphuris and Kerphers.2 Egyptologist Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards for example identifies Khaba with the Ramesside cartouche name Teti.10 In contrast Egyptologists Wolfgang Helck and Aidan Dodson suggest that Khaba could have been identical to the Ramesside names Sedjes and Hudjefa II. Both names are actually pseudonyms for a royal title that was illegible when the Ramesside scribes compiled the kinglists. This would match a king who ruled only a short time. The Turin Canon gives a short reign of 6 years for Hudjefa II.211 A minority of modern Egyptologists think that Khaba might be identical to a Ramesside cartouche name known as Huni. This name can be credited to a king who is handed down by the Ramesside scribes as the last ruler of the 
3 rd dynasty. Rainer Stadelmann Nicolas Grimal Wolfgang Helck and Toby Wilkinson point to a step pyramid at Zawyet elAryan called the Layer Pyramid. This monument is assigned to Khaba see section below and since Stadelmann and Wilkinson hold that the pyramid was finished they believe that a longreigning king such as king Huni would have been necessary to oversee the project. Huni is attested in the Turin Canon to have reigned for 24 years. In addition Stadelmann points to the seal impressions found at Elephantine they come from a site very close to a stepped pyramid which is said to have been built by Huni.5 Identification with Manethos king listedit It is also unknown under which Hellenized name the ancient historian Manetho listed Khaba. He might have been the same person as the listed Meschris or Sphis24 but this in turn is doubted by Wolfgang Helck and Eberhard Otto. They connect both names with king Sanakht.12 Reignedit Chronologyedit Because of the contradictions within Ramesside king lists and the lack of contemporary festive inscriptions the exact chronological position of Khaba remains disputed.2 Egyptologist Nabil Swelim believes that Khaba could have been the direct successor to King Khasekhemwy the last ruler of the 
2 nd dynasty. He bases his assumptions on similarities between the twos names both begin with the syllable kha. As a comparison he points to the names Netjerikhet Djoser and Sekhemkhet Djoserteti which also display such similarity and are widely assumed to have ruled backtoback.4 Nevertheless Swelims theory is not widely accepted.211 Grimal Helck Wilkinson and Stadelmann point out that during the 
3 rd dynasty it became a fashion that royal stone bowls with polished surfaces showed only Horus names without any guiding inscriptions. This is also the case for the stone bowls of king Khaba. This decor style was practiced still under Sneferu the founder of the 
4 th dynasty. Thus Khaba is thought to have reigned close to the end of the Third Dynasty.51113 Durationedit The correct duration of Khabas reign is also unknown. Should he be identical to the Ramesside cartouche names Sedjes meaning omitted and Hudjefa meaning erased he might have ruled for six years as the Turin Canon suggests. If Khaba was identical to king Huni he might have ruled for 24 years.1114 Eventsedit The current archaeological situation allows no closer evaluation of Khabas reign. The seal impressions from Elephantine only prove that this island seems to have been an important place to visit in Khabas time. The inscriptions reveal that the seals and their belonging vessels originated from Thinis and that they were registered by the governor of Elephantine. Other seals show the depiction of the goddess Bastet. The Hierakonpolis seal was found in early dynastic ruins of a local Horus temple. It shows traces of the image of a god possibly Ash.37 Tombedit Layer Pyramid at Zawyet elAryan. Main article Layer Pyramid Khaba is commonly thought to have built the Layer Pyramid located at Zawyet elAryan about 8 km southwest of Giza. The pyramids construction is typical of Third Dynasty masonry with mudbricks arranged in layers around a core made of rough blocks from the local bedrock. The pyramid was planned to be about 42 to 45 metres 138 to 148 ft tall but is now only 17 metres 56 ft. It is unclear whether part of the pyramid has been eroded over time or its construction was never finished. While there are no inscriptions directly relating the pyramid to Khaba his serekh appears on stone bowls that were discovered in a nearby mastaba known as Mastaba Z5
00.5 6 Alternatively Khaba could have been interred in the aforementioned mastaba which is located about 200 m 660 ft north of the pyramid. Indeed excavations of the mastaba yielded several stone bowls inscribed with Khabas Horus name as well as two seal fragments of him. Although this is generally taken as a proof that Khaba was the pyramid owner it could equally imply that the mastaba was Khabas tomb and the pyramid that of another yet unknown king.56 Other buildings from Khabas reignedit Mastaba Z5
00 edit Only two large mastaba tombs can be securely dated into Khabas reign. The first one is known as Mastaba Z500 which is located at Zawyet elAryan. It lies around 2
00 m north of the Layer Pyramid and has a southnorthorientation.15 The mastaba ist made of mudbricks its outer wall is niched and it contains only two large chambers without any typical tomb architecture elements. Because of this Egyptologists such as Nabil Swelim believe that Mastaba Z500 was in fact a mortuary temple belonging to the funerary complex of the Layer Pyramid. The datation of the building into Khabas reign is based on numerous diorite and dolomite vessels and mud seal fragments bearing the serekh name of king Khaba.16 Quesna Tombedit In 2010 an unknown mudbrick mastaba was discovered in Quesna an archaeological site located in the Monufia Governorate in the Nile Delta. The mastaba was once 
14 m in length and 
6 m in width. Its substructure contains a 
3 m wide corridor chapel divided into three architectural sections the first northern section is filled with rubble the second central section contains a double room as the burial chamber and the third southern section has a burial shaft in its center. In 2014 a tiny mud seal fragment with the kings name was discovered inside. The true owner of the tomb however is unknown and archaeological excavations are still ongoing.17 Referencesedit  a b c Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 p. 97.  a b c d e f g h Aidan Dodson The Layer Pyramid of Zawiyet elAryan Its Layout and Context. In Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt JARCE No. 37 2000. American Research Center Hg. Eisenbrauns Winona LakeBristol 2000 ISSN 00659991 pp. 8190.  a b c d e f g h i Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge London UK 2002 ISBN 1134664206 p. 8486 171 172  177.  a b c Nabil Swelim Some Problems on the History of the Third Dynasty  Archaeological and Historical Studies vol. 7. The Archaeological Society of Alexandria Alexandria 1983 p. 199202.  a b c d e Rainer Stadelmann King Huni His Monuments and His Place in the History of the Old Kingdom. In Zahi A. Hawass Janet Richards Hrsg. The Archaeology and Art of Ancient Egypt. Essays in Honor of David B. OConnor vol. II. Conceil Suprme des Antiquits de lgypte Kairo 2007 p. 425431.  a b c Miroslav Verner Die Pyramiden. Rowohlt Wiesbaden 1999 ISBN 3499608901 p. 174177.  a b c d JeanPierre Ptznik Die Siegelabrollungen und Rollsiegel der Stadt Elephantine im 3. Jahrtausend v. Chr. p. 7375.  Luxor Times British archaeologists discovered an Old Kingdom Mastaba in Delta  Peter Kaplony Inschriften der gyptischen Frhzeit. Band III Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1963 ISBN 3447000
52 X p. 173174.  Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards u.a. The Cambridge ancient history vol.1 p. 156.  a b c d Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit  gyptologische Abhandlungen A vol. 45. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 p.109.  Wolfgang Helck Eberhard Otto Lexikon der gyptologie Vol. 5. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag Wiesbaden 1984 ISBN 3447024895 p. 250.  NicolasChristophe Grimal A history of ancient Egypt. Wiley  Blackwell London UK 1994 ISBN 0631193960 p. 66.  Gerald P. Verbrugghe John Moore Wickersham Berossos and Manetho Introduced and Translated Native Traditions in Ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt. University of Michigan Press 2001 ISBN 0472086871 p. 189.  Mark Lehner Z500 and The Layer Pyramid of Zawiyet elAryan. In Studies in honor of William Kelly Simpson vol. II. PDF Boston 1997 p. 507522.  Nabil Swelim Some Problems on the History of the Third Dynasty  Archaeological and Historical Studies volume 7. The Archaeological Society of Alexandria Alexandria 1983 S. 2732 180  219.  Mada Masr Tomb of littleknown pharaoh unearthed in Nile Delta press release in April 23 2015 English Archived July 15 2015 at the Wayback Machine. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKhabaoldid1163593519 Categories 
27 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Third Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles This page was last edited on 5 July 2023 at 1743 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width