Bikheris - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identity Toggle Identity subsection 
1.1 Possible name sources 
1.2 Identifications 
2 Historical figure 
3 Reign 
4 Burial 
5 References Toggle the table of contents Bikheris 26 languages Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina   srpski Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Bikheris Baka and Bakare Inscribed limestone fragment possibly showing Bikheris name Pharaoh Reign ca. 2570 BC Predecessor Khafre  Successor Menkaure  Royal titulary Probably the same person as Biuris. Nomen Baka b
3 k3 Ba and Ka Bakar b
3 k
3 r His soul is the Ka of R Father Djedefre  Dynasty 
4 th Dynasty Bikheris is the Hellenized name of an ancient Egyptian pharaoh who may have ruled during the 
4 th Dynasty Old Kingdom period around 2570 BC. Next to nothing is known about this ruler and some Egyptologists even believe him to be fictitious.1 Identityedit Possible name sourcesedit In attempts to reconstruct Ancient Egyptian king lists Egyptologists and historians face several problems. As already mentioned Bikheris is a Hellenized name variation. The name appears in the book Aegyptiaca written by Manetho around 300 BC. In a Latin copy of Manetho written by Eratosthenes a king named Biuris is placed at the date when Bikheris allegedly ruled. Scholars wonder if both names actually derive from one and the same Egyptian source.2 However ancient Egyptian sources are scarce. The oldest possible royal name source may come from an unfinished pyramid shaft at Zawyet elAryan. The shaft was excavated in 1904 by Italian Egyptologist Alessandro Barsanti. He discovered several black ink inscriptions inside the shaft some of which actually show a royal cartouche name. Unfortunately Barsanti made no facsimile but sloppy drawings and all but the cartouche name remains illegible. At least the second lower hieroglyph can be identified as a Kasymbol thus making the kings name a ...ka.13 The temporally next possible source appears in the famous Westcar Papyrus of the 
13 th Dynasty. The text mentions a kings son BauefRa. Scholars wonder if this Bauefre may be identical with Bikheris. A very similar name from the New Kingdom period can be found in a rock inscription at Wadi Hammamat. The inscription consists of an honorary prayer surmounted by a short king list. The list contains the names Khufu Djedefra Khafre Djedefhor and Baefra.4 Identificationsedit Alan B. Lloyd is convinced that the names Baka Bakare Baefra Bauefra and Biuris are all identical to Manethos Bikheris.2 This in turn is doubted by Kim Ryholt who points out that the names Baefra and Bauefra contain no syllable that would phonetically fit to Bikheris. Thus Bauefra and Bikheris might be two different kings.5 This view is strengthened by the fact that Bauefra is entitled in contemporary documents only as kings son which is the title of a prince not that of a ruler.6 The only Old Kingdom name that could indeed fit is the now incomplete name Xka as found at Zawyet elAryan. According to Peter Jnosi the mysterious name could be a Baka written with a ram symbol. A son of Djedefra was actually named Baka his name was indeed written with a ram and a kasymbol. It might be possible that prince Baka was meant to become king on the royal throne but then he died unexpectedly during his coronation year leaving an unfinished tomb shaft. Maybe Baka changed his name from Baka into BakaRe after his coronation or perhaps it was done posthumously. If the theory is correct Bikheris was the hellenized variant of Bakare.6 Historical figureedit Some scholars suspect that the line of throne successions during the 
4 th Dynasty of Egypt may have been much less smooth than mainstream Egyptologists believe. In support of this they point out that it was already suspicious that king Djedefra broke with the family tradition of building royal tombs at Giza. In fact Djedefra had left the Giza necropolis in an attempt to found a new royal cemetery at Abu Rawash instead. Alan B. Lloyd also points out that Djedefra dared another break with royal traditions by introducing the cult of Ra and placing Ra over all other deities. If Djedefra broke with family traditions then Bikheris as his son may have done the same thing. This and the obviously very short reign may have led to Bikheris exclusion from official records.24 Another problem is how later historians depict the 
4 th Dynasty Manetho and Eratosthenes both describe Bikheris as the sixth ruler of the 
4 th Dynasty and as the son and successor of king Djedefra. However both authors chronologically misplace the kings completely since they give the succession Snofru  Khufu  Khafre  Menkaure  Djedefra  Shepseskaf  Thamphthis archaeological records however give the correct succession Snofru  Khufu  Djedefra  Khafre  Menkaure  Shepseskaf. The reason for the numerous misplacements of kings in Hellenistic documents may be caused by the ancient authors erroneous idea that the three builders of the Giza pyramids Khufu Khafre and Menkaure automatically must have been direct throne successors. Also the Hellenistic authors seem to have built the king list on the historical importance of each king first the famous pyramid builders everyone knew at their time because of their still practiced mortuary cults and their impressive monuments then the lesser important followers.24 Thus most scholars are convinced that Bikheris should he have existed must have ruled either between Djedefra and Khafre or between Khafre and Menkaure. Since Bikheris is described as the son and follower of Djedefra a chronological position between Djedefra and Khafre seems possible. However the Ramesside king lists provide evidence for placing Bikheris reign between Khafre and Menkaure. The Saqqara king list provides a very odd sequence of succeeding kings for the 
4 th Dynasty after king Khafre the cartouches from him up to king Userkaf the first ruler of the 
5 th Dynasty are destroyed and thus illegible today. But their number is puzzling since between Khafre and Userkaf only two kings are archaeologically detected Menkaure and Shepseskaf. On the other hand the Saqqara king list gives five cartouches between Khafre and Userkaf Khafre    Menkaure  Shepseskaf  Thamphthis    Userkaf. One was possibly preserved for Bikheris whilst the second may have been reserved for a king Thamphthis. The third cartouche the one before Userkaf remains a mystery.2 Jrgen von Beckerath proposes king Nyuserre as the holder of the third cartouche he thinks it is possible that Nyuserre was simply misplaced to the beginning of the 
5 th Dynasty. The Saqqara king list would therefore give the following succession Khafre  Bikheris  Menkaure  Shepseskaf  Thamphthis  Nyuserr  Userkaf.1 The Royal Canon of Turin also provides an unusual sequence after king Khafre the papyrus on which the king list was written is damaged and only a few year notes have survived. According to the numbers of preserved year notes between Khafre and Menkaure a further king must have been listed because an additional line starts with king of Upper and Lower Egypt the year notes here are damaged and illegible though. The following year note about 18 years of rulership must belong to king Menkaure. After Menkaure 4 years of rulership are mentioned this line was surely reserved for king Shepseskaf. After Shepseskaf however a further additional year note gives 2 years of rulership before starting the 
5 th Dynasty with Userkaf. Egyptologists think that the gap between Khafre and Menkaure once named either Bauefra or Bikheris and the gap between Shepseskaf and Userkaf may have mentioned Thamphthis.24 Reignedit The length of Bikheris reign is subject to some dispute. Manetho credits Bikheris with 22 years of rulership Eratosthenes gives Biuris 10 years and the Royal Canon of Turin provides 2 years. Modern Egyptologists and historians believe Manethos and Eratosthenes year numbers to be exaggerations or misinterpretations. They credit Bikheris with a reign of either 2 years likewise to the Turin Canon or even less than one year as Peter Jnosi suggests. Such a short reign would explain why Bikheris left virtually no monuments andor documents.24 Burialedit The tomb of Bikheris is unknown. If he is indeed identical to the archaeologically attested prince Baka he might have been buried in the Unfinished Northern Pyramid of Zawyet elAryan. This tomb was left unfinished right after the foundation was completedonly an ovalshaped imbedded sarcophagus was found. The condition of the tomb suggests the sudden death of the king which forced the tomb workers to leave the necropolis behind. The unfinished tomb would therefore fit well to a supposed shortlived ruler such as Bikheris.46 Referencesedit  a b c Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des pharaonischen gypten. Die Zeitbestimmung der gyptischen Geschichte von der Vorzeit bis 332 v. Chr.  Mnchner gyptologische Studien vol. 46. von Zabern Mainz 1997 ISBN 3805323107 p. 158.  a b c d e f g Alan B. Lloyd Commentary. In Herodotus Book II  Etudes prliminaires aux religions orientales dans lempire romain vol. 43. BRILL Leiden 1993 ISBN 9004077375 p.7678.  Miroslav Verner Archaeological Remarks on the 
4 th and 
5 th Dynasty Chronology. In Archiv Orientln Vol. 69. Prag 2001 p. 363418.  a b c d e f Peter Jnosi Giza in der 4. Dynastie. Die Baugeschichte und Belegung einer Nekropole des Alten Reiches. Bd. I Die Mastabas der Kernfriedhfe und die Felsgrber. Verlag der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 2005 ISBN 3700132441 p. 6465.  K. S. B. Ryholt Adam BlowJacobsen The Political Situation in Egypt During the Second Intermediate Period c. 1800  1550 B.C  CNI publications Carsten Niebuhr Institut Kbenhavn vol. 20. Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 ISBN 8772894210 p. 1718.  a b c George Andrew Reisner A History of the Giza Necropolis Vol. I. Harvard University Press Harvard 1942 p. 28. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBikherisoldid1154306954 Categories 
26 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 May 2023 at 1559 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width