Menkaure - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign 
3 Pyramid complex Toggle Pyramid complex subsection 
3.1 Valley temple 
3.2 Mortuary Temple 
3.3 Sarcophagus 
4 Records from later periods 
5 Trivia 
6 Gallery of images 
7 References 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Menkaure 53 languages Afrikaans     Brezhoneg Catal etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh of the 
4 th dynasty Not to be confused with Menkare. Menkaure Menkaura Mykerinos Menkheres Greywacke statue of Menkaure Egyptian Museum Cairo Pharaoh Reign 18 to 22 years1 starting c. 2530 BC Predecessor Khafre most likely or Bikheris Successor Shepseskaf Royal titulary Horus name HorKakhet rk
3 t Bull of the divine company Nebty name KaNebty Nbt.jk3 Bull of the two Ladies Golden Horus Netjerbiknebu Nrbjknb.w The divine golden falcon Abydos King List Menkaure mnk.wr His Kas will stay like Ra Saqqara Tablet ...kaure ...k.wr Nomen Menkaura mnkwr His kasouls will stay like Ra1 Alternative spellings mnkwr Consort Khamerernebty II Rekhetre  Children Khuenre Shepseskaf Khentkaus I  Sekhemre Father Khafre Mother Khamerernebty I Born 2532 BC Died c. 2500 BC Burial Pyramid of Menkaure Dynasty Fourth Dynasty Menkaure or Menkaura Egyptian transliteration mnkwr was a pharaoh of the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt during the Old Kingdom. He is well known under his Hellenized names Mykerinos Ancient Greek  romanized Mukernos by Herodotus in turn Latinized as Mycerinus and Menkheres  Menkhrs by Manetho. According to Manetho he was the throne successor of king Bikheris but according to archaeological evidence he was almost certainly the successor of Khafre. Africanus from Syncellus reports as rulers of the fourth dynasty Sris Suphis I Suphis II Menchers Menkaure Ratoiss Bicheris Seberchers and Thamphthis in this order.2 Menkaure became famous for his tomb the Pyramid of Menkaure at Giza and his statue triads which showed him alongside the goddess Hathor and various regional deities. Familyedit See also Fourth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Menkaure was the son of Khafre and the grandson of Khufu. A flint knife found in the mortuary temple of Menkaure mentioned a kings mother Khamerernebty I suggesting that Khafre and this queen were the parents of Menkaure. Menkaure is thought to have had at least two wives. Queen Khamerernebty II is the daughter of Khamerernebty I and the mother of a kings son Khuenre. The location of Khuenres tomb suggests that he was a son of Menkaure making his mother the wife of this king.34 Queen Rekhetre is known to have been a daughter of Khafre and as such the most likely identity of her husband is Menkaure.3 Not many children are attested for Menkaure Khuenre was the son of queen Khamerernebty II. Menkaure was not succeeded by Prince Khuenre his eldest son who predeceased Menkaure but rather by Shepseskaf a younger son of this king.5 Shepseskaf was the successor to Menkaure and likely his son. Sekhemre is known from a statue and possibly a son of Menkaure. A daughter who died in early adulthood is mentioned by Herodotus. She was placed at a decorated hall of the palatial area at Sais in a hollow gold layered wooden zoomorphic burial feature in the shape of a kneeling cow covered externally with a layer of red decoration except the neck area and the horns that were covered with adequate layers of gold.6 Khentkaus I  possible Menkaures daughter7 The royal court included several of Menkaures half brothers. His brothers Nebemakhet Duaenre Nikaure and Iunmin served as viziers during the reign of their brother. His brother Sekhemkare may have been younger than he was and became vizier after the death of Menkaure.8 Reignedit Menkaura flanked by the goddess Hathor left and the personification of the nome of Sesheshet right. Graywacke statue in Cairo Museum. The length of Menkaures reign is uncertain. The ancient historian Manetho credits him with rulership of 63 years but this is surely an exaggeration. The Turin King List is damaged at the spot where it should present the full sum of years but the remains allow a reconstruction of ....  8 years of rulership. Egyptologists think that 
18 year rulership was meant to be written which is generally accepted. A contemporary workmens graffito reports about the year after the 
11 th cattle count. If the cattle count was held every second year as was tradition at least up to king Sneferu Menkaure might have ruled for 22 years.9 In 2013 a fragment of the sphinx of Menkaure was discovered at Tel Hazor at the entrance to the city palace.10 Pyramid complexedit Main article Pyramid of Menkaure Menkaures pyramid at Giza was called NetjererMenkaure meaning Menkaure is Divine. This pyramid is the smallest of the three main pyramids at Giza. This pyramid measures 1
03.4  m 339 ft at the base and 
65.5  m 215 ft in height.11 There are three subsidiary pyramids associated with Menkaures pyramid. These other pyramids are sometimes labeled GIIIa East subsidiary pyramid GIIIb Middle subsidiary pyramid and GIIIc West subsidiary pyramid. In the chapel associated with GIIIa a statue of a queen was found. It is possible that these pyramids were meant for the queens of Khafre. It may be that Khamerernebti II was buried in one of the pyramids.48 Valley templeedit The Valley temple was a mainly brick built structure that was enlarged in the fifth or sixth Dynasty. From this temple come the famous statues of Menkaure with his queen and Menkaure with several deities. A partial list includes8 Nome triad HathorMistressoftheSycomore seated and King and Harenome goddess standing greywacke in Boston Mus. 
09.2 00. Nome triad King HathorMistressoftheSycomore and Theban nomegod standing greywacke. Now in Cairo Mus. Ent. 40678. Nome triad King HathorMistressoftheSycomore and Jackalnome goddess standing greywacke. Now in Cairo Mus. Ent. 40679. Nome triad King HathorMistressoftheSycomore and Batfetish nome goddess standing greywacke. Now in Cairo Mus. Ent. 46499. Nome triad King Hathor and nomegod standing greywacke. Middle part in Boston Mus. 
11.3 147 head of King in Brussels Mus. Roy. E. 3074. Doublestatue King and wife Khamerernebti II standing uninscribed greywacke. Now in Boston Mus. 
11.1 738. King seated lifesize fragmentary alabaster. Now in Cairo Mus. Ent. 40703. King seated lower part inscribed seat alabaster. Now in Boston Mus. 
09.2 02 Mortuary Templeedit At his mortuary temple more statues and statue fragments were found. An interesting find is a fragment of a wand from Queen Khamerernebty I. The piece is now in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts. Khamerernebti is given the title Kings Mother on the fragment.8 Sarcophagusedit Burial chamber of Menkaure today and as discovered with now lost sarcophagus In 1837 English army officer Richard William Howard Vyse and engineer John Shae Perring began excavations within the pyramid of Menkaure. In the main burial chamber of the pyramid they found a large stone sarcophagus 8 feet 0 inches 244 cm long 3 feet 0 inches 91 cm in width and 2 feet 11 inches 89 cm in height made of basalt. The sarcophagus was not inscribed with hieroglyphs although it was decorated in the style of palace facade. Adjacent to the burial chamber were found wooden fragments of a coffin bearing the name of Menkaure and a partial skeleton wrapped in a coarse cloth. The sarcophagus was removed from the pyramid and was sent by ship to the British Museum in London but the merchant ship Beatrice carrying it was lost after leaving port at Malta on October 13 1838. The other materials were sent by a separate ship and those materials now reside at the museum with the remains of the wooden coffin case on display. It is now thought that the coffin was a replacement made during the much later Saite period nearly two millennia after the kings original interment. Radio carbon dating of the bone fragments that were found place them at an even later date from the Coptic period in the first centuries AD.12 Records from later periodsedit According to Herodotus 430 BC Menkaure was the son of Khufu Greek Cheops and that he alleviated the suffering his fathers reign had caused the inhabitants of ancient Egypt. Herodotus adds that he suffered much misfortune his only daughter whose corpse was interred in a wooden bull which Herodotus claims survived to his lifetime died before him. Subsequently the oracle at Buto predicted he would only rule six more years. The king deemed this unjust and sent back to the oracle a message of reproach blaming the god why must he die so soon who was pious whereas his father and his uncle had lived long who shut up the temples and regarded not the gods and destroyed men But a second utterance from the place of divination declared to him that his good deeds were the very cause of shortening his life for he had done what was contrary to fate Egypt should have been afflicted for an hundred and fifty years whereof the two kings before him had been aware but not Mycerinus. Hearing this he knew that his doom was fixed. Therefore he caused many lamps to be made and would light these at nightfall and drink and make merry by day or night he never ceased from revelling roaming to the marsh country and the groves and wherever he heard of the likeliest places of pleasure. Thus he planned that by turning night into day he might make his six years into twelve and so prove the oracle false.13 Triviaedit Menkaure was the subject of a poem by the nineteenth century English poet Matthew Arnold entitled Mycerinus. Menkaure using the Greek version of his name Mencheres is a major character in the Night Huntress series of books by Jeaniene Frost depicted as an extremely old and powerful vampire living in modern times. He is a protagonist of one book in the series. Gallery of imagesedit Colossal alabaster statue of Menkaura at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts Greywacke statue of Menkaura and Queen Khamerernebty II at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts. Menkaures Pyramid in Giza. Fragmentary statue triad of Menkaura flanked by the goddess Hathor left and a male nome god right Boston Museum of Fine Arts. Fragmentary alabaster statue head of believed to depict either Menkaure14 or Shepseskaf15 at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts. Drawing of the anthropoid coffin fragment inscribed with the name of the king Menkaura made by excavator Richard Vyse and published in 1840. Menkaura alongside Hathor and the nome goddess Anput Basalt cylinder seal of pharaoh Menkaure from Egypt. Neues Museum Berlin Greywacke Statue of Menkaure flanked by Hathor and Anput Cairo Museum 2023 Referencesedit  a b Thomas Schneider 2002. Lexikon der Pharaonen. Dsseldorf Albatros. ISBN 3491960533. pp. 163164.  LacusCurtius  Manetho History of Egypt And other Fragments.  a b Grajetzki Ancient Egyptian Queens A Hieroglyphic Dictionary Golden House Publications London 2005 p1314 ISBN 9780954721893  a b Tyldesley Joyce. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2006. ISBN 0500051453  Clayton pp.5758  Herodotus Historia B129132  Hassan Selim Excavations at Gza IV. 19321933. Cairo Government Press Bulq 1930. pp 1862  a b c d Porter Bertha and Moss Rosalind Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Statues Reliefs and Paintings Volume III Memphis Part I Abu Rawash to Abusir. 
2 nd edition revised and augmented by Dr Jaromir Malek 1974. Retrieved from gizapyramids.org  Miroslav Verner Archaeological Remarks on the 
4 th and 
5 th Dynasty Chronology. In Archiv Orientln Vol. 69. Prague 2001 page 363418.  Ancient Egyptian leader makes a surprise appearance at an archaeological dig in Israel July 9 2013 sciencedaily.com  Guinness Book of World Records 2012. 2011. p. 194. ISBN 9781904994688.  Boughton Paul Menkauras Anthropoid Coffin A Case of Mistaken Identity Ancient Egypt. AugustSeptember 2006. p.3032.  Herodotus Histories 
2.1 29133  Head of King Menkaura Mycerinus. Museum of Fine Arts Boston. Catalog number 
09.2 03.  Hayes William 1978. The Scepter of Egypt A Background for the Study of the Egyptian Antiquities in The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Vol. 1 From the Earliest Times to the End of the Middle Kingdom. New York Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 108. OCLC 7427345. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Menkaura. Menkaure and His Queen by Dr. Christopher L.C.E. Witcombe. View photos videos current status and other information on the pyramid of Menkaure at Talking Pyramids v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMenkaureoldid1213243747 Categories Menkaure 
26 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt 
3 rdmillennium BC births 
3 rdmillennium BC deaths Khafre Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 11 March 2024 at 2154 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width