Merikare - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
1.1 Biography 
1.2 Burial 
1.3 Attestations 
1.4 Hypothesis of an earlier reign 
2 References 
3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Merikare 26 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Portugus  Slovenina Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh of tenth dynasty of Ancient Egypt Merikare Merykare Merykara Scribe palette of the chancellor Orkaukhety bearing the cartouche of Merikare Pharaoh Reign c. 20752040 BCE Predecessor Wahkare Khety  Successor possibly an unnamed ephemeral successor1 then Mentuhotep II 
11 th Dynasty Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Merikare2 mr.jk
3 r Beloved by the ka of Ra Nomen possibly Khety3 ty Father Wahkare Khety  Died approximately 2040 BCE Burial Pyramid of Merikare Dynasty 
10 th Dynasty Merikare also Merykare and Merykara was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the 
10 th Dynasty who lived toward the end of the First Intermediate Period. Purportedly inspired by the teaching of his father he embarked on a semipeaceful coexistence policy with his southern rivals of the 
11 th Dynasty focusing on improving the prosperity of his realm centered on Herakleopolis instead of waging an open war with Thebes. His policy was not rewarded and shortly after his death his kingdom was conquered by the Theban Mentuhotep II marking the beginning of the Middle Kingdom. The existence of his pyramid has historically been ascertained although it has not yet been discovered. Reignedit Biographyedit According to many scholars he ruled at the end of the 
10 th Dynasty in his middleage24567 following a long reign by his father. The identity of his predecessor the socalled Khety III who was the purported author of the Teaching for King Merikare is still a question of debate among Egyptologists. Some scholars tend to identify Merikares predecessor with Wahkare Khety.678 These sebayt teachings in ancient Egyptian  possibly composed during the reign of Merikare and fictitiously attributed to his father  are a collection of precepts for good governance. The text also mentions the eastern borders recently secured but still in need of the kings attention.9 In the text Merikares unnamed father mentions having sacked Thinis but he advises Merikare to deal more leniently with the troublesome Upper Egyptian realms.8 Once crowned around 2075 BCE10 Merikare wisely resigned himself to the existence of two separate kingdoms the Herakleopolite and the Theban ones and tried to maintain the policy of peaceful coexistence achieved by his father.8 It seems that the period of peace brought a certain amount of prosperity to Merikares realm.7 Some time later the pharaoh was forced to sail up the Nile with his court on a great fleet. Once he reached Asyut the king installed the loyalist nomarch Khety II who succeeded his deceased father Tefibi8 he also made restorations at the local temple of Wepwawet. After that Merikare advanced farther upstream to the town of Shashotep likely to quell a revolt and at the same time as a show of force to the turbulent southern border areas.11 Merikare died in c. 2040 BCE a few months before the fall of Herakleopolis. Thus the final defeat by the Thebans led by Mentuhotep II of the 
11 th Dynasty was likely inflicted upon an ephemeral unnamed successor.1 Burialedit Main article Pyramid of Merikare Stele of Anpuemhat attesting the funerary cult of Merikare in Saqqara during the 
12 th Dynasty Many sources suggest that Merikare was buried in a yetundiscovered pyramid in Saqqara called Flourishing are the Abodes of Merikare that had to be near to the pyramid of Teti of the 
6 th Dynasty.1 The titles of the officials involved in its construction are documented as his funerary cult endured into the 
12 th Dynasty in fact Merikares cartouche appears on the stelae of at least four priests who were responsible for the funerary cult of Teti and Merikare during the Middle Kingdom.12 They include Gemniemhat who also held other important positions. Attestationsedit Despite the fact that his name cannot be recognized in the Turin King List Merikare is the most attested among the Herakleopolite rulers. His name appears on the Teaching for King Merikare a wooden scribe palette belonging to the chancellor Orkaukhety found in a tomb near Asyut along with a brazier dedicated to Meryibre Khety and now at the Louvre4 the inscriptions from the tomb of the nomarch Khety II in Asyut4 nine steles attesting the existence of his pyramid and his funerary cult in Saqqara.3 Hypothesis of an earlier reignedit In 2003 the Egyptologist Arkadi F. Demidchik suggested that Merikares placement within the dynasty should be reconsidered. According to him if Merikare reigned during the campaign led by Mentuhotep II then the formers pyramid and its cult couldnt have survived the Theban conquest again Merikare likely would not be able to obtain granite from the South as mentioned in the Teachings. Demidchik also argued that the battles for Thinis mentioned by Tefibi and Merikare were the same being fought in the opposite front by the Theban ruler Wahankh Intef II thus suggesting that Merikares reign should be placed some decades earlier than usually thought when the 
10 th Dynastys power was at its peak.3 Referencesedit  a b c William C. Hayes in The Cambridge Ancient History vol 1 part 2 1971 2008 Cambridge University Press ISBN 0521077915 pp. 46778.  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 
2 nd edition Mainz 1999 p. 74.  a b c Arkadi F. Demidchik 2003 The reign of Merikare Khety Gttinger Miszellen 192 pp. 2536.  a b c Flinders Petrie A History of Egypt from the Earliest Times to the XVIth Dynasty 1897 pp. 11516.  William C. Hayes op. cit. p. 996.  a b Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Oxford Blackwell Books 1992 pp. 14145.  a b c Michael Rice Who is who in Ancient Egypt 1999 2004 Routledge London ISBN 0203443284 p. 113.  a b c d William C. Hayes op. cit. p. 46667.  William C. Hayes op. cit. p. 237.  Miriam Lichtheim Ancient Egyptian Literature vol. 2. pp. 97109. University of California Press 1980 ISBN 0520028996 p. 97.  Alan Gardiner Egypt of the Pharaohs. An introduction Oxford University Press 1961 p. 113.  James Edward Quibell Excavations at Saqqara 19051906 Le Caire Impr. de lInstitut franais darchologie orientale 1907 p. 20 ff pl. XIII XV. Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Merikare. Wolfgang Kosack Berliner Hefte zur gyptischen Literatur 1  12 Teil I. 1  6 Teil II. 7  12 2 Bnde. Paralleltexte in Hieroglyphen mit Einfhrungen und bersetzung. Heft 8 Die Lehre fr Knig Merikar. Verlag Christoph Brunner Basel 2015. ISBN 9783906206110. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMerikareoldid1221505703 Categories 
21 stcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Tenth Dynasty of Egypt 
21 stcentury BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 April 2024 at 1006 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width