Mentuhotep III - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
1.1 Name 
1.2 Expedition to Punt 
1.3 Monuments 
2 Family 
3 References 
4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Mentuhotep III 36 languages    Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh of Eleventh Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Mentuhotep III Osiride statue of the 
11 th Dynasty pharaoh Mentuhotep III on display at the Museum of Fine Arts Boston. Pharaoh Reign 20091997 BC1 Predecessor Mentuhotep II Successor Mentuhotep IV Royal titulary Horus name Sankhtawyef2 Hr sankht
3 wyf He who invigorates his two lands Nebty name Sankhtawyef2 sankht
3 wyf He who invigorates his two lands Prenomen Praenomen Sankhkare sankhkare Giving Life to the Soul of Ra3 Nomen Mentuhotep Mntwhtp Montu is content4 Consorts Imi  Mother Tem Died 1997 BC Burial TT281 uncertain Dynasty 
11 th dynasty Sankhkare Mentuhotep III also Montuhotep III5 of the Eleventh Dynasty was Pharaoh of Egypt during the Middle Kingdom. He was assigned a reign of 12 years in the Turin Canon. Reignedit Mentuhotep III succeeded his father Mentuhotep II6 to the throne. It is believed that following his fathers long 51 years of reign Mentuhotep III was relatively old when he acceded to the throne and reigned for 12 years. Despite its short duration Mentuhoteps reign is known for his expedition to Punt and architectural innovations. Nameedit Mentuhotep IIIs titulary is very similar to the third and final one of his father. Mentuhotep III is known to have had at least two praenomen the well known Sankhkare and also snfrk
3 ra He who embellishes the Soul of Re Expedition to Puntedit Mentuhotep III 
11 th dynasty Mentuhotep III sent an expedition to the Land of Punt during the 
8 th year of his reign something that had not been done since the Old Kingdom. An inscription in the Wadi Hammamat describes the expedition as being 3000 men strong and under the command of the steward Henenu. As they left Coptos in direction of the Red Sea port of Mersa Gawasis they dug 12 wells for future expeditions and cleared the region of rebels. They returned from Punt with incense gum and perfumes and quarried the Wadi Hammamat for stones. Monumentsedit Mentuhotep III on a relief carving from the temple of Monthu in Medamud Sankhkare Mentuhotep was responsible for several building projects in the 12 years of his reign. He extended the temple of Monthu in Medamud a monumental decorated doorway bearing his likeness and royal titles now resides in the Louvre. Mentuhotep IIIs temple at Thoth Hill in Western Thebes Sankhkare Mentuhotep also had a mudbrick temple erected at Thoth Hill in Western Thebes. The temple was built on the site of an older archaic temple. It was dedicated to the god MontuRa. This temple may have been destroyed by an earthquake towards the end of the 
11 th Dynasty.7 It was long presumed that his own tomb and mortuary temple was begun in Deir elBahari but never completed.7 This temple was located in a separate valley a short distance from his fathers mortuary temple. A causeway would have led up to a temple platform. A burial chamber lined with limestone slabs was completed and sealed but apparently it never contained a burial. The association of the monument with Sankhkare Mentuhotep was circumstantial based on colocation with the tomb TT280 of the High Steward Meketre one of the chief officials of the reign. However Dorothea Arnold recently provided compelling evidence that the monument is the likely unfinished Theban tomb of Amenemhat I the funerary monument of Sankhkare Mentuhotep remains unknown.8 However the attribution of the monument to Amenemhat I is unproven as well. The owner of the unnamed royal burial place must remain open.9 Familyedit See also Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt family tree Mentuhotep III was the son and successor of Mentuhotep II. One of the wives of Mentuhotep II Tem was given the title Mother of the Dual King and based on that title she is almost certainly the mother of Mentuhotep III. Mentuhotep IIIs family is mostly a mystery. It is currently believed that he fathered his successor Mentuhotep IV with one of his harem wives Imi. This is however still debated10 Mentuhotep IVs mother is known to have been Queen Imi. If he was the son of Mentuhotep III Imi must have been the wife of Mentuhotep III.11 Referencesedit  Stewart John 2006. African States and Rulers Third ed.. London McFarland. p. 81. ISBN 0786425628.  a b Karl Richard Lepsius Denkmaller Abtheilung II Band IV Available online see p. 152 Archived 20151027 at the Wayback Machine  King List chronological Archived 20041224 at the Wayback Machine  Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p72. 2006. ISBN 0500286280  Firth Lesley editorinchief et al. 1985. Mentohotep III. Who Were They The Simon  Schuster Color Illustrated Question  Answer Book. Little Simon Book Simon  Schuster Inc. New York City. p. 12. ISBN 0671604767. cite encyclopedia author has generic name help  Mentuhotep III. ib205.tripod.com. 9 December 2012. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 28 October 2016.  a b Wilkinson Richard H. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt Thames and Hudson 20
00 pp. 37 172 173 181 ISBN 0500051003  Arnold Dorothea Amenemhat I and the Early Twelfth Dynasty at Thebes Metropolitan Museum Journal v. 26 1991.  Harco WillemsEgypts Middle Kingdom a view from within in Karen Radner Nadine Moeller and D. T. Potts eds The Oxford History of the Ancient Near East Volume II Oxford ISBN 9780190687571 684687  Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2004. ISBN 0500051283  Tyldesley Joyce. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2006 pp. 6668. ISBN 0500051453 Further readingedit Grajetzki W. 2006. The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History Archaeology and Society. London Duckworth. pp. 2325. ISBN 0715634356. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mentuhotep III. Preceded by Mentuhotep II Pharaoh of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty Succeeded by Mentuhotep IV v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMentuhotepIIIoldid1175061523 Categories 
21 stcentury BC Pharaohs 
20 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt 
20 thcentury BC deaths Land of Punt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 12 September 2023 at 1508 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width