Intef I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Sources 
2 Reign 
3 Tomb 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Intef I 39 languages Afrikaans   Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia 
11 th dynasty Theban Pharaoh Intef I Antef Inyotef Anjotef Anyotef Enyotef Serekh of Intef I reading Horus Sehertawy inscribed posthumously for him by Mentuhotep II in the Temple of Montu at Tod now in the Egyptian Museum. Pharaoh Reign 4 to 16 years 21342118 BC1 c. 2120 BC or c. 2070 BC2 Predecessor Mentuhotep I Successor Intef II Royal titulary Horus name Sehertawy Shrt.wy Maker of peace in the two lands3 Nomen SaRe Intef Srinit.f Son of Ra Intef litt. His father brought him3 Father uncertain most probably Mentuhotep I4 Mother Neferu I Burial Saff tomb at ElTarif known as Saff elDawba4 Dynasty 
11 th Dynasty Sehertawy Intef I was a local nomarch at Thebes during the early First Intermediate Period and the first member of the 
11 th Dynasty to lay claim to a Horus name. Intef reigned from 4 to 16 years c. 2120 BC or c. 2070 BC2 during which time he probably waged war with his northern neighbor the Coptite nomarch Tjauti. Intef was buried in a saff tomb at ElTarif known today as Saff elDawaba.4 Sourcesedit See also Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt family tree Intef is known for certain from only one nearcontemporary monument two inscribed blocks from the temple of Montu at Tod which were erected during Mentuhotep IIs reign. The blocks represent Mentuhotep II facing the names of three of his ancestors which are identified by their proper name nomen and Horus name. These are Intef I Sehertawy Intef II Wahankh and Intef III Nakhtnebtepnefer although in this case only the Horus names Sehertawy and Wahankh are preserved.5 This relief establishes the succession of kings of the 
11 th Dynasty. There are no contemporary monuments which can be positively attributed to Intef I.6 A possible exception is a short inscription discovered in the western desert the assault troops of the son of Re Intef. In the original publication of the inscription this king Intef is identified with Intef I although Intef II has also been proposed as a possibility.4 The inscription is located in the vicinity of an inscription commissioned by the contemporary Coptite nomarch named Tjauti see below.7 Intef I is most likely attested on later king lists but this remains uncertain as his name is either lost or damaged. In the Karnak king list a king Intef appears next to Men... most likely Mentuhotep I as part of the latters Horus name the ancestor is still visible. The few remains of Intef Is Horus name fit to Sehertawy. The name and duration of the reign of Intef I are not preserved in the Turin Canon although from an analysis of the available space it is possible that Intef I was mentioned in what is now a lacuna affecting entry 
5.1 3. The durations of the reigns of the other 
11 th Dynasty kings are preserved in the Turin Canon and add up to 127 years. Furthermore the summary of reigns of this Dynasty is also preserved in the Turin Canon and is given as 143 years. On the strength of these much later fragments the two lost reigns of Mentuhotep I and Intef I have been calculated to add up to 16 years further implying that Intefs reign lasted for less than 16 years. Thus the duration of Intefs reign is often reported to be between 4 and 16 years.4 Intef I was succeeded by his brother Intef II who pursued the war with the northern neighbors of the Theban kingdom. Reignedit Court of the saff tomb of Intef I at Saff elDawaba Sehertawy Intef I was the first member of his Dynasty to assume a pharaonic title with the Horus name of Sehertawy variously rendered as Maker of peace in the two lands He who has brought calm to the two Lands and Pacifier of the two lands.348 Intefs parents may possibly have been Mentuhotep I and Neferu I.4 By taking a Horus name with both crowns Intef declared himself ruler of all Egypt.4 However his authority was contested by the other nomarchs of Egypt chief among them being the 
10 th Dynasty rulers at Herakleopolis Magna who also laid claim to the title of pharaoh and their powerful ally Ankhtifi nomarch of Hierakonpolis and a faithful follower of the Herakleopolitan Dynasty.9 On his accession to the Theban throne Intef probably ruled only the Theban fourth nome but it is conjectured that after defeating Ankhtifi or one of his successors Intef acquired the three nomes to the south of Thebes down to Elephantine and to the north all territories south of the border with the Coptite nome. Alternatively this may have been achieved by Intefs predecessor Mentuhotep I.4 Both hypotheses remain conjectural given the paucity of historical records on this period. Intef I got rapidly embroiled in a war with his northern neighbors. A graffito discovered by the Theban Desert Road Survey in the Gebel Tjauti northwest of Thebes reports the presence there of the assault troops of the son of Ra Intef.410 It has been posited that this inscription refers to Intef I whose soldiers were fighting the Coptite nomarch Tjauti. In support of this hypothesis is a nearby worn out stele erected by Tjauti reporting the construction of a road to allow his people to cross the desert which the ruler of another nome had sealed off when he came in order to fight with my nome....4 Although not named explicitly Darell Baker and other Egyptologists contend that this ruler must either be Intef I or his successor Intef II.4 In any case the subsequent defeat of Tjauti ultimately put Koptos Dendera and the three nomes of Hierakonpolis under Theban control expanding the Theban kingdom 250 km northward with a border near Abydos.4 Tombedit Intefs funerary complex was dug in a hill side at ElTarif on the opposite bank of the Nile at Thebes and is known today as Saff elDawaba. The site of ElTarif comprises three monumental royal tombs known as saff tombs. Inscriptions found in one tomb indicate that it belonged to Wahankh Intef II Intef Is successor. At the opposite the Saff elDawaba is devoid of inscriptions but yielded the earliest type of pottery found at ElTarif and for this reason is most often assigned to Intef I.211 The Saff elDawaba comprises a large 300 by 75 metres 984 ft  246 ft sunken courtyard backed by a colonnade leading to a mortuary chapel carved into the hill and flanked by two chambers. The burial chamber of Intef I was dug beneath the mortuary chapel.4 Court of the tomb of Intef I. Portico of the tomb columns half buried in the sand. Pillared gallery in front of the burial chamber. Burial chamber. Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Intef I.  Redford Donald B. ed. 2001. Egyptian King List. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt Volume 2. Oxford University Press. pp. 626628. ISBN 9780195102345.  a b c Thomas Schneider Ancient Egyptian Chronology  Edited by Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss And David a. Warburton available online see p. 491  a b c Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p72. 2006. ISBN 0500286280  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 pp. 143144  Labib Habachi King Nebhepetre Menthuhotep his monuments place in history deification and unusual representations in the form of gods in Mitteilungen des deutschen Archaeologischen Instituts Kairo 19 1963 fig. 22  Schneider op. cit. p. 161  Darnell John Coleman Darnell Deborah 2002. Theban Desert Road Survey in the Egyptian Western Desert. Vol. 1. Chicago Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. pp. 3846. ISBN 9781885923172.  Nicholas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Oxford Blackwell Books 1992 p. 143  Grimal p.142  Theban Desert Road Survey. yale.edu. Archived from the original on 20131201.  Rasha Soliman Old and Middle Kingdom Theban Tombs London 2009 ISBN 9781906137090 3135 Preceded by Mentuhotep I Pharaoh of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty Succeeded by Intef II v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleIntefIoldid1168349009 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs 
21 stcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Nomarchs Mentuhotep I Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2023 at 0741 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width