Amenemhat II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
2.1 Accession 
2.2 Account of reign 
2.3 Court officials 
2.4 Succession 
3 Tomb 
4 References 
5 Bibliography 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Amenemhat II 37 languages Afrikaans     Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh of Ancient Egypt For other individuals with that name see Amenemhat disambiguation. Amenemhat II Ammenemes Sitting statue attributed to Amenemhat II later usurped by 
19 th Dynasty pharaohs Berlin Pergamon Museum Pharaoh Reign about 35 years 191418796 BCE1 18781843 BCE2 1877618432 BCE3 Predecessor Senusret I Successor Senusret II Royal titulary Horus name Hekenemmaat knmm3.t He who delights in Maat Nebty name Hekenemmaat knmm3.t He who delights in Maat Golden Horus Maatkheru Bjknbwm3.trw The golden Horus true of voice Variant form Maatkheruemnebtawy Bjknbwm3.trwmnbt3.wj The golden Horus true of voice as the lord of the two lands Prenomen Praenomen Nubkaure Nbwk
3 wR Golden are the souls of Ra Nomen Amenemhat Jmn m 3.t Amun is in front Variant form Ameni Jmnj Ruler of  Amun Children See Family Father Senusret I Mother Neferu III Burial White Pyramid at Dahshur Dynasty 
12 th Dynasty Nubkaure Amenemhat II31 also known as Amenemhet II was the third pharaoh of the 
12 th Dynasty of ancient Egypt. Although he ruled for at least 35 years his reign is rather obscure as well as his family relationships. Familyedit See also Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Dagger of Princess Ita Amenemhat IIs daughter. Archaeological findings have provided the name of Amenemhats mother the kings mother Neferu III but not the name of his father. Nevertheless it is commonly assumed that he was a son of his predecessor Senusret I. An early attestation of Amenemhat may have come from the tomb of the namesake nomarch Amenemhat buried at Beni Hasan. This nomarch who lived under Senusret I escorted the Kings son Ameny in an expedition to Nubia and it is believed that this prince Ameny was no other than Amenemhat II in his youth.3 The identity of Amenemhats queen consort is unknown. Many royal women were buried within his pyramid complex but their relationships with the king are unclear a queen Keminub must be dated to the later 
13 th Dynasty and three kings daughters named Ita Itaweret and Khenmet may have been Amenemhats daughters although a definitive proof is still lacking.3 His successor Senusret II was likely his son although this is never explicitly stated anywhere.4 Other children were prince Amenemhatankh and the princesses Nofret II and Khenemetneferhedjet likely the same person of Khenemetneferhedjet I both of these women later became wives of their purported brother Senusret II.5 A woman queen and kings mother called Senet is known from three statues. Her royal husband and sons are not known. Amenemhat II might be her husband. Reignedit Accessionedit Great Sphinx of Tanis bearing the cartouches of Amenemhat II. Louvre A23 Amenemhat II was once believed to have shared a period of coregency with his predecessor Senusret I an hypothesis based on the doubledated stela of an official named Wepwawet Leiden V4 that bears the regnal year 44 of Senusret I and the regnal year 2 of Amenemhat II.6 The existence of such coregency is now considered unlikely and the meaning of the doubledate on the stela is interpreted as a time range when Wepwawet was in charge from Senusret Is year 44 to Amenemhat IIs year 
2.7 8 Account of reignedit A Guardian figure in a temple from the Met museum gallery 136 wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt and whose face appears to reflect the features of the reigning king most probably Amenemhat II or Senusret II. It functioned as a divine guardian for the imiut and it is wearing a divine shendyt which suggests that the statuette was not merely a representation of the living ruler.9 The most important record for Amenemhats early reign is on fragments of the socalled Annals of Amenemhat II unearthed at Memphis later reused during the 
19 th Dynasty. It provides records of donations to temples and sometimes of political events. Among the latter there is a mention of a military expedition into Asia the destruction of two cities  Iuai and Iasy  whose location is still unknown and the coming of tributebearers from Asia and Kush.10 Under Amenemhat II several mining expeditions are known at least 3 in the Sinai one in the Wadi Gasus year 28 and one in search for amethysts in the Wadi elHudi. He is known to have ordered building works at Heliopolis Herakleopolis Memphis in the Eastern Delta and rebuilt a ruined temple at Hermopolis. There are some mentions of the building of a First temple but it is still unclear what it should have been.11 A wellknown finding associated with Amenemhat II is the Great Sphinx of Tanis Louvre A23 later usurped by many other pharaohs. He is also named on the boxes of a treasure of silver objects found under the temple of Montu at Tod notably many of these objects are not of Egyptian workmanship but rather Aegean evidencing contacts between Egypt and foreign civilizations in the Middle Kingdom. Many private stelae bears Amenemhats cartouches  and sometimes even his regnal years  but are of little help in providing useful information about the events of his reign.12 Court officialsedit Some members of Amenemhats court are known. Senusret was the vizier at the beginning of his reign and one of his successors was Ameny later likely followed by Siese who had a remarkable career and also was a treasurer and a high steward before his vizierate. Beside Siese other known treasurers were Rehuerdjersen and Merykau. The overseer of the gateway Khentykhetywer was buried near the kings pyramid. Other known officials were the overseers of the chamber Snofru and Senitef and the royal scribe and irypat Samont.11 As great overseer of troops a certain Ameny dates most likely under the king. Successionedit Amenemhat II and his successor Senusret II shared a brief coregency the only unquestionable one of the whole Middle Kingdom. Unlike most of the doubledated monuments the stela of Hapu from Konosso explicitly states that these two kings ruled together for a while8 and that the regnal year 3 of Senusret II equates the regnal year 35 of Amenemhat II. Amenemhats year 35 on the stela of Hapu is also the highest date known for him.13 Tombedit Main article White Pyramid Plan of Amenemhat IIs pyramid complex at Dahshur Unlike his two predecessors who built their pyramids at Lisht Amenemhat II chose Dahshur for this purpose a location which had not been used as a royal cemetery since the time of Sneferu and his Red Pyramid 
4 th Dynasty. At the present time Amenemhats pyramid  originally called Amenusekhem but best known today as the White Pyramid  is poorly preserved and excavated. The mortuary temple adjacent the pyramid was called DjefaAmenemhat.14 Many people were buried within the pyramid complex whose tombs were rediscovered by Jacques de Morgan in 18945 the three aforementioned princesses Ita Itaweret and Khenmet were found untouched still containing their beautiful jewels and also the tombs of the lady Sathathormeryt the treasurer Amenhotep and the queen Keminub unlike the others the latter two were looted in antiquity and are dated to the subsequent 
13 th Dynasty.1015 Referencesedit  a b Amenemhat II on Digitalegypt  Hornung 2006 p. 491.  a b c d Grajetzki 2006 p. 45.  Grajetzki 2006 p. 48.  Dodson  Hilton 2004 pp. 9697.  Murnane 1977 pp. 56.  Delia 1979 pp. 16 2122.  a b Willems 2010 pp. 9293.  Guardian Figure. www.metmuseum.org. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 9 February 2022.  a b Grajetzki 2006 pp. 4546.  a b Grajetzki 2006 pp. 4748.  Grajetzki 2006 p. 47.  Murnane 1977 p. 7.  Grajetzki 2006 pp. 4647.  Untitled information on White Pyramid burials Bibliographyedit Delia Robert D. 1979. A new look at some old dates a reexamination of Twelfth Dynasty double dated inscriptions. Bulletin of the Egyptological Seminar of New York. 1 1528. Dodson Aidan Hilton Dyan 2004. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 0500051283. Grajetzki Wolfram 2006. The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History Archaeology and Society. London Duckworth. ISBN 0715634356. Hornung Erik Krauss Rolf Warburton David eds. 2006. Ancient Egyptian Chronology. Handbook of Oriental Studies. Leiden Boston Brill. ISBN 9789004113855. ISSN 01699423. Murnane William J. 1977. Ancient Egyptian coregencies Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization no. 40. Chicago The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. ISBN 0918986036. Willems Harco 2010. The First Intermediate Period and the Middle Kingdom. In Lloyd Alan B. ed.. A companion to Ancient Egypt volume 1. WileyBlackwell. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amenemhat II. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAmenemhatIIoldid1221314957 Categories 
19 thcentury BC deaths 
20 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
19 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 29 April 2024 at 0525 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width