Khendjer - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign 
2 Attestations 
3 Noncontemporary attestations 
4 Theories Toggle Theories subsection 
4.1 Chronological position 
5 References Toggle the table of contents Khendjer 29 languages   Bosanski Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Hrvatski Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh For the pharaoh of the Sixth Dynasty of Egypt see Userkare. Khendjer Upper part of a statue of Khendjer from his pyramid complex. Cairo Egyptian Museum JE 53368 Pharaoh Reign Five years starting in 1764 1756 or 1718 BC Predecessor Wegaf most likely1 or Khaankhre Sobekhotep Successor Imyremeshaw Royal titulary Horus name Turin King List User...re Khendjer Wsr...Rnr Strong is the ... of Ra boar Prenomen Praenomen Userkare Wsrk
3 R Strong is the Ka of Ra Nomen Khendjer nr Boar Consort Sonbhenas Burial Saqqara South Pyramid of Khendjer Dynasty Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Userkare Khendjer was a minor king of the early Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt during the Middle Kingdom.2 Khendjer possibly reigned for four to five years archaeological attestations show that he was on the throne for at least three or four years three months and five days. Khendjer had a small pyramid built for himself in Saqqara and it is therefore likely that his capital was in Memphis. Reignedit The highest attested date for Khendjers reign is Year 5 IV Akhet day 15 season of the Inundation. Kim Ryholt notes that two dated control notes on stone blocks from his unfinished pyramid complex give him a minimum reign of 3 or 4 years 3 months and 5 days.3 The aforementioned control notes are dated to Year 1 I Akhet day 10 and Year 5 IV Akhet day 15 of his reign.4 In these control notes the names of three officials involved in building the pyramid are also identified. They are the Interior Overseer of the Inner Palace Senebtyfy jmjr nwtj n kp snb.tjfj the Interior Overseer Ameny jmjr nwtj jmnjj and the Interior Overseer Craftsman Shebenu jmjr nwtj rp mww bnw.5 The latter is also attested by other sources.6 Attestationsedit Main article Pyramid of Khendjer At Saqqara South the Pyramid of Khendjer may have been completed as it was found with a pyramidion during excavations by G. Jequier.7 There was found a fragment of a canopic jar which offers a partial name for his queen Seneb ... which may be restored as Sonbhenas.8 There are also some notes and marks of people working at the pyramid.9 At Abydos a stela beloning to a Controller of the Phyle Amenyseneb record a building project by the king at the Temple of Osiris.101112 On this stela the name Khendjer also appear along with the prenomen Nimaatre. Some have speculated that Khendjer had a second prenomen.13 However it was also the prenomen of Amenemhat III. Amenyseneb is also associated by another stela with vizier Ankhu.14 See also a doublesided stela of Amenyseneb.15 Another stela once in Liverpool destroyed in World War II provides the name of the kings son Khedjer. He might be a son of the king.16 Other objects with his name according to the list provided by Ryholt include three cylinderseals from Athribis a tile found near elLisht scarab seals and an axe blade. Noncontemporary attestationsedit The Turin King List column 720 mentions Dual King Userkare Khendjer x years ....17 In this list Khendjer is between Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep 719 and Imyremeshaw 721. Theoriesedit The name Khendjer is poorly attested in Egyptian.18 Khendjer has been interpreted as a foreign name hnzr and equated with the Semitic personal name hnzr for boar according to the Danish Egyptologist Kim Ryholt.1 He notes that this identification is confirmed by the fact that the name hnzr is written as hzr in a variant spelling of this kings name on a seal from this kings reign.19 Ryholt states that the word boar is attested as huzru in Akkadian hinzr in Arabic hazr in Aramaic hazr in Hebrew the name is attested as hzr in I Chron. 2415 Neh. 1020 huziri in the Nuzi texts hnzr in Ugarit and perhaps hiziri in Amorite.1 Khendjer could be according to this theory the earliest known Semitic king of a native Egyptian dynasty. Khendjers prenomen or throne name Userkare translates as The Soul of Re is Powerful.20 Chronological positionedit Khendjer making offerings on the pyramidion from his pyramid. The pyramidion from Khendjers pyramid. The exact chronological position of Khendjer in the Thirteenth Dynasty is not known for certain owing to uncertainties affecting earlier kings of the dynasty. Egyptologist Darrell Baker makes him the twentyfirst king of the dynasty Ryholt sees him as the twentysecond king and Jrgen von Beckerath places him as the seventeenth pharaoh of the dynasty. Furthermore the identity of his predecessor is still debated Baker and Ryholt believe it was Wegaf but that pharaoh is confused with Khaankhre Sobekhotep so that it is not known which one of the two founded the Thirteenth Dynasty and which one was Khendjers predecessor.12 Several absolute dates have been proposed for his reign depending on the scholar 17641759 BC as proposed by Ryholt and Baker1 17561751 BC as reported by Redford21 and 17181712 BC as per Schneider.22 Referencesedit Media related to Khendjer at Wikimedia Commons  a b c d e K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997  a b Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 181  Ryholt p.193  Ryholt pp.193195  Felix Arnold The Control Notes and Team Marks The South Cemeteries of Lisht Volume II New York 1990 ISBN 0870995510 pp.176183  Marks and notes in the Pyramid Complex of Khendjer  Persons and Names of the Middle Kingdom.  G. Jequier Deux pyramides du Moyen Empire Cairo 1933 S. 335  Ryholt op. cit. p.221 The object is Cairo JE 54498  Marks and notes in the Pyramid Complex of Khendjer  Persons and Names of the Middle Kingdom.  Paris Louvre Museum C11  Stle de Imnysneb 1753 retrieved 20231227  Stele C11.  Jrgen von Beckerath Untersuchungen zur politischen Geschichte der zweiten Zwischenzeit in gypten Glckstadt 1964 238  Paris Louvre Museum C12  DoubleSided Stela of the Priest Amenyseneb  Middle Kingdom. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 20231227.  W. Grajetzki Two Treasurers of the Late Middle Kingdom Oxford 2001 p. 28 pl. 2  Turin king list Column 7.  The name Khedjer for private individuals appears on only two monuments Stela Marischal Museum University of Aberdeen ABDUA 21642 and on stela Liverpool M13635 see Iain Ralston The Stela of Ibi son of Iiqi in the Marischal Museum University of Aberdeen In Discovering Egypt from the Neva The Egyptologcial Legacy of Oleg D Berlev edited by S. Quirke Berlin 2003 pp.107110 pl. 6 and W. Grajetzki Two Treasurers of the Late Middle Kingdom Oxford 2001 p. 28 pl. 2. Both monuments date to around the time of king Khendjer and the individuals there might have called themselves after the king.  Ryholt p.220 and footnote 763  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson Ltd 2006 paperback p.91  Redford Donald B. ed. 2001. Egyptian King List. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt Volume 2. Oxford University Press. pp. 626628. ISBN 9780195102345.  Thomas Schneider following Detlef Franke Lexikon der Pharaonen Preceded by Wegaf Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Imyremeshaw v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKhendjeroldid1213245450 Categories 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 March 2024 at 2203 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width