Sobekhotep III - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family Toggle Family subsection 
1.1 Parents and siblings 
1.2 Wife and children 
2 Reign 
3 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
3.1 Lower Egypt 
3.2 Upper Egypt 
3.3 Nubia 
3.4 Noncontemporary attestation 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sobekhotep III 26 languages   Catal Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian king Sobekhotep III Sobekhotep III worshipping Satet left and Anuket right. The central hole was made when the relief was used as a grinding stone long after the original carving. Now on display at the Brooklyn Museum. Pharaoh Reign 3 to 4 years c. 1740 BC or 1700 BC Predecessor Seth Meribre Successor Neferhotep I Royal titulary Horus name Khutawy wjt
3 wj He who protects the Two Lands Nebty name Khaiemsekhemef jmsmf He appears in its power Golden Horus Hetephermaat tprm
3 t Maat is Satisfied Prenomen Praenomen Sekhemre Sewadjtawy SmR sw
3 t
3 wj A powerful one who allows the Two Lands to thrive Nomen Sobekhotep Sbk tp Sobek is satisfied Consort Senebhenas Neni Children Iuhetibu Fendy  Dedetanqet  Father Mentuhotep Mother Iuhetibu Dynasty 
13 th Dynasty Sobekhotep III throne name Sekhemresewadjtawy was an Egyptian king of the mid Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt who reigned three to four years. Familyedit Parents and siblingsedit Scarab of Sobekhotep III giving the name of his father gods father Mentuhotep.1 The family of the king is known from several sources. A monument from Sehel Island shows Sobekhotep with his father Mentuhotep his mother was kings mother Iuhetibu Yauheyebu his brothers Seneb and Khakau and a halfsister called Reniseneb. Reniseneb was a daughter of Iuhetibu and her second husband Dedusobek.2 Wife and childrenedit Sobekhotep III had two wives Senebhenas and Neni. A stela from Koptos Qift3 now in the Louvre C 8 mentions the daughters of Neni Iuhetibu Fendy and Dedetanqet. Iuhetibu Fendy wrote her name in a cartouche.2 This is the second time in Egyptian history that a kings daughter received this honor. Senebhenas is shown with Sobekhotep on an altar in Sehel Island and a stela in Wadi elHol.3 The stela depicts Sobekhotep III before the god Monthu. He receives an ankh and a wasscepter from the god. Sobekhotep is followed by his father Montuhotep his mother Iuhetibu and his wife Senebhenas.2 Reignedit Sobekhotep III is known from many objects45 despite the fact that the Turin King List gives him a reign of only four years6 and two to four months in length. He added inscriptions to the temple of Menthu at Madamud7 and built a chapel at El Kab.8 On Sehel9 an altar with his name was found. A number of scarab seals have been found that were from an officier of the rulers table Sobekhotep begotten of the officier of the rulers table Mentuhotep.10 It is possible that these seals belonged to Sobekhotep III before he became king. Sobekhotep III was the first of a group of Thirteenth Dynasty kings about whom there exists historical records. This group of Thirteenth Dynasty kings are all known from many objects. These kings produced many seals and there are many private monuments that can be dated to these reigns. This would seem to indicate that Egypt was relatively stable during this period. Attestationsedit The main attestations of Sobekhotep III are found in Upper Egypt. Only small finds tradables are attested in Lower Egypt and Nubia. For a full list see Ryholt 199734344 File 1326 Lower Egyptedit At Saqqara a scarabseal.11 The seal is said to be from Saqqara. At Lisht sealimpressions 2 and scarabseals 2. Upper Egyptedit At Abydos a scarabseal. At Koptos a stela of two kings daughters12 and a scarabseal. At Wadi elHol a rockinscription family list. At Medamud architectural elements usurped. One base of a colossal statue was later reused by Sobekemsaf II. Nubiaedit At the fortress of Mirgissa Nubia a scarabimpression with the royal name of Sobekhotep III and the Kings Mother Iuhetibu .13 Also a sealimpression with the name Sekhemre Sewadjtawy a seal with two impressions.14 Noncontemporary attestationedit The Turin King List 724 contains the entry The Dual King Sekhemkare Wadjtawy Sobekhotep 4 years 2 months x days nswbit smkr wt.wy sbktp rnpt 4 bd 2 hrw x.15 See alsoedit List of pharaohs Referencesedit  Flinders Petrie A history of Egypt from the earliest times to the 
16 th dynasty 1897 available copyright free here  a b c M. F. Laming Macadam A Royal Family of the Thirteenth Dynasty The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology Vol. 37 Dec. 1951 pp. 2028  a b Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2004. ISBN 0500051283  A scarab of Sobekhotep III at the Metropolitan Museum of Art  Another scarab of Sobekhotep III at the Metropolitan Museum of Art  Following Ryholt The Political Situation p. 71. However the four is partly destroyed year 3 is also possible  F. Bisson de la Roque J. J. Clre Fouilles de Mdamoud 1927 Cairo 1928 p. 44 Porter  Moss V 1937 p. 14649  Ryholt The Political Situation p. 344  M.F.L. Macadams Gleanings from the Bankes MSSIn Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 32 1946 60 pl. VIII H.A. Wild A BasRelief of SekhemReSewadjtowe Sebkhotpe In Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 37 1951 p. 1216  G.T. Martin Egyptian Administrative and Private Name Seals Oxford 1971 n. 575588  BM EA 30506  Louvre Museum C8  Mirgissa 321120 
1 httpspnm.unimainz.de
4 inscription11080  BMFA Ryholt 1997344 unclear if this is the same impression as Mirgissa 321120  Turin King List Column 7. Bibliographyedit K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c. 18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 34344 File 1326. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sebekhotep Sekhemre Sewadjtawy. Sobekhotep III Preceded by Seth Meribre Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Neferhotep I v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSobekhotepIIIoldid1208897547 Categories 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 February 2024 at 1142 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width