Sihathor - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 Family 
3 Tomb 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Sihathor 16 languages  Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar  Nederlands  Slovenina   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh  ruler of the 
13 th Dynasty of Egypt Sihathor Sahathor Menuazra1 Sihathors name on the Turin canon second row from bottom Pharaoh Reign less than a year ... months and 3 days as a coregent with Neferhotep I1 Coregency Neferhotep I Predecessor Neferhotep I Successor Sobekhotep IV Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Ra Sihathor Rs
3 tr Ra the son of Hathor Nomen Menwadjre Mnw
3 R Ra he whose prosperity is lasting Father Haankhef Mother Kemi Burial likely intended to be in Abydos close to those of his brothers Dynasty 
13 th dynasty Menwadjre Sihathor was an ephemeral ruler of the 
13 th Dynasty during the late Middle Kingdom. Sihathor may never have enjoyed an independent reign possibly only ruling for a few months as a coregent with his brother Neferhotep I. According to Egyptologist Kim Ryholt Sihathor died in 1733 BC2 while Detlef Franke dates his short reign to 1694 BC.3 His tomb is likely to be the unfinished one located between the tombs of his brothers S9 and S10 in Abydos. Attestationsedit According to the latest reading of the Turin canon by Ryholt Sihathor is recorded there on column 7 line 26 Gardiner col. 6 line 
26.2  Sihathor is attested on two statues from the Hekaib sanctuary in Elephantine as a kings son which is here an honorary title referring to his brother Neferhotep I being king.2 Two rock inscriptions from Philae and Sehel Island further mention Sihathor as a brother to Neferhotep I.2 According to Ryholt and Stephen Quirke Sihathor is also attested as a king on a steatite cylinder seal now in the Petrie Museum UC1157 and a bead of unknown provenance now in the Brooklyn Museum.124 A few further seals mentioning a kings son Sihathor are known but Ryholt concludes that they may correspond to another Sihathor.2 Finally Vivian Davies points to the existence of a statue of Sihathor made after his death and where he is only given the title of kings son.5 Familyedit Scarab seals of the Royal seal bearer divine father Haankhef the father of Sihathor and Princess royal daughter Kema daughter of Neferhotep niece of Sihathor.6 The family of Sihathor is known thanks to the rock inscriptions of Philae and Sehel made by his brother Neferhotep I. Sihathors father is thus known to be Haankhef his mother was Kemi and his brothers were Neferhotep I and Sobekhotep IV the later of whom eventually succeeded him on the throne.2 Tombedit The Egyptologist and archaeologist Josef W. Wegner of the University of Pennsylvania has led excavations of the tomb and funerary complex of Senusret III in Abydos as well as of the surrounding necropolis. This necropolis was found to comprise royal tombs dating to the Second Intermediate Period as well as from the earlier late Middle Kingdom. Two large tombs in particular S9 and S10 are now believed to belong to Sihathors pharaoh brothers Neferhotep I and Sobekhotep IV. Indeed evidences gathered from the neighbouring tombs reveal that a king Sobekhotep was buried in S10 who must be Sobekhotep IV given the size of the tomb its general datation and location in Abydos. By extension S9 is likely to belong to Neferhotep I.78 These attributions are crucial for locating Sihathors tomb as indeed Wegner has found an unfinished royal burial at the immediate northeast of S10 east of S9. According to him its position suggest very strongly that it was intended for Neferhoteps chosen heir Sihathor. The burial seems to have been abandoned at the death of its intended owner its massive granite sarcophagus reused at a later time during the chaotic Second Intermediate Period.9 Referencesedit  a b c Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 430  a b c d e f g K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 excerpts available online here  Thomas Schneider The Relative Chronology of the Middle Kingdom and the Hyksos Period Dyns. 1217 in Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss David A. Warburton editors Ancient Egyptian Chronology  Handbook of Oriental studies. Section One. The Near and Middle East. vol 83. Brill LeidenBoston 2006 ISBN 9789004113855 pp. 168196.  Picture of the cylinder seal  Vivian Davies A Statue of the Kings Son Sahathor from Thebes in Stationen Beitrge zur Kulturgeschichte gyptens Rainer Stadelmann editor Heike Guksch Daniel Polz pp. 177  179 ISBN 3805325266  Flinders Petrie Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XVIII  Wegner Josef W. 2015. A royal necropolis at south Abydos New Light on Egypts Second Intermediate Period. Near Eastern Archaeology. 78 2 6878. doi
10.5 6
15 neareastarch.

78.2.0 068. S
2 CID 163519900.  Wegner J. Cahail K. 2015. Royal Funerary Equipment of a King Sobekhotep at South Abydos Evidence for the Tombs of Sobekhotep IV and Neferhotep I. JARCE. 15 123164. doi
10.5 9
13 jarce.
51.2 015.a006.  Josef W. Wegner lecture at the University of Chicago Oriental Institute. On Youtube The Pharaohs of AnubisMountain 28 October 2015. Preceded by Neferhotep I Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Sobekhotep IV v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSihathoroldid1145260970 Categories 
18 thcentury BC deaths 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 March 2023 at 0323 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width