Salitis - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 Identification 
3 References Toggle the table of contents Salitis 23 languages  Azrbaycanca Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais  Italiano Magyar  Nederlands  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi    Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Salitis Salatis Saites Einfall der Hyksos Invasion of the Hyksos by Hermann Vogel c. 1880 the Hyksos invaders are imagined just after a victorious battle against the Egyptians. Pharaoh Reign around 1650 BCE Predecessor Timaios 
13 th Dynasty nonefounder 
15 th Dynasty Successor BnonBeon Royal titulary Dynasty 
15 th Dynasty In the Manethonian tradition Salitis Greek  also Salatis or Saites was the first Hyksos king the one who subdued and ruled Lower Egypt and founded the 
15 th Dynasty. Biographyedit Salitis is mainly known from a few passages of Flavius Josephus work Contra Apionem for these passages Josephus claimed to have reported Manethos original words. It seems that during the reign of an Egyptian pharaoh called Timaios or Tutimaios an army of foreigners suddenly came from the Near East and took over the Nile Delta without a fight. After conquering Memphis and likely deposing Timaios the invaders committed several atrocities such as destroying cities and temples and killing or capturing the native Egyptians.
1 I756 After that they made one of their number whose name was Salitis king. He resided in Memphis and exacted tribute from both the upper and lower country leaving fortresses in the most strategic places. Flavius Josephus Against Apion I 
77.1  Salitis was determined to hold down his new conquests. For this reason he fortified the eastern borders and sought a strategic position to establish an imposing stronghold from which he could dominate the independentminded Upper Egyptians. Having found it in the city of Avaris on the east bank of the Bubastite branch of the Nile
1 I778 Salitis established this city and rendered it extremely secure with walls settling there a large body of armed troops  as many as 240000 men  as a frontier guard. He used to go there in the summer partly to hand out rations and distribute pay and partly to train them carefully in military exercises to frighten foreigners. Flavius Josephus Against Apion I 78801 Salitis died after 19 years of rule and his throne passed to another Asiatic called Bnon or Beon.
1 I8091 Identificationedit Several attempts have been made to identify Salitis with an archaeologically attested ruler. He was sometimes associated with a ruler named Sharek or Shalek  who is mentioned in a genealogical priestly document from Memphis  and also with the much more attested king Sheshi.2593 German Egyptologist Jrgen von Beckerath believed that Salitis could be associated with Yakbim another Second Intermediate Period ruler.4 William F. Albright suggested that Salitis may have been the same person as the Umman Manda king Zaluti. Albright assigns Zaaluti an IndoIranian etymology.56227 At the current state of knowledge Salitis remains unidentified.
71 I
77 n.300 Even for his name there are no clues of what it could have originally meant in Egyptian though the variant Saites used by Sextus Julius Africanus in his epitome of Manetho might contain a reference to the deltaic city of Sais. It has been suggested that the name might be linked to shallit a title borne by the biblical patriarch Joseph during his stay in Egypt Genesis 426 with the meaning of keeper of the power however this is considered a very weak assumption.
81 I
77 n.300 As for him also the identification of his Egyptian predecessor Timaios and Asiatic successor Bnon were a matter of debate though the former was tentatively identified with Djedneferre Dedumose of the waning 
13 th Dynasty2523 this identification was questioned for being rather weak.9 Referencesedit  a b c d e f g Josephus Flavius 2007. Against Apion  Translation and commentary by John M. G. Barclay. LeidenBoston Brill. ISBN 9789004117914.  a b Hayes William C. 1973. Egypt from the death of Ammenemes III to Seqenenre II. In Edwards I. E. S. ed.. The Cambridge Ancient History 
3 rd ed. vol. II part 1. Cambridge University Press. pp. 4276. ISBN 0521082307.  a b Grimal Nicolas 1992. A History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford Blackwell Books. ISBN 9780631174721. p. 185  Salitis page on eglyphica.de  Albright William F. 1940. New Light on the History of Western Asia in the Second Millennium BC. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research. 77 78 77 2032 2331. doi
10.2 3071355237. JSTOR 1355237. S
2 CID 163980863.  Drews Robert 1988. The Coming of the Greeks IndoEuropean Conquests in the Aegean and the Near East. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691186580. JSTOR j.ctv
39 x
8 fq.  Labow D. 2005. Flavius Josephus Contra Apionem Buch 1. Einleitung Text Textkritischer Apparat bersetzung und Kommentar. Stuttgart Kohlhammer Verlag. 7677 n.71  Troiani L. 1974. Sui frammenti di Manetone nel primo libro del Contra Apionem di Flavio Giuseppe. Studi Classici e Orientali in Italian. 23. p. 107  Helck Wolfgang Otto Eberhard Westendorf Wolfhart eds. 1986. Lexikon der Agyptologie vol. 6. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSalitisoldid1216478999 Categories 
17 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt People from Avaris Hidden categories CS1 long volume value CS1 Italianlanguage sources it Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles using infobox templates with no data rows This page was last edited on 31 March 2024 at 0715 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width