Yanassi - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 References 
3 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Yanassi 3 languages Deutsch Magyar  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Stela of Yanassi from Tell elDaba Yanassi also Yanassy and Yansasaden possibly reflecting the West Semitic JinaiAd was a Hyksos prince and possibly king of the Fifteenth Dynasty. He was the eldest son of the pharaoh Khyan and possibly the crown prince designated to be Khyans successor. He may have succeeded his father thereby giving rise to the mention of a king Iannas in Manethos Aegyptiaca who improbably was said to have ruled after the pharaoh Apophis. Alternatively the Egyptologist Kim Ryholt has proposed that Khyan was succeeded by Apophis and because Yanassi was Khyans eldest son Ryholt proposed that Apophis was an usurper.1 This opinion has been rejected as mere speculation by scholars including David Aston.2 Archaeological discoveries in the 20
10 s show that Khyans rule may have to be pushed further back in time creating the need and time for one or more kings to reign between Khyan and Apophis. In addition the Turin canon an exhaustive list of kings written during the reign of Ramses II can be interpreted to have credited more than 10 years of reign to a king ruling before Apophis and after Khyan possibly Yanassi if he was indeed Apophis immediate predecessor.2 Attestationsedit In spite of his status as the royal son of the longreigning Khyan Yanassi is attested only by a damaged stela Cairo TD8422 176 found at Tell elDaba the site of the ancient Hyksos capital Avaris.34 On the stela  which was probably dedicated to the god Seth lord of Avaris  he is called the eldest kings son of Khyan.1 If Yanassi indeed became king he might have ruled between Khyan and Apophis. On the Turin canon the entry before that attributed to Apophis on column 10 line 26 is damaged such that the name of the king is lost and his reign length is only partial it may be read as 10 20 or 30 plus a certain number of years.2 A further though noncontemporary attestation of Yanassi may be found in Josephus polemic Contra Apionem where Josephus claims to directly quote the Aegyptiaca  of Manetho which would have been written in the 
3 rd century BC during the reign of Ptolemy II 283  246 BC by the Egyptian priest Manetho. No copies of the Aegyptiaca have survived since antiquity and it is now known only through later quotations by Sextus Julius Africanus Josephus and Eusebius. According to Josephus Manethos reconstruction of the Fifteenth Dynastys succession was Salitis Bnon Apachnan Iannas ArchlesAssis and Apophis. Apachnan is generally understood to be the Hellenized name of Khyan while Iannas Ancient Greek I would best be understood as a corruption of that of Yanassi confirming that he ascended the Hyksos throne. Josephus further reports that Manetho credited Iannas with an improbably long reign of 50 years and one month.567 In any case this means that Manetho must have considered Yanassi a king. Until the 20
10 s this idea was rejected by the scholarly consensus in Egyptology which considered Apophis as Khyans direct successor as proposed by Ryholt. In this understanding it appeared more likely that in a Manethonian passage mentioning both IannasYanassi and Khyan Josephus erroneously chose the former instead of the latter.6 This view was challenged by archaeological discoveries which implied that Khyan may have reigned up to 80 years earlier than thought hitherto necessitating for one or more kings to reign between him and Apophis.8 Referencesedit  a b Ryholt 1997 p. 256.  a b c Aston 2018 p. 16.  Bietak 1981 pp. 6373.  Ryholt 1997 p. 57 n.159.  Gardiner 1961 p. 156.  a b Ryholt 1997 pp. 120121.  Aston 2018 p. 18.  Aston 2018 p. 17. Bibliographyedit Aston David A. 2018. How Early and How Late Can Khyan Really Be. An Essay Based on Conventional Archaeological Methods. In Moeller Nadine ForstnerMller Irene eds.. The Hyksos ruler Khyan and the Early Second Intermediate Period in Egypt Problems and Priorities of Current Research. Proceedings of the Workshop of the Austrian Archaeological Institute and the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago Vienna July 4  5 2014. Leberstrae 122 A1110 Wien Verlag Holzhausen GmbH. pp. 1556. ISBN 9783902976833.cite book CS1 maint location link Bietak Manfred 1981. Eine Stele des ltesten Knigssohnes des Hyksos Chajan. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo MDAIK. 37 6373. Gardiner Alan 1961. Egypt of the Pharaohs an introduction. Oxford University Press. p. 156. ISBN 9780195002676. Ryholt Kim 1997. The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c. 18001550 B.C. CNI publications 20. Carsten Niebuhr Institute of Near Eastern Studies University of Copenhagen  Museum Tusculanum Press. ISBN 9788772894218. Preceded by Khyan Pharaoh of Egypt Fifteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Apepi v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs This Ancient Egypt biographical article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleYanassioldid1158510906 Categories 
17 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Amorite kings People of the Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Heirs to the ancient Egyptian throne Ancient Egypt people stubs Hidden categories Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text CS1 maint location Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown All stub articles This page was last edited on 4 June 2023 at 1424 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width