Senebkay - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestation 
2 Death 
3 Tomb 
4 See also 
5 References Toggle the table of contents Senebkay 22 languages   Deutsch Espaol Franais Hrvatski Italiano  Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Senebkay Seneb Kay Drawing of Senebkays cartouche from his tomb at Abydos Pharaoh Reign c. 1650 BC Predecessor  Successor  Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Woseribre WsrjbR Powerful is the Heart of Re 1 Nomen Senebkay Snbk
3 jj Born 
17 th century BCE Died 
17 th century BCE 3540 yrs old Burial Abydos tomb CS9 Dynasty uncertain Abydos Dynasty or 
16 th Dynasty Woseribre Senebkay alternatively Seneb Kay was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh during the Second Intermediate Period. The discovery of his tomb in January 2014 supports the existence of an independent Abydos Dynasty contemporary with the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Dynasties during the Second Intermediate Period.2 Attestationedit He might also appear in the Turin Canon where there appear two kings with the throne name Weser... re the names are only partly preserved. A further possible object with his name is a magical wand bearing the name Sebkay. The wand was found at Abydos but could refer to one or possibly two kings of the earlier 
13 th Dynasty.3 The existence of the socalled Abydos Dynasty was first proposed by Detlef Franke4 and later further developed by Kim Ryholt in 19
97.2  Deathedit The skeleton of Senebkay show he died at the age of 3540 from multiple battlewounds.5 Tombedit The cartouche of pharaoh Woseribre Senebkay inside the kings tomb. Senebkays tomb CS9 was discovered in 2014 by Josef W. Wegner of the University of Pennsylvania and a team of Egyptian archaeologists in the southern part of Abydos Egypt.67 The fourchamber tomb has a decorated limestone burial chamber. Most blocks of the chamber were reused from older structures such as the stela of Idudjuiker. On the east short wall there is a painted depiction of the two Wadjeteyes. Left and right are standing the goddess Neith and Nut. Over the scene is depicted a winged sun disc. On the North wall is depicted a standing goddess her name is destroyed. There are short text lines mentioning the deities Duamutef and Qebehsenuf. In the center of the wall appears the cartouche with the kings name Senebkay. The South wall is much destroyed. There are visible the remains of two female deities. Texts mention the deities Amset and Hapi.8 The head of the king was once decorated with a mummy mask.9 The texts record the pharaohs titulary and call him the king of Upper and Lower Egypt Woseribre the son of Re Senebkay.2 Senebkays name was found inscribed inside a royal cartouche. Some of the burial equipment such as the wooden canopic box were taken from older tombs. The remains of the canopic box was originally inscribed for a king Sobekhotep9 likely from the nearby tomb S10 now believed to belong to Sobekhotep IV.10 The tomb did not house many funerary goods and may have been robbed in ancient times.citation needed The king was around 5 feet 10 inches 
1.7 8 metres tall and died between the ages of 35 and 
40.1 1 Studies on his skeleton reveal he was most likely killed in battle. There are eighteen wounds on his bones impacting his lower back feet and ankles. The cutting angles suggest he was hit from below perhaps while he was on a chariot or on horseback. Upon falling to the ground he was killed by several axe blows to the skull. The curvature of the wounds on the skull indicate the use of battle axes contemporary to the Second Intermediate Period.11 See alsoedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Senebkay. List of pharaohs Referencesedit  Wegner Josef June 2015. A ROYAL NECROPOLIS AT SOUTH ABYDOS New Light on Egypts Second Intermediate Period. Near Eastern Archaeology. 78 2. p. 74 Fig. 9. doi
10.5 6
15 neareastarch.

78.2.0 068. S
2 CID 163519900.  a b c Giant Sarcophagus Leads Penn Museum Team in Egypt To the Tomb of a Previously Unknown Pharaoh Press release. Penn Museum. January 2014. Archived from the original on 20 April 2015. Retrieved 16 January 2014.  findingalostpharaoh Archived 28 January 2014 at archive.today archaeology and arts Retrieved 28 January 2014  Franke Detlef 1988. Zur Chronologie des Mittleren Reiches. Teil II Die sogenannte Zweite Zwischenzeit Altgyptens. Orientalia. 57 259.  Pharaoh of Lost Dynasty Died Brutal Death Forensic Study Reveals Press release. National Geographic. Retrieved 4 March 2015.  Mintz Zoe 15 January 2014. New Pharaoh Discovered In Egypt King Seneb Kay Had The Longest Rule Of His Time. International Business Times. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014. Retrieved 15 January 2014.  The Associated Press 15 January 2014. New Pharaonic Tomb Discovered in Egypt. Cairo ABC News. Archived from the original on 28 January 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2020.  Wegner Josef Raise yourself up Mortuary Imaginary in the Tomb of Woseribre SenebKay in G. Miniaci M. Betr S. Quirke editors Company of Images Modelling the Imaginary World of Middle Kingdom Egypt 20001500 BC Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 262 Leuven Paris Bristol CT 2017 ISBN 9789042934955 pp. 485487.  a b Wegner Josef Kings of Abydos solving an Ancient Egyptian Mystery in Current World Archaeology Magazine 64 AprilMay 2014 Volume 6 no. 4 p. 26  Wegner Josef W. 2015. A royal necropolis at south Abydos New Light on Egypts Second Intermediate Period. Near Eastern Archaeology. 78 2 6970. See p. 70  a b Lorenzi Rossella 25 February 2015. Pharaoh Brutally Killed in Battle Analysis Shows. Discovery. Archived from the original on 11 May 2016. Retrieved 3 March 2015. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSenebkayoldid1201938280 Categories 
17 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt 2014 archaeological discoveries 
2 ndmillennium BC births 
2 ndmillennium BC deaths Pharaohs of the Abydos Dynasty Monarchs killed in action Axe murder Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 February 2024 at 1805 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width