Sekhemre-Heruhirmaat Intef - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Brief reign 
2 References Toggle the table of contents SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef 21 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Italiano  Magyar   Polski  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski      Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian king SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Intef VII Rishi coffin of SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef on display at the Louvre Pharaoh Reign late 
17 th Dynasty Predecessor Nubkheperre Intef Successor Senakhtenre Ahmose Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen SekhemreHeruhirmaat SmRhrwrM3.t Mighty like Re is the one who satisfies Maat Nomen Initef Jnjit.f1 Intef litt. his father brought him Father Possibly Nubkheperre Intef Burial Tomb at Dra Abu elNaga Dynasty 
17 th Dynasty SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef or Antef Inyotef sometimes referred to as Intef VII was an ancient Egyptian king of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt who ruled during the Second Intermediate Period when Egypt was divided between the Thebanbased 
17 th Dynasty in Upper Egypt and the Hyksos 
15 th Dynasty who controlled Lower and part of Middle Egypt. Cartouche of SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef or Intef VIII detail of a limestone block from Koptos SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef is referred to as Intef VII in some literature123 while others refer to him as Intef VIII.4 SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef ruled from Thebes and was buried in a tomb in the 
17 th Dynasty royal necropolis at Dra Abu elNaga. Brief reignedit His only clear attestation is his coffin  Louvre E 3020  now in France.5 His sarcophagus contained the corrected nomen of this king as well as his prenomen SekhemreHeruhirmaat which was added in ink on the chest of the coffin.6 Little more is known concerning the reign of this king except that he was a shortlived successor of Nubkheperre Intef. The Danish Egyptologist Kim Ryholt has argued that SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef was possibly a coregent of Nubkheperre Intef based on a block from Koptos which preserves ... the nomen and prenomen of Antef Nubkheperre together with the unfortunately almost lost prenomen of another king. The prenomina of both kings are given the epithet din7 and since this was normally used only for the ruling king it may be inferred that these kings coreigned.8 Ryholt observes that the length of the damaged cartouche would fit well with the long prenomen of SekhemreHeruhirmaat. Ryholt suggested that SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef died prematurely and was buried in a royal coffin that initially belonged to Nubkheperre Intef hence SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef did not enjoy an independent reign of his own. The British Egyptologist Aidan Dodson however criticises Ryholts proposal that SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef died during the reign of his predecessor and was buried in SekhemreWepmaat Intefs original royal coffin. Dodson observes that the form of the name Intef written here which was originally similar to that used to designate Nubkheperre Intef before it was amended for SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef and the added kings prenomen of SekhemreHeruhirmaat on this kings coffin was composed in an entirely different hand from the remaining texts on the coffin.9 Dodson also stresses that On the matter of the coffins of the Inyotef kings Ryholt fails to address the key point that the container used for Sekhemreheruhirmaet his Inyotef H is certainly a stock i.e. nonroyal coffin made lacking the deceaseds name to be inserted laterjust as was that later used for the burial of Kamose. On this basis there seems no possibility of the former having been the original coffin of Inyotef N pressed into service for his prematurely defunct coregent. The reviewers previous explanation of the changed spelling of the nomen thus remains the most likely and may also provide an explanation for the inclusion of the prenomen in view of the confusion in the mind of the scribe he made sure that the king was correctly identified in the Hereafter by adding his prenomen as well10 Dodsons previous explanation derives from his GM 120 1991 article where the author argues that SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef was most probably a shortlived Theban king who died within months of his accession to power since the temple scribes were probably still used to writing Inyotef in the manner of Nubkheperre Intef sc. with the reedleaf initf leading to the corrected mistake on the coffin of SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef.11 This would also explain the modesty of SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intefs coffin which lacked a royal uraeus and is stylistically similar to the clearly nonroyal coffin of Kamose. Intef hence would not have had the time to create a proper royal coffin in his abbreviated reign. The prominent German Egyptologist Daniel Polz who rediscovered the tomb of the powerful 
17 th Dynasty king Nubkheperre Intef at Dra Abu elNaga in 2001 also places SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef as a shortlived successor of this influential pharaoh in a 2007 book just prior to the accession of Senakhtenre Ahmose.12 Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef.  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen  Mnchner gyptologische Studien vol 46 Mainz am Rhein Verlag Philipp von Zabern 1999. ISBN 3805323107 pp. 12829  Chris Bennett A Genealogical Chronology of the Seventeenth Dynasty Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt Vol. 39 2002 pp. 123155 JSTOR  Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2004.  Kim S. B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c. 18001550 BC CNI Publications Vol 20 Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 pp. 177 204 266 289 395  Kim Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 p. 267  Ryholt p. 267  Given life  Ryholt p. 268  Aidan Dodson Book Review of Ryholt K. S. B. The Political Situation in Egypt... Bibliotheca Orientalis LVII No. 12 JanuaryApril 2000 p. 51  Dodson Bi Or LVII No. 12 pp. 5152  Aidan Dodson On the Internal Chronology of the Seventeenth Dynasty Gttinger Miszellen 120 1991 p. 36  Daniel Polz Der Beginn des Neuen Reiches. Zur Vorgeschichte einer Zeitenwende. Sonderschriften des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 31. BerlinNew York Walter de Gruyter 2007. p. 50 Preceded by Nubkheperre Intef Pharaoh of Egypt Seventeenth Dynasty Succeeded by Senakhtenre Ahmose v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSekhemreHeruhirmaatIntefoldid1218328824 Categories 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 April 2024 at 0205 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width