New Kingdom of Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History Toggle History subsection 
1.1 Rise 
1.2 Height of power 

1.2.1 Downfall 
1.3 Final years 

1.3.1 Decline into the Third Intermediate Period 
2 Gallery 
3 See also 
4 References 
5 Further reading 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents New Kingdom of Egypt 65 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Asturianu Azrbaycanca   Banjar   Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Latina Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Period in ancient Egyptian history c. 1550 BCE1069 BCE New Kingdom redirects here. For other uses see New Kingdom disambiguation. New Kingdom of Egypt c.15501544 BCc.1069 BC Egyptian territory under the New Kingdom c.
15 th century BC Capital Thebes c.15501352 BC Dynasty XVII and Dynasty XVIII until Akhenaten Amarna c.13521336 BC Akhenaten of Dynasty XVIII Thebes c.13361279 BC Dynasty XVIII and Dynasty XIX until Ramesses II PiRamesses c.12791213 BC Ramesses II of Dynasty XIX Memphis c.12131069 BC Dynasty XIX from Merneptah and Dynasty XX Common languages Egyptian Nubian Canaanite Amorite Religion Egyptian religion Atenism during the Amarna Period Government Divine absolute monarchy Pharaoh  c.1550  1525 BC Ahmose I first  c.1107  1077 BC Ramesses XI last History  Rise c.15501544 BC  Downfall c.1069 BC Population  c.
13 th century BCE 31 to 52 million Preceded by Succeeded by Second Intermediate Period of Egypt Third Intermediate Period of Egypt Part of a series on the History of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Predynastic Period 60003000 BC Ancient Egypt Early Dynastic Period 31502686 BC Old Kingdom 26862181 BC 
1 st Intermediate Period 21812055 BC Middle Kingdom 20551650 BC 
2 nd Intermediate Period 16501550 BC New Kingdom 15501069 BC 
3 rd Intermediate Period 1069664 BC Late Period 664332 BC GrecoRoman Egypt Argead dynasty 332310 BC Ptolemaic dynasties 31030 BC Roman and Byzantine Egypt 30 BC641 AD Sasanian Egypt 619629 Medieval Egypt Rashidun caliphate 641661 Umayyad caliphate 661750 Abbasid dynasty 750935 Tulunid dynasty 868905 Ikhshidid dynasty 935969 Fatimid dynasty 9691171 Ayyubid dynasty 11711250 Mamluk dynasty 12501517 Early modern Egypt Ottoman Egypt 15171867 French occupation 17981801 Muhammad Ali dynasty 18051953 Khedivate of Egypt 18671914 Late Modern Egypt British occupation 18821922 Sultanate of Egypt 19141922 Kingdom of Egypt 19221953 Republic 19
53 present Egypt portal v t e The New Kingdom also referred to as the Egyptian Empire was the ancient Egyptian nation between the 
16 th century BC and the 
11 th century BC. This period of ancient Egyptian history covers the Eighteenth Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties. Through radiocarbon dating the establishment of the New Kingdom has been placed between 1570 BC and 1544 BC.3 The New Kingdom followed the Second Intermediate Period and was succeeded by the Third Intermediate Period. It was the most prosperous time for the Egyptian people and marked the peak of Egypts power.4 In 1845 the concept of a New Kingdom as one of three golden ages was coined by German scholar Baron von Bunsen the original definition would evolve significantly throughout the 
19 th and 
20 th centuries.5 The later part of this period under the Nineteenth Dynasty 12951189 BC and the Twentieth Dynasty 11891069 BC is also known as the Ramesside period. It is named after the eleven pharaohs who took the name Ramesses after Ramesses I the founder of the Nineteenth Dynasty and his grandson Ramesses II its longestreigning monarch.4 Possibly as a result of the foreign rule of the Hyksos during the Second Intermediate Period the New Kingdom saw a historic expansion into the Levant thus marking Egypts greatest territorial extent. Similarly in response to attacks by the Kushites who led raids into Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period67 the rulers of the New Kingdom felt compelled to expand far into Nubia and to hold wider territories in the Near East particularly on the Levantine frontier. Historyedit Riseedit Main article Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt The Eighteenth Dynasty included some of Egypts most famous kings including Ahmose I Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep III Akhenaten and Tutankhamun. Ahmose I is viewed to be the founder of the eighteenth dynasty. He continued the campaigns of his father Seqenenre Tao and of Kamose against the Hyksos until he reunified the country once more. Ahmose would then continue to campaign in the Levant the home of the Hyksos to prevent any future invasions on Egypt.8 Ahmose was followed by Amenhotep I who campaigned in Nubia and was followed by Thutmose I. Thutmose I campaigned in the Levant and reached as far as the Euphrates thus becoming the first pharaoh to cross the river.9 During this campaign the Syrian princes declared allegiance to Thutmose. However after he returned they discontinued tribute and began fortifying against future incursions.10 Hatshepsut was one of the most powerful pharaohs of this dynasty. She was the daughter of Thutmose I and the royal wife of Thutmose II. Upon the death of her husband she ruled jointly with his son by a minor wife Thutmose III who had ascended to the throne as a child of about two years of age but eventually she ruled in her own right as king. Hatshepsut built extensively in the Karnak temple in Luxor and throughout all of Egypt11 and she reestablished the trade networks that had been disrupted during the Hyksos rule of Lower Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period thereby building the wealth of the Eighteenth Dynasty. She oversaw the preparations and funding for a mission to the Land of Punt. After her death having gained valuable experience heading up the military for Hatshepsut Thutmose III assumed rule. Thutmose III expanded Egypts army and wielded it with great success to consolidate the empire created by his predecessors. This resulted in a peak in Egypts power and wealth during the reign of Amenhotep III. The term pharaoh originally the name of the kings palace became a form of address for the person who was king during his reign c.14791425 BC.12 Widely considered a military genius by historians Thutmose III conducted at least 16 campaigns in 20 years.13 He was an active expansionist ruler.14 He is recorded to have captured 350 cities during his rule and conquered much of the Near East from the Euphrates to Nubia during seventeen known military campaigns. He was the first pharaoh after Thutmose I to cross the Euphrates doing so during his campaign against Mitanni. He continued north through the territory belonging to the still unconquered cities of Aleppo and Carchemish and quickly crossed the Euphrates in his boats taking the Mitannian king entirely by surprise.15 The wealthiest of all the kings of this dynasty is Amenhotep III who built the Luxor Temple the Precinct of Monthu at Karnak and his massive Mortuary Temple. Amenhotep III also built the Malkata palace the largest built in Egypt. One of the bestknown eighteenth dynasty pharaohs is Amenhotep IV who changed his name to Akhenaten in honour of the Aten a representation of the Egyptian god Ra. His worship of the Aten as his personal deity is often interpreted as historys first instance of monotheism. Akhenatens wife Nefertiti contributed a great deal to his new direction in the Egyptian religion. Nefertiti was bold enough to perform rituals to Aten. Akhenatens religious fervour is cited as the reason why he and his wife were subsequently written out of Egyptian history.16 Under his reign in the fourteenth century BC Egyptian art flourished in a distinctive new style see Amarna Period. By the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty Egypts status had changed radically. Aided by Akhenatens apparent lack of interest in international affairs the Hittites had gradually extended their influence into the Levant to become a major power in international politicsa power that both Seti I and his son Ramesses II would confront during the nineteenth Dynasty. The last two members of the Eighteenth DynastyAy and Horemhebbecame rulers from the ranks of officials in the royal court although Ay might also have been the maternal uncle of Akhenaten and a fellow descendant of Yuya and Tjuyu. Ay may have married the widowed Great Royal Wife and young halfsister of Tutankhamun Ankhesenamun in order to obtain power she did not live long afterward. Ay then married Tey who originally had been wetnurse to Nefertiti. Ays reign was short. His successor was Horemheb a general during the reign of Tutankhamun whom the pharaoh may have intended as his successor in the event that he had no surviving children which came to pass.17 Horemheb may have taken the throne away from Ay in a coup dtat. Although Ays son or stepson Nakhtmin was named as his father or stepfathers Crown Prince Nakhtmin seems to have died during the reign of Ay leaving the opportunity for Horemheb to claim the throne next. Horemheb also died without surviving children having appointed his vizier Paramessu as his heir. This vizier ascended the throne in 1292 BC as Ramesses I and was the first pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty. Height of poweredit Main article Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt The Nineteenth Dynasty was founded by the Vizier Ramesses I whom the last ruler of the eighteenth dynasty Pharaoh Horemheb had chosen as his successor. His brief reign marked a transition period between the reign of Horemheb and the powerful pharaohs of this dynasty in particular his son Seti I and grandson Ramesses II who would bring Egypt to new heights of imperial power. Seti I fought a series of wars in western Asia Libya and Nubia in the first decade of his reign. The main source for knowledge of Setis military activities are his battle scenes on the north exterior wall of the Karnak Hypostyle Hall along with several royal stelas with inscriptions mentioning battles in Canaan and Nubia. The greatest achievement of Seti Is foreign policy was the capture of the Syrian town of Kadesh and neighboring territory of Amurru from the Hittite Empire. Egypt had not held Kadesh since the time of Akhenaten. Seti I was successful in defeating a Hittite army that tried to defend the town and erected a victory stela at the site which has been found by archaeologists.18 Kadesh however soon reverted to Hittite control because the Egyptians did not or could not maintain a permanent military occupation of Kadesh and Amurru which were close to the Hittite homelands. Ramesses II sought to recover territories in the Levant that had been held by the 
18 th Dynasty. In his second year before confronting the Hittites Ramesses II had to deal with a raid by the Sherden sea people whom he defeated and incorporated into his army.19 His campaigns against the Hittites culminated in the Battle of Kadesh where he led Egyptian armies against those of the Hittite king Muwatalli II. Ramesses was caught in historys first recorded military ambush although he was able to rally his troops and turn the tide of battle against the Hittites thanks to the arrival of the Nearin possibly mercenaries in the employ of Egypt. The outcome of the battle was undecided with both sides claiming victory at their home front and ultimately resulting in a peace treaty between the two nations. He campaigned later in the Levant capturing Edom and Moab.20 New kingdom Egyptian stelae from this period have been found in Jordan.21 Later Egyptians conquered Qatna and Tunip where a statue of Ramses II was erected.22 Thus he recaptured Qadesh and northern Amurru.23 Nevertheless like Seti I he found that he could not permanently hold territory so far from base and after years of conflict a peace treaty was concluded between the two nations. Egypt was able to obtain wealth and stability under the rule of Ramesses for more than half a century.24 His immediate successors continued the military campaigns although an increasingly troubled courtwhich at one point put a usurper Amenmesse on the thronemade it increasingly difficult for a pharaoh to effectively retain control of the territories. Ramesses II built extensively throughout Egypt and Nubia and his cartouches are prominently displayed even in buildings that he did not construct.25 There are accounts of his honor hewn on stone statues and the remains of palaces and templesmost notably the Ramesseum in western Thebes and the rock temples of Abu Simbel. He covered the land from the Delta to Nubia with buildings in a way no king before him had.26 He also founded a new capital city in the Delta during his reign called PiRamesses. It previously had served as a summer palace during the reign of Seti I.27 Ramesses II constructed many large monuments including the archaeological complex of Abu Simbel and the Mortuary temple known as the Ramesseum. He built on a monumental scale to ensure that his legacy would survive the ravages of time. Ramesses used art as a means of propaganda for his victories over foreigners which are depicted on numerous temple reliefs. Ramesses II erected more colossal statues of himself than any other pharaoh and also usurped many existing statues by inscribing his own cartouche on them. Ramesses II was also famed for the huge number of children he sired by his various wives and concubines the tomb he built for his sons many of whom he outlived in the Valley of the Kings has proven to be the largest funerary complex in Egypt. Downfalledit Main article End of the 
19 th Dynasty The immediate successors of Ramesses II continued the military campaigns although an increasingly troubled court complicated matters. He was succeeded by his son Merneptah and then by Merneptahs son Seti II. Seti IIs right to the throne seems to have been disputed by his halfbrother Amenmesse who may have temporarily ruled from Thebes. Upon his death Seti IIs son Siptah who may have been afflicted with poliomyelitis during his life was appointed to the throne by Bay a chancellor and a West Asian commoner who served as vizier behind the scenes. Siptah died early and throne was assumed by Twosret who was the royal wife of his father and possibly his uncle Amenmesses sister. A period of anarchy at the end of Twosrets short reign saw the enthronement of Setnakhte establishing the Twentieth Dynasty. Final yearsedit Main article Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt The last great pharaoh from the New Kingdom is widely considered to be Ramesses III a Twentieth Dynasty pharaoh who reigned several decades after Ramesses II.28 In the eighth year of his reign the Sea Peoples invaded Egypt by land and sea. Ramesses III defeated them in two great land and sea battles the Battle of Djahy and the Battle of the Delta. He incorporated them as subject peoples and is thought to have settled them in Southern Canaan although there is evidence that they forced their way into Canaan. Their presence in Canaan may have contributed to the formation of new states such as Philistia in this region after the collapse of the Egyptian Empire In the reign of Ramses III himself Egyptian presence in the Levant is still attested as far as Byblos2930. He later was compelled to fight invading Libyan tribesmen in two major campaigns in Egypts Western Delta in his sixth year and eleventh year respectively.31 The heavy cost of this warfare slowly drained Egypts treasury and contributed to the gradual decline of the Egyptian Empire in Asia. The severity of the difficulties is indicated by the fact that the first known labour strike in recorded history occurred during the twentyninth year of Ramesses IIIs reign. At that time the food rations for Egypts favoured and elite royal tombbuilders and artisans in the village of Deir el Medina could not be provisioned.32 Air pollution limited the amount of sunlight penetrating the atmosphere affecting agricultural production and arresting global tree growth for almost two full decades until 1140 BC.33 One proposed cause is the Hekla 3 eruption of the Hekla volcano in Iceland but the dating of this remains disputed. Near the end of Ramesses IIIs reign one of his secondary wives plotted to assassinate the king in her quest to place her son on the throne. Palace personnel the harem government officials and army officers participated in the plot. A special court of 12 judges was formed to try the defendants who were sentenced to death. Written sources show that the coup failed and that the conspirators were successfully tried. However it is not clear from the documents whether Ramses survived the assassination attempt. The kings mummy showed no visible wounds and questions about his fate were left open to speculation for many years. In 2012 researchers announced that a CT scan had revealed a deep knife wound in the mummys throat indicating that Ramesses was indeed killed by the conspirators. He died in Thebes in the 
32 nd year of his reign and was succeeded by Crown Prince Ramesses IV.34 Decline into the Third Intermediate Periodedit Ramesses IIIs death was followed by years of bickering among his heirs. Three of his sons ascended the throne successively as Ramesses IV Rameses VI and Rameses VIII. Egypt was increasingly beset by droughts belownormal flooding of the Nile famine civil unrest and corruption of officials. The power of the last pharaoh of the dynasty Ramesses XI grew so weak that in the south the High Priests of Amun at Thebes became the de facto rulers of Upper Egypt and Smendes controlled Lower Egypt in the north even before Rameses XIs death. Smendes eventually founded the twentyfirst dynasty at Tanis. Galleryedit Hatshepsut as a Sphinx  daughter of Thutmose I coregent for her twoyearold stepson Thutmose III she soon ruled as pharaoh Egypt prospered greatly under her rule Queen Hatshepsuts Temple at Deir elBahari was called DjeserDjeseru meaning the Holy of Holies Thutmosis III a military man and member of the Thutmosid royal line is commonly called the Napoleon of Egypt because his conquests of the Levant brought Egypts territories and influence to its greatest extent Tiye born a commoner became queen through her marriage to Amenhotep III and during the New Kingdom when women gained influence in court Tiye soon helped run affairs of state for both her husband and son during their reigns Akhenaten born Amenhotep IV was the son of Queen Tiye and he turned away from the dominant cult of Amun relocated the capitol and promoted that of the Aten as a supreme deity Nefertiti  the wife of Akhenaten she held position as coregent with Akhenaten and may have ruled later as pharaoh in her own right as she is one of few candidates for the identity of Pharaoh Neferneferuaten Tutankhamuns mask  King Tutankhamun son of Akhenaten returned to the former capitol and restored the cult of Amun to its former influence although he died young and was not considered significant in his own time the 1922 discovery of his KV62 intact tomb by Howard Carter made him relevant as a symbol of ancient Egypt to the modern world Abu Simbel Temple of Ramesses II Queen AhmoseNefertari Egyptian Emperor Thutmose III in his youth See alsoedit History of ancient Egypt Referencesedit  Alan K. Bowman 22 October 2020. Ancient Egypt. Encyclopdia Britannica. Retrieved 3 January 2021.  Steven Snape 16 March 2019. Estimating Population in Ancient Egypt. Retrieved 5 January 2021.  Ramsey Christopher Bronk Dee Michael W. Rowland Joanne M. Higham Thomas F. G. Harris Stephen A. Brock Fiona Quiles Anita Wild Eva M. Marcus Ezra S. Shortland Andrew J. 2010. RadiocarbonBased Chronology for Dynastic Egypt. Science. 328 5985 15541557. Bibcode20
10 Sci...3
28.1 5
54 R. doi
10.1 1
26 science.1189395. PMID 20558717. S
2 CID 206526496.  a b Shaw Ian ed. 2000. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. p. 481. ISBN 9780198150343.  Schneider Thomas 27 August 2008. Periodizing Egyptian History Manetho Convention and Beyond. In KlausPeter Adam ed.. Historiographie in der Antike. Walter de Gruyter. pp. 181197. ISBN 9783110206722.  Davies Vivian 2003. Sobeknakht of Elkab and the coming of Kush. Egyptian Archaeology. 23 36.  Elkabs hidden treasure. AlAhram Weekly 31 July6 August 2003 Issue No. 649  Weinstein James M. The Egyptian Empire in Palestine A Reassessment p. 7. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research n 241. Winter 1981.  Shaw and Nicholson 1995 p.289  Steindorff p.36  JJ Shirley The Power of the Elite The Officials of Hatshepsuts Regency and Coregency in J. Galn B.M. Bryan P.F. Dorman eds. Creativity and Innovation in the Reign of Hatshepsut Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 69 Chicago 2014 ISBN 9781614910244 p. 206.  Redmount Carol A. Bitter Lives Israel in and out of Egypt. p. 8990. The Oxford History of the Biblical World. Michael D. Coogan ed. Oxford University Press. 1998.  Lichtheim Miriam 2019. Ancient Egyptian Literature. Univ of California Press. p. 340. ISBN 9780520305847. Retrieved 22 October 2019.  J.H. Breasted Ancient Times A History of the Early World An Introduction to the Study of Ancient History and the Career of Early Man. Outlines of European History 1. Boston Ginn and Company 1914 p.85  Redford War 225  Tyldesley Joyce 20050428. Nefertiti Egypts Sun Queen. Penguin UK. ISBN 9780141949796.  Gardiner Alan 1953. The Coronation of King Haremhab. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 39 1331.  Brand P.J. 2000. The Monuments of Seti I. Brill Academic Pub. pp. 120122.  Grimal Nicolas 1994. A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell July 19 1994. pp. 250253.  Grimal Nicolas 1994. A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell July 19 1994. p. 256.  Kaelin Oskar Mathys HansPeter Stucky Rolf A 2016. Proceedings of the 
9 th International Congress on the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East June 913 2014 University of Basel. Volume 2. Harrassowitz. p. 99.  Ramses II  Biography Accomplishments Tomb Mummy Death  Facts  Britannica. www.britannica.com. 29 March 2023.  Grimal Nicolas 1994. A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell July 19 1994. p. 257.  Thomas Susanna 2003. Rameses II Pharaoh of the New Kingdom. The Rosen Publishing Group. ISBN 9780823935970. ramses ii.  Amelia Ann Blandford Edwards. Chapter XV Rameses the Great. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008. Retrieved 23 April 2008.  Wolfhart Westendorf Das alte gypten 1969  Kitchen 1982 p. 119.  Eric H. Cline and David OConnor eds. Ramesses III The Life and Times of Egypts Last Hero University of Michigan Press 2012  James Peter 2017 The levantine warrecords of Ramesses III  changing attitudes past present and future p. 71  Kitchen K. A. 2008. Ramesside Inscriptions Setnakht Ramesses III and Contemporaries Translations Ramesside Inscriptions Translations. WileyBlackwell. p. 215.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Blackwell Books 1992. p.271  William F. Edgerton The Strikes in Ramses IIIs TwentyNinth Year JNES 10 no. 3 July 1951 pp. 137145.  Frank J. Yurco End of the Late Bronze Age and Other Crisis Periods A Volcanic Cause in Gold of Praise Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honor of Edward F. Wente ed Emily Teeter  John Larson SAOC 58 1999 pp. 456458.  Ramses III  Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh  Military Leader  Britannica. www.britannica.com. 20240403. Retrieved 20240420. Further readingedit Bierbrier M. L. The Late New Kingdom In Egypt C. 1300664 B.C. A Genealogical and Chronological Investigation. Warminster England Aris  Phillips 1975. Freed Rita A. Yvonne Markowitz and Sue H. dAuria eds. Pharaohs of the Sun Akhenaten Nefertiti Tutankhamun. London Thames  Hudson 1999. Freed Rita E. Egypts Golden Age The Art of Living In the New Kingdom 15581085 B.C. Boston Museum of Fine Arts 1981. Kemp Barry J. The City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti Amarna and Its People. London Thames  Hudson 2012. Morkot Robert. A Short History of New Kingdom Egypt. London Tauris 2015. Radner Karen. State Correspondence In the Ancient World From New Kingdom Egypt to the Roman Empire. New York Oxford University Press 2014. Redford Donald B. Egypt and Canaan In the New Kingdom. Beer Sheva Ben Gurion University of the Negev Press 1990. Sadek Ashraf I. Popular Religion In Egypt During the New Kingdom. Hildesheim Gerstenberg 1987. Spalinger Anthony John. War In Ancient Egypt The New Kingdom. Malden MA Blackwell Pub. 2005. Thomas Angela P. Akhenatens Egypt. Shire Egyptology 10. Princes Risborough UK Shire 1988. Tyldesley Joyce A. Egypts Golden Empire The Age of the New Kingdom. London Headline Book Pub. 2001. Wood Jonathan. R. and Hsu YiTing An Archaeometallurgical Explanation for the Disappearance of Egyptian and Near Eastern CobaltBlue Glass at the end of the Late Bronze Age Internet Archaeology 52 2019. Internet Archaeology External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Egyptian New Kingdom. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Egyptian Empire. Library resources about New Kingdom of Egypt Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Scientific tool for converting calendar dates mentioned in Greek and Demotic Papyri from Egypt into Julian dates. Middle East on the Matrix Egypt The New KingdomPhotographs of many of the historic sites dating from the New Kingdom New Kingdom of Egypt  Aldokkan Preceded by Second Intermediate Period Time Periods of Egypt 15501069 BC Succeeded by Third Intermediate Period v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Empires Ancient Colonies Akkadian NeoSumerian Assyrian Middle Assyrian NeoAssyrian Babylonian Old Babylonian Kassite NeoBabylonian Chinese Qin Han Jin Dmt Egyptian Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom New Kingdom Goguryeo Harsha Hellenistic Macedonian Seleucid Ptolemaic Bactrian IndoGreek Hittite Hunnic White Xiongnu Iranian Median Achaemenid Parthian Sasanian Kush Kushan Magadha Haryanka Shaishunaga Nanda Maurya Shunga Gupta Phoenician Carthaginian Roman Western Eastern Satavahana Xianbei Nirun Postclassical Aragonese Angevin Ayyubid Aztec Benin Bornu Bruneian Bulgarian First Second Burmese First Calakmul Caliphate Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Chalukya Western Eastern Chinese Sui Tang Liao Song Jn Yuan Chola Ethiopian Aksum Zagwe Solomonic Genoese Georgian Huetar Inca Kannauj Pala GurjaraPratihara Rashtrakuta Iranian Tahirid Saffarid Samanid Buyid Japanese Yamato Kamakura Muromachi Edo Kanem Khmer Latin Majapahit Mali Mongol Yuan Golden Horde Chagatai Khanate Ilkhanate Moroccan Idrisid Almoravid Almohad North Sea Oyo Hellenic Roman Byzantine Nicaea Thessalonica Trebizond Epirus Morea RomanoGermanic Carolingian Holy Roman Serbian Singhasari Songhai Srivijaya Tibetan Tikal Tiwanaku Toltec TurcoPersian Ghaznavid Great Seljuk Khwarezmian Timurid Turkic First Western Eastern Second Venetian Vietnamese Dinh Early Le Ly Tran Ho Later Tran Later Le Vijayanagara Wagadou Wari Modern Afghan Ashanti Austrian AustroHungarian Brazilian Burmese Second Third Central African Chinese Ming Qing China Manchukuo Ethiopian Haitian First Second French First Second German German Empire Nazi Germany Indian IndoPersian Mughal Sikh Iranian Safavid Afsharid Zand Qajar Pahlavi Japanese Korean Maratha Mexican First Second Mongol Oirat Khoshut Dzungar Kalmyk Bogd Moroccan Saadi Alawi Ottoman Russian Tsarist Imperial Sokoto Tongan Vietnamese Mac Revival Le Tay son Dainam Vietnam Colonial American Belgian British English Scottish Chinese Danish Dutch French German Italian Japanese Mongol Omani PolishLithuanian Couronian Portuguese Russian Spanish Swedish Lists Empires largest Ancient great powers Medieval great powers Modern great powers European colonialism African empires Miscellaneous Empire as a description of foreign policy American Empire Soviet empire Authority control databases National Germany Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNewKingdomofEgyptoldid1219884309 Categories New Kingdom of Egypt States and territories established in the 
16 th century BC States and territories disestablished in the 
11 th century BC Former kingdoms 
2 nd millennium BC in Egypt 
2 ndmillennium BC establishments in Egypt 
2 ndmillennium BC disestablishments in Egypt Former empires Hidden categories Pages with nonnumeric formatnum arguments Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 20 April 2024 at 1246 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width