Seqenenre Tao - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign 
2 Monumental construction 
3 Mummy 
4 Legacy in modern literature 
5 References 
6 Further reading 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Seqenenre Tao 36 languages Afrikaans   Bikol Central  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog     Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh from the Seventeenth Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Seqenenre Tao Rishi coffin of Seqenenre Tao Pharaoh Reign Starting 1560 or 15581555 BC Predecessor Senakhtenre Ahmose Successor Kamose Royal titulary Horus name Khaemwaset jmW
3 st He appears in Thebes Prenomen Praenomen Seqenenre Sqnjnr He whom Ra makes brave  He who strikes like Ra1 Nomen Taa T33 Thoth is great Consort Ahhotep I Ahmose Inhapi Sitdjehuti Children Kamose Ahmose I AhmoseNefertari Henutemipet Meritamon Nebetta Sapair Tumerisy Binpu Ahmose Henuttamehu Father Senakhtenre Ahmose Mother Tetisheri Burial Mummy found in the Deir elBahri royal cache but was likely originally buried in Dra Abu elNaga Monuments Palace and fortifications at Deir elBallas Dynasty 
17 th Dynasty Seqenenre Tao also Seqenera Djehutyaa or Sekenenra Taa called the Brave ruled over the last of the local kingdoms of the Theban region of Egypt in the Seventeenth Dynasty during the Second Intermediate Period. He probably was the son and successor to Senakhtenre Ahmose and Queen Tetisheri. The dates of his reign are uncertain but he may have risen to power in the decade ending in 1560 BC or in 1558 BC based on the probable accession date of his son Ahmose I the first ruler of the Eighteenth Dynasty see Egyptian chronology. With his queen Ahhotep I Seqenenre Tao fathered two pharaohs Kamose his immediate successor who was the last pharaoh of the Seventeenth Dynasty and Ahmose I who following a regency by his mother was the first pharaoh of the Eighteenth. Seqenenre Tao is credited with starting the opening moves in a war of revanchism against Hyksos incursions into Egypt which saw the country completely liberated during the reign of his son Ahmose I. Reignedit New Kingdom literary tradition states that Seqenenre Tao came into contact with his Hyksos contemporary in the north Apepi or Apophis. The tradition took the form of a tale nowadays called The Quarrel of Apophis and Seqenenre in which the Hyksos king Apepi sent a messenger to Seqenenre in Thebes to demand that the Theban hippopotamus pool be done away with for the noise of these beasts was such that he was unable to sleep in faraway Avaris. Perhaps the only historical information that can be gleaned from the tale is that Egypt was a divided land the area of direct Hyksos control being in the north but the whole of Egypt paying tribute to the Hyksos kings. Seqenenre Tao participated in active diplomatic posturing which went beyond simply exchanging insults with the Asiatic ruler in the North. He seems to have led military skirmishes against the Hyksos and judging from the vicious head wounds on his mummy in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo may have died during one of them.2 His son and successor Wadjkheperre Kamose the last ruler of the Seventeenth Dynasty at Thebes is credited with launching a successful campaign in the Theban war of liberation against the Hyksos although he is thought to have died in the campaign.2 His mother Ahhotep I is thought to have ruled as regent after the death of Kamose and continued the warfare against the Hyksos until Ahmose I the second son of Seqenenre Tao and Ahhotep I was old enough to assume the throne and complete the expulsion of the Hyksos and the unification of Egypt. Monumental constructionedit The relatively short length of the reign of Seqenenre Tao did not allow for the construction of many monumental structures but it is known that he had built a new palace made of mud brick at Deir elBallas. On an adjacent hillside overlooking the river the foundations of a building were found that almost certainly was a military observation post.3 A relatively large amount of pottery known as Kermaware was found at the site indicating that a large number of Kerma Nubians were resident at the site. It is thought that they were there as allies of the pharaoh in his wars against the Hyksos.4 Mummyedit Mummified head of Seqenenre depicting his wounds. The cut above his eye was made by another weapon most probably some sort of dagger. The common theory is that he died in a battle against the Hyksos.5 In the Deir elBahri cache the Mummy of Seqenenre was discovered in 1881. Priests had interred his mummy in the cache along with Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Thutmose III Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II and Ramesses IX of the later Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasty. The mummy was unwrapped by Eugne Grbaut when Professor Gaston Maspero resigned his office of directorship on June 5 1886 and was succeeded in the superintendency of excavations and Egyptian archeology by M. Eugene Grebault. In the same month Grebault started upon the work of unbandaging the mummy of Seqenenre of the eighteenth dynasty. It was under this monarch that a revolt against the Hyksos had originated in the course of which the Asiatics were expelled from Egypt. The history of this king had been considered legendary but from the signs of wounds present in the mummy it looked likely that he had died in battle. In the same season the mummy of Seti I was unbandaged and also that of an anonymous prince.6 A vivid description provides an account of the injury that was done to the pharaoh at his death ...it is not known whether he fell upon the field of battle or was the victim of some plot the appearance of his mummy proves that he died a violent death when about forty years of age. Two or three men whether assassins or soldiers must have surrounded and despatched him before help was available. A blow from an axe must have severed part of his left cheek exposed the teeth fractured the jaw and sent him senseless to the ground another blow must have seriously injured the skull and a dagger or javelin has cut open the forehead on the right side a little above the eye. His body must have remained lying where it fell for some time when found decomposition had set in and the embalming had to be hastily performed as best it might.2 The wound on his forehead was probably caused by a Hyksos axe7 and his neck wound was probably caused by a dagger while he was prone.4 There are no wounds on his arms or hands which suggests he was not able to defend himself. Until 2009 the main hypotheses had been that he died either in a battle against the Hyksos or was killed while sleeping.8 A reconstruction of his death by Egyptologist Garry Shaw and archaeologist and weapons expert Robert Mason suggested a third which they saw as the likeliest that Seqenenre was executed by the Hyksos king Apepi.9 Garry Shaw also analysed the arguments for the competing hypotheses and other physical textual and statistical evidence concluding that the most likely cause of Seqenenres death is ceremonial execution at the hands of an enemy commander following a Theban defeat on the battlefield.10 His mummy appears to have been hastily embalmed. Xrays that were taken of the mummy in the late 19
60 s show that no attempt had been made to remove the brain or to add linen inside the cranium or eyes both normal embalming practice for the time. In the opinion of James E. Harris and Kent Weeks who undertook the forensic examination at the time the Xrays were taken his mummy is the worst preserved of all the royal mummies held at the Egyptian Museum and they noted that a foul oily smell filled the room the moment the case in which his body was exhibited was opened which is likely due to the poor embalming process and the absence of the use of absorbing natron salts leaving some bodily fluids in the mummy at the time of burial.11 Also Harris and Weeks noted in 1973 that his entire facial complex in fact is so different from other pharaohs it is closest in fact to his son Ahmose that he could be fitted more easily into the series of Nubian and Old Kingdom Giza skulls than into that of later Egyptian kings. Various scholars in the past have proposed a Nubian that is nonEgyptianorigin for Sequenre and his family and his facial features suggest that this might indeed be true.12 He was the earliest royal mummy on display in the recently revamped Royal Mummies Hall at the Egyptian Museum Cairo.13 In 2021 a CT scan of his mummy revealed that he died in his forties possibly on a battlefield meanwhile his deformed hands imply that he was possibly imprisoned with his hands tied and his facial fractures correlated well with the Hyksos weapons.14 In April 2021 his mummy was moved to National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade. 15 In 2022 biological anthropologist S.O.Y. Keita reviewed studies from various time periods including the 1973 craniofacial study of Seqenenre Tao which had found affinities with Nubian and Old Kingdom Giza crania. Keita viewed the Giza skulls to be part of a Nile Valley variation and commented that it was neither obligatory that those crania series nor King Tao were of Nubian origin although a Nubian origin is most certainly possible. He also stated that it could be inferred that populations with these traits were ancestral to various later populations.16 Legacy in modern literatureedit Seqenenre Tao appears in the historical novel Shadow Hawk by Andre Norton in which he is murdered by priests allied with the Hyksos. The book focuses on an Egyptian officer leading Nubian troops in the service of the Theban kingdom.17 Referencesedit  Clayton Peter. Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson Ltd paperback 2006. p.94  a b c Maspero Gaston. History Of Egypt Chaldaea Syria Babylonia and Assyria Volume 4 of 12 Project Gutenberg EBook Release Date December 16 2005. EBook 17324. Archived copy. Archived from the original on 20150924. Retrieved 20150329.cite web CS1 maint archived copy as title link  Shaw Ian. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press 2000. p.198.  a b Shaw Ian. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press 2000. p199.  Van de Mieroop 2011 p. 160.  Rappoport S. The Project Gutenberg EBook of History Of Egypt From 330 B.C. To The Present Time Volume 12 of 12 by S. Rappoport. The Grolier Society Publishers London. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 October 2016.  Shaw Ian. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. p199. Oxford University Press 2000.  Smith G Elliot The Royal Mummies. Duckworth Egyptology. 2000 Reprint from original 1912 edition. ISBN 0715629
59 X  Axe Experiment. Museum Secrets. History Television. Archived from the original on 17 March 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2011.  Shaw Garry J. 2009. The Death of King Seqenenre Tao. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 45.  Harris James E. Weeks Kent R. Xraying the Pharaohs. Charles Scribners Sons. 1973. SBN 684130165 p.122123.  Y. Keita S. O. 1990. Studies of ancient crania from northern Africa. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 83 1 3548. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.1330830105. ISSN 00029483. PMID 2221029.cite journal CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  Hawass Zahi. Dancing with Pharaohs The New Royal Mummies Halls at the Egyptian Museum Cairo. KMT Volume 17 Number 1 Spring 2006. p22.  Saleem Sahar N. Hawass Zahi 2021. Computed Tomography Study of the Mummy of King Seqenenre Taa II New Insights Into His Violent Death. Frontiers in Medicine. 8 637527. doi
10.3 3
89 fmed.20
21.6 37527. PMC 7925410. PMID 33681262.  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021.  Keita S. O. Y. September 2022. Ideas about Race in Nile Valley Histories A Consideration of Racial Paradigms in Recent Presentations on Nile Valley Africa from Black Pharaohs to Mummy Genomest. Journal of Ancient Egyptian Interconnections.  Norton Andre 2001. Shadow hawk. Bathgate N.D. San Francisco Bethlehem Books Ignatius Press. OCLC 1285744618. Van de Mieroop Marc 2011. A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell. ISBN 9781405160704. Further readingedit Gardiner Sir Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. Oxford 1964. Hayes William C. Egypt From the Death of Ammenemes III to Sequenenre II in Volume 2 Chapter 2 of the Cambridge Ancient History Revised Edition Cambridge 1965. Pritchard James B. Editor. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament. Third Edition with Supplement. Princeton 1969. External linksedit Sequenenre Taos death and the fate of his mummy a podcast in the History of Egypt Podcast series by Eyptologist Dominic Perry February 2021 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seqenenre Tao. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSeqenenreTaooldid1220474050 Categories 
16 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies Egyptian Museum Egyptian rebels Monarchs killed in action Axe murder Deaths by stabbing in Egypt Ancient rebels Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint archived copy as title CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 24 April 2024 at 0034 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width