Thutmose II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
2.1 Dates and length of reign 

2.1.1 Argument for a short reign 

2.1.2 Argument for a long reign 
2.2 Military Campaigns 
3 Death Toggle Death subsection 
3.1 Burial 
3.2 Mummy 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Thutmose II 49 languages   Azrbaycanca  Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Gaeilge   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn   Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian Pharaoh For the name Thutmose Thutmosis see Thutmose. Thutmose II Thutmosis II Chebron Chebros Relief of Thutmose II in Karnak Temple complex. Pharaoh Reign 13 yrs disputed 14931479 BC Low Chronology 15131499 BC High Chronology Predecessor Thutmose I Successor Hatshepsut Royal titulary Horus name Ka nakht weser pehty K
3 ntwsrpty Victorious bull strong of might1 Strong bull rich of strength Nebty name Netjeri nesyt Nrinsyt Divine of kingship1 Golden Horus Sekhem kheperu Smprw Powerful of manifestations1 Prenomen Praenomen Aa kheper en re 3 pr n R The great one is the manifestation of Ra1 Great is the manifestation of Ra Nomen Djehutymesu wtymsw Thoth is born1 Born of Thoth Djehutymes Neferkhau wtjmsjwnfrw Born of Thoth he whose apparitions are perfect Djehutymes Nedjty re wtjmsjwntjR Thoth is born protector of Ra1 Consort Hatshepsut Iset Children Thutmose III Neferure Father Thutmose I Mother Mutnofret Born C.1510 BC Died 1479 BC aged 31 Burial KV42 now considered unlikely Mummy found in the Deir elBahri royal cache Theban Necropolis Dynasty 
18 th Dynasty Thutmose II was the fourth Pharaoh of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt and his reign is generally dated from 1493 to 1479 BC Low Chronology. Little is known about him and he is overshadowed by his father Thutmose I halfsister and wife Hatshepsut and son Thutmose III. He died around the age of 30 and his body was found in the Deir elBahri Cache above the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut. Familyedit See also Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Thutmose II sometimes read as Thutmosis or Tuthmosis II Thothmes in older history works in Latinized Greek Ancient Egyptian wty.ms Djehutymes meaning Thoth is born was the son of Thutmose I and a minor wife Mutnofret. He was therefore a lesser son of Thutmose I and chose to marry his fully royal halfsister Hatshepsut in order to secure his kingship. While he successfully put down rebellions in Nubia and the Levant and defeated a group of nomadic Bedouins these campaigns were specifically carried out by the kings Generals and not by Thutmose II himself. This is often interpreted as evidence that Thutmose II was still a minor at his accession. Thutmose II fathered Neferure with Hatshepsut as well as a male heir the famous Thutmose III by a lesser wife named Iset before his death.citation needed Some archaeologists believe that Hatshepsut was the real power behind the throne during Thutmose IIs rule because of the similar domestic and foreign policies that were later pursued under her reign and because of her claim that she was her fathers intended heir. She is depicted in several raised relief scenes from a Karnak gateway dating to Thutmose IIs reign both together with her husband and alone.2 She later had herself crowned Pharaoh several years into the rule of her husbands young successor Thutmose III this is confirmed by the fact that the queens agents actually replaced the kings name in a few places with her own cartouches on the gateway.3 Manethos Epitome refers to Thutmose II as Chebron a reference to his prenomen Aakheperenre and gives him a reign of 13 years but this figure is highly disputed among scholars. Some Egyptologists prefer to shorten his reign by a full decade to only three years because his highest Year Date is only a Year 1 II Akhet day 8 stele.4 Reignedit Dates and length of reignedit Red granite fragment bearing the cartouche of Thutmose II. Probably from a throne of a seated statue. From Thutmose III Temple at Koptos Egypt. 
18 th Dynasty Manethos Epitome has been a debated topic among Egyptologists with little consensus given the small number of surviving documents for his reign but a 
13 year reign is preferred by older scholars while newer scholars prefer a shorter 34 year reign for this king due to the minimal amount of scarabs and monuments attested under Thutmose II. It is still possible to estimate when Thutmose IIs reign would have begun by means of a heliacal rise of Sothis in Amenhotep Is reign which would give him a reign from 1493 to 1479 BC5 although uncertainty about how to interpret the rise also permits a date from 1513 to 1499 BC6 and uncertainty about how long Thutmose I ruled could also potentially place his reign several years earlier still. Nonetheless scholars generally assign him a reign from 1493 or 1492 to 14
79.5 7 Argument for a short reignedit Aakheperenre the praenomen of Thutmose II temple of Hatshepsut Luxor. Ineni who was already aged by the start of Thutmose IIs reign lived through this rulers entire reign into that of Hatshepsut.8 In addition Thutmose II is poorly attested in the monumental record and in the contemporary tomb autobiographies of New Kingdom officials. A clear count of monuments from his rule which is the principal tool for estimating a kings reign when dated documents are not available is nearly impossible because Hatshepsut usurped most of his monuments and Thutmose III in turn reinscribed Thutmose IIs name indiscriminately over other monuments.9 However apart from several surviving blocks of buildings erected by the king at Semna Kumma and Elephantine Thutmose IIs only major monument consists of a limestone gateway at Karnak that once lay at the front of the Fourth Pylons forecourt. Even this monument was not completed in Thutmose IIs reign but in the reign of his son Thutmose III which hints at the nearly ephemeral nature of Thutmose IIs reign.10 The gateway was later dismantled and its building blocks incorporated into the foundation of the Third Pylon by Amenhotep III.3 In 1987 Luc Gabolde published an important study that statistically compared the number of surviving scarabs found under Thutmose I Thutmose II and Hatshepsut.11 While monuments can be usurped scarabs are so small and comparatively insignificant that altering their names would be impractical and without profit hence they provide a far better insight into this period. Hatshepsuts reign is believed to have lasted for 21 years and 9 months. Gabolde highlighted in his analysis the consistently small number of surviving scarabs known for Thutmose II compared to Thutmose I and Hatshepsut respectively for instance Flinders Petries older study of scarab seals noted 86 seals for Thutmose I 19 seals for Thutmose II and 149 seals for Hatshepsut while more recent studies by Jaeger estimate a total of 241 seals for Thutmose I 463 seals for Hatshepsut and only 65 seals for Thutmose II.12 Hence unless there was an abnormally low number of scarabs produced under Thutmose II this would indicate that the kings reign was rather shortlived. On this basis Gabolde estimated Thutmose I and IIs reigns to be approximately 11 and 3 full years respectively. Consequently the reign length of Thutmose II has been a much debated subject among Egyptologists with little consensus given the small number of surviving documents for his reign. Argument for a long reignedit Thutmose II in front of an offering table. From the mortuary temple of Hatshepsut at Deir elBahari Egypt. Neues Museum Berlin Thutmoses reign is still traditionally given as 13 or 14 years. Although Inenis autobiography can be interpreted to say that Thutmose reigned only a short time it also calls Thutmose II a hawk in the nest indicating that he was perhaps a child when he assumed the throne.8 Since he lived long enough to father two childrenNeferure and Thutmose IIIthis suggests that he may have had a longer reign of 13 years in order to reach adulthood and start a family. The German Egyptologist J. Von Beckerath uses this line of argument to support the case of a 
13 year reign for Thutmose II.
13 page needed Alan Gardiner noted that at one point a monument had been identified by Georges Daressy in 190014 dated to Thutmoses 
18 th year although its precise location has not been identified.15 This inscription is now usually attributed to Hatshepsut who certainly did have an 
18 th year. Von Beckerath observes that a Year 18 date appears in a fragmentary inscription of an Egyptian official and notes that the date likely refers to Hatshepsuts prenomen Maatkare which had been altered from Aakheperenre Thutmose II with the reference to the deceased Thutmose II being removed. There is also the curious fact that Hatshepsut celebrated her Sed Jubilee in her Year 16 which von Beckerath believes occurred 30 years after the death of Thutmose I her father who was the main source of her claim to power. This would create a gap of 13 to 14 years where Thutmose IIs reign would fit in between Hatshepsut and Thutmose Is rule.16 Von Beckerath additionally stresses that Egyptologists have no conclusive criteria to statistically evaluate the reign length of Thutmose II based on the number of preserved objects from his reign.17 Catherine Roerig has proposed that tomb KV20 generally believed to have been commissioned by Hatshepsut was the original tomb of Thutmose II in the Valley of the Kings.18 If correct this would be a major project on the part of Thutmose II which required a construction period of several years and implies a long reign for this king. Secondly new archaeological work by French Egyptologists at Karnak has produced evidence of a pylon and an opulent festival court of Thutmose II in front of the 
4 th pylon according to Luc Gabolde.19 Meanwhile French Egyptologists at Karnak have also uncovered blocks from a chapel and a barque sanctuary constructed by Thutmose II there.20 Finally Zygmunt Wysocki has proposed that the funerary temple of Hatshepsut at Deir elBahari was originally begun as Thutmose IIs own mortuary temple. Thutmose III here later replaced depictions of Hatshepsut with those by Thutmose II in those parts of the temple that are proposed to have been executed by the latter king before Hatshepsut took over the temple following Thutmose IIs death.21 Thutmose II also contributed to the decoration of the temple of Khnum at Semna.22 A reconsideration of this new archaeological evidence would remove several arguments usually advanced in support of a short reign namely the absence of a tomb that can be assigned to Thutmose II the absence of a funerary temple and the lack of any major works undertaken by this pharaoh.23 Thutmose IIs Karnak building projects would also imply that his reign was closer to 13 years rather than just 3 years. Archaeologists from Warsaw Universitys Institute of Archaeology led by Andrzej Niwiski have discovered a treasure chest and a wooden box dated 3500 years back in the Egyptian site of Deir elBahari in March 20
20.2 4 The stone chest consisted of several items and all of them covered with linen canvas. Three bundles of flax were found during the excavation. A goose skeleton was found inside one of them sacrificed for religious purposes. The second one included goose eggs. It is believed that what the third bundle contained was an ibis egg which had a symbolic meaning for the ancient Egyptians. In addition a little wooden trinket box was discovered inside the bundle believed to contain the name Pharaoh Thutmose II. According to the Andrzej Niwiski The chest itself is about 40 cm long with a slight smaller height. It was perfectly camouflaged looked like an ordinary stone block. Only after a closer look did it turn out to be a chest.24 Military Campaignsedit Upon Thutmoses coronation Kush rebelled as it had the habit of doing upon the transition of Egyptian kingship. The Nubian state had been completely subjugated by Thutmose I25 but some rebels from Khenthennofer rose up and the Egyptian forces retreated into a fortress built by Thutmose I.26 On account of his relative youth at the time Thutmose II dispatched an army into Nubia rather than leading it himself but he seems to have easily crushed this revolt with the aid of his fathers military generals.27 An account of the campaign is given by the historian Josephus who refers to it as the Ethiopic War. Thutmose also seems to have fought against the Shasu Bedouin in the Sinai in a campaign mentioned by Ahmose PenNekhbet.15 Although this campaign has been called a minor raid there is a fragment recorded by Kurt Sethe that records a campaign in Upper Retenu or Syria which appears to have reached as far as a place called Niy where Thutmose I hunted elephants after returning from crossing the Euphrates.28 This quite possibly indicates that the raid against the Shasu was only fought en route to Syria.28 Deathedit Burialedit His tomb is not known for certain. It is speculated that it may have originally been KV
42 by whom. Another option is tomb C4 near the Valley of the kings. The much destroyed tomb dates to the early 
18 th Dynasty and shows many features typical for a royal burial such as remains of an Amduat depicted on the walls. 29 However his remains were found in the Royal Cache of Mummies at Deir elBahari Theban Necropolis. Mummyedit The mummified head of Thutmose II Thutmose IIs mummy was discovered in the Deir elBahri cache revealed in 1881. He was interred along with other 
18 th and 
19 th dynasty leaders including Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose III Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II and Ramesses IX. It included a label that indicated it had been rewrapped in the Twentyfirst Dynasty.30 It can be viewed today in the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Cairo. The mummy was unwrapped by Gaston Maspero on July 1 1886. There is a strong familial resemblance to the mummy of Thutmose I his likely father as the mummys face and shape of the head are very similar. The body of Thutmose II suffered greatly at the hands of ancient tomb robbers with his left arm broken off at the shoulderjoint the forearm separated at the elbow joint and his right arm chopped off below the elbow. His anterior abdominal wall and much of his chest had been hacked at possibly by an axe. In addition his right leg had been severed from his body.31 All of these injuries were sustained postmortem though the body also showed signs that Thutmose II did not have an easy life as the following quote by Gaston Maspero attests He had scarcely reached the age of thirty when he fell a victim to a disease of which the process of embalming could not remove the traces. The skin is scabrous in patches and covered with scars while the upper part of the skull is bald the body is thin and somewhat shrunken and appears to have lacked vigour and muscular power.32 James Harris and Fawzia Hussien 1991 conducted an Xray survey on New Kingdom royal mummies and examined the mummified remains of Thutmose II. The results of the study determined that the mummy of Thutmose II had a craniofacial trait measurement that is common among Nubian populations.33 His mummy has the inventory number CG 610
66.3 0 In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.34 The identity of the mummy has been questioned.30 The rewrapping label appears to identify him as Thutmose II but it may have been modified from Thutmose I.30 See alsoedit History of Ancient Egypt Family tree of the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt Referencesedit  a b c d e f Leprohon Ronald J. 2013. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary. SBL Press. pp. 9798. ISBN 9781589837362. Retrieved 10 December 2021.  Betsy Bryan 2000. The 
18 th Dynasty before the Amarna Period. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. p. 236.  a b Betsy Bryan p. 236  J. Von Beckerath 1997. Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten Mnchner gyptologische Studien 46. Mainz Philip von Zabern. p. 201.  a b Grimal Nicolas 1988. A History of Ancient Egypt. Librairie Arthme Fayard. p. 204.  Helk Wolfgang. Schwachstellen der ChronologieDiskussion. pp. 4749. Gttinger Miszellen Gttingen 1983  Shaw Ian Nicholson Paul 1995. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. The British Museum Press. p. 289.  a b Breasted James Henry 1906. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II. University of Chicago Press. p. 47.  Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988. p. 216.  Betsy Bryan pp. 235236  Gabolde Luc 1987. La Chronologie du rgne de Thoutmosis II ses consquences sur la datation des momies royales et leurs rpercutions sur lhistoire du dveloppement de la Valle des Rois. Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur. 14 6187.  Gabolde Luc 1987. La Chronologie du rgne de Thoutmosis II ses consquences sur la datation des momies royales et leurs rpercutions sur lhistoire du dveloppement de la Valle des Rois. Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur. 14 6768.  J. Von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten Mnchner gyptologische Studien 46 Philip von Zabern Mainz 1997  G. Daressy Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte 1 1900 9020  a b Gardiner Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. p. 180 Oxford University Press 1964  J. Von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten Mnchner gyptologische Studien 46 Philip von Zabern Mainz 1997 p. 121  J. von Beckerath Nochmals zur Regierung Tuthmosis II Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur 17 1990 pp. 6574  C. Roerig The Building Activities of Thutmose III in the Valley of the Kings in E.C. Cline D. OConnor eds. Thutmose III A New Biography Ann Arbor 2006 pp. 238259  Luc Gabolde La cour de fetes de Thoutmosis II  Karnak Cahiers de Karnak 9 1993 pp. 1100 Luc Gabolde Monuments dcors en bas relief aux noms de Thoutmosis II et Hatshepsout  Karnak Mmoires publis par les membres de lInstitut Franais dArchology Orientale MIFAO 123 le Cairo 2005.  Luc Gabolde Monuments dcors en bas relief aux noms de Thoutmosis II et Hatshepsout  Karnak Mmoires publis par les membres de lInstitut Franais dArchology Orientale MIFAO 123 le Cairo 2005.  Zygmunt Wysocki The Temple of Queen Hatshepsut at Deir elBahari Its Original Form Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 42 1986 pp. 213228  W. V. Davies Tombos and the Viceroy InebnyAmenemnekhu British Museum Studies in Ancient Egypt and the Sudan 10 2008 
45 f  Thomas Schneider Contributions to the Chronology of the New Kingdom and the Third Intermediate Period Egypt and the Levant 20 2010. p. 393  a b Stone chest found in ancient temple and containing skeleton of a sacrificial goose could lead to hidden royal tomb. www.thefirstnews.com. Retrieved 20200313.  Steindorff George and Seele Keith. When Egypt Ruled the East. p. 35. University of Chicago 1942  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 49. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 50. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906  a b Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 51. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906  Piers Litherland Has the Tomb of Thutmoses II been found In Egyptian Archaeology. 63 Autumn 2023 pp. 2831.  a b c d Habicht M.E Bouwman A.S Rhli F.J 25 January 2016. Identifications of ancient Egyptian royal mummies from the 
18 th Dynasty reconsidered. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology. 159 S61 216231. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.22909. PMID 26808107.  Smith G Elliot. The Royal Mummies pp. 2829. Duckworth 2000 reprint.  Maspero Gaston. History Of Egypt Chaldaea Syria Babylonia and Assyria Volume 4 of 12 Project Gutenberg EBook Release Date December 16 2005. EBook 17324.  Harris James E. Hussien Fawzia September 1991. The identification of the Eighteenth Dynasty royal mummies a biological perspective. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. 1 34 235239. doi
10.1 0
02 oa.1390010317. ISSN 10474
82 X.  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021. External linksedit Media related to Thutmosis II at Wikimedia Commons v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleThutmoseIIoldid1220679571 Categories Thutmose II 1479 BC deaths 
15 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies Ancient child monarchs Egyptian Museum Hatshepsut Children of Thutmose I Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2016 Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from December 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 25 April 2024 at 0734 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width