Seti I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
1.1 Reign Length 
1.2 Military campaigns 
1.3 Capture of Kadesh 
2 Burial Toggle Burial subsection 
2.1 Mummy 
3 Alleged coregency with Ramesses II 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Seti I 63 languages Afrikaans nglisc  Asturianu Azrbaycanca  Brezhoneg Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands   Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn   Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Seti I Sethi I Image of Seti I from his temple in Abydos Pharaoh Reign 129412901279 BC Predecessor Ramesses I Successor Ramesses II Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht KhaemwasetSeankhtawy The strong bull rising in Waset he who makes life in the two lands 12 Nebty name Wehemmesut Sekhemkhepesh Derpedjetpesdjet He who renews the births strong with a sword who subjugates the nine bows Golden Horus Wehemkhau Weserpedjutemtawnebu He who renews the crowns he who subjugates the nine bows in all lands Prenomen Praenomen Menmaatre Eternal is the Justice of Re Nomen Seti Merenptah He of the god Seth beloved of Ptah 3 Consort Tuya Tanedjemet  Children Tia Ramesses II Henutmire  Father Ramesses I Mother Sitre Died 1279 BC Burial KV17 Mummy found in the Deir elBahri royal cache Theban Necropolis Monuments Mortuary Temple of Seti I Temple at Abydos Great Hypostyle Hall Dynasty 
19 th Dynasty Menmaatre Seti I or Sethos I in Greek was the second pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt during the New Kingdom period ruling c.1294 or 1290 BCE to 1279 BCE.45 He was the son of Ramesses I and Sitre and the father of Ramesses II. The name Seti means of Set which indicates that he was consecrated to the god Set also termed Sutekh or Seth. As with most pharaohs Seti had several names. Upon his ascension he took the prenomen mnm
3 tr  usually vocalized in Egyptian as Menmaatre Established is the Justice of Re.3 His better known nomen or birth name is transliterated as sty mrynpt or Sety Merenptah meaning Man of Set beloved of Ptah. Manetho incorrectly considered him to be the founder of the 
19 th Dynasty and gave him a reign length of 55 years though no evidence has ever been found for so long a reign. Reignedit Hieroglyphs from the tomb of Seti I After the enormous social upheavals generated by Akhenatens religious reform Horemheb Ramesses I and Seti Is main priority was to reestablish order in the kingdom and to reaffirm Egypts sovereignty over Canaan and Syria which had been compromised by the increasing external pressures from the Hittite state. Seti with energy and determination confronted the Hittites several times in battle. Without succeeding in destroying the Hittites as a potential danger to Egypt he reconquered most of the disputed territories for Egypt and generally concluded his military campaigns with victories. The memory of Seti Is military successes was recorded in some large scenes placed on the front of the temple of Amun situated in Karnak. A funerary temple for Seti was constructed in what is now known as Qurna Mortuary Temple of Seti I on the west bank of the Nile at Thebes while a magnificent temple made of white limestone at Abydos featuring exquisite relief scenes was started by Seti and later completed by his son. His capital was at Memphis. He was considered a great king by his peers but his fame has been overshadowed since ancient times by that of his son Ramesses II. Reign Lengthedit Basalt fragment. Part of a necklace in relief is shown together with a cartouche of Seti I. 
19 th Dynasty. From Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Seti Is known accession date is known to be on III Shemu day 
24.6  Seti Is reign length was either 9 or 11 rather than 15 full years. Egyptologist Kenneth Kitchen has estimated that it was 15 years but there are no dates recorded for Seti I after his Year 11 Gebel Barkal stela. As this king is otherwise quite well documented in historical records other scholars suggest that a continuous break in the record for his last four years is unlikely although it is technically possible simply that no records have been yet discovered. Temple of Seti I at Abydos Peter J. Brand noted that the king personally opened new rock quarries at Aswan to build obelisks and colossal statues in his Year 
9.7  This event is commemorated on two rock stelas in Aswan. However most of Setis obelisks and statues such as the Flaminian and Luxor obelisks were only partly finished or decorated by the time of his death since they were completed early under his sons reign based on epigraphic evidence they bore the early form of Ramesses IIs royal prenomen Usermaatre. Ramesses II used the prenomen Usermaatre to refer to himself in his first year and did not adopt the final form of his royal title Usermaatre Setepenre until late into his second year.8 Brand aptly notes that this evidence calls into question the idea of a 15 Year reign for Seti I and suggests that Seti died after a ten to eleven year reign because only two years would have passed between the opening of the Rock Quarries and the partial completion and decoration of these monuments.9 This explanation conforms better with the evidence of the unfinished state of Seti Is monuments and the fact that Ramesses II had to complete the decorations on many of his fathers unfinished monuments including the southern half of the Great Hypostyle Hall at Karnak and portions of his fathers temples at Gurnah and Abydos during the very first Year of his own reign.10 Critically Brand notes that the larger of the two Aswan rock stelas states that Seti I has ordered the commissioning of multitudinous works for the making of very great obelisks and great and wondrous statues i.e. colossi in the name of His Majesty L.P.H. He made great barges for transporting them and ships crews to match them for ferrying them from the quarry. KRI 74121411 However despite this promise Brand stresses that there are few obelisks and apparently no colossi inscribed for Seti. Ramesses II however was able to complete the two obelisks and four seated colossi from Luxor within the first years of his reign the two obelisks in particular being partly inscribed before he adopted the final form of his prenomen sometime in his year two. This state of affairs strongly implies that Seti died after ten to eleven years. Had he Seti I ruled on until his fourteenth or fifteenth year then surely more of the obelisks and colossi he commissioned in his year nine would have been completed in particular those from Luxor. If he in fact died after little more than a decade on the throne however then at most two years would have elapsed since the Aswan quarries were opened in year nine and only a fraction of the great monoliths would have been complete and inscribed at his death with others just emerging from the quarries so that Ramesses would be able to decorate them shortly after his accession. ... It now seems clear that a long fourteento fifteenyear reign for Seti I can be rejected for lack of evidence. Rather a tenure of ten or more likely probably eleven years appears the most likely scenario.12 Astronomical ceiling of Seti I tomb showing the personified representations of stars and constellations The German Egyptologist Jrgen von Beckerath also accepts that Seti Is reign lasted only 11 Years in a 1997 book.13 Setis highest known date is Year 11 IV Shemu day 12 or 13 on a sandstone stela from Gebel Barkal12 but he would have briefly survived for 2 to 3 days into his Year 12 before dying based on the date of Ramesses IIs rise to power. Seti Is accession date has been determined by Wolfgang Helck to be III Shemu day 24 which is very close to Ramesses IIs known accession date of III Shemu day 
27.1 4 More recently in 2011 the Dutch Egyptologist Jacobus Van Dijk questioned the Year 11 date stated in the great temple of Amun on the Gebel Barkal stelaSeti Is previously known highest attested date.15 This monument is quite badly preserved but still depicts Seti I in erect posture which is the only case occurring since his Year 4 when he started to be depicted in a stooping posture on his stelae. Furthermore the glyphs I  representing the 11 are damaged in the upper part and may just as well be I I I instead. Subsequently Van Dijk proposed that the Gebel Barkal stela should be dated to Year 3 of Seti I and that Setis highest date more likely is Year 9 as suggested by the wine jars found in his tomb.16 In a 2012 paper David Aston analyzed the wine jars and came to the same conclusion since no wine labels higher than Seti Is 
8 th regnal year were found in his KV17 tomb.17 Military campaignsedit Seti I fought a series of wars in western Asia Libya and Nubia in the first decade of his reign. The main source for Setis military activities are his battle scenes on the north exterior wall of the Karnak Hypostyle Hall along with several royal stelas with inscriptions mentioning battles in Canaan and Nubia. Wepwawet wolfgod of war and death giving scepters to Seti I basrelief from the Temple of Seti I In his first regnal year he led his armies along the Horus Military road the coastal road that led from the Egyptian city of Tjaru ZarwSile in the northeast corner of the Egyptian Nile Delta along the northern coast of the Sinai peninsula ending in the town of Canaan in the modern Gaza strip. The Ways of Horus consisted of a series of military forts each with a well that are depicted in detail in the kings war scenes on the north wall of the Karnak Hypostyle Hall. While crossing the Sinai the kings army fought local Bedouins called the Shasu. In Canaan he received the tribute of some of the city states he visited. Others including BethShan and Yenoam had to be captured but were easily defeated. A stele in BethShan testifies to that reconquest according to Grdsseloff Rowe Albrecht et Albright18 Seti defeated Asian nomads in war against the Apirus Hebrews. Dussaud commented Albrights article The interest of Professor Albrights note is mainly due to the fact that he no longer objects to the identification of Apiru with Ibri i.e. the Hebrews provided that we grant him that the vocal change has been driven by a popular etymology that brought the term eber formerly ibr that is to say the man from beyond the river.19 It seems that Egypt extends beyond the river. The attack on Yenoam is illustrated in his war scenes while other battles such as the defeat of BethShan were not shown because the king himself did not participate sending a division of his army instead. The year one campaign continued into Lebanon where the king received the submission of its chiefs who were compelled to cut down valuable cedar wood themselves as tribute. At some unknown point in his reign Seti I defeated Libyan tribesmen who had invaded Egypts western border. Although defeated the Libyans would pose an everincreasing threat to Egypt during the reigns of Merenptah and Ramesses III. The Egyptian army also put down a minor rebellion in Nubia in the 
8 th year of Seti I. Seti himself did not participate in it although his crown prince the future Ramesses II may have. Capture of Kadeshedit Seti I in Syria The greatest achievement of Seti Is foreign policy was the capture of the Syrian town of Kadesh and neighboring territory of Amurru from the Hittite Empire. Egypt had not held Kadesh since the time of Akhenaten. Seti I was successful in defeating a Hittite army that tried to defend the town. He entered the city in triumph together with his son Ramesses II and erected a victory stela at the site which has been found by archaeologists.20 Kadesh however soon reverted to Hittite control because the Egyptians did not or could not maintain a permanent military occupation of Kadesh and Amurru so close to the Hittite homelands. It is unlikely that Seti I made a peace treaty with the Hittites or voluntarily returned Kadesh and Amurru but he may have reached an informal understanding with the Hittite king Muwatalli on the precise boundaries of their empires. Five years after Seti Is death however his son Ramesses II resumed hostilities and made a failed attempt to recapture Kadesh. Kadesh was henceforth effectively held by the Hittites even though Ramesses temporarily occupied the city in his 
8 th year. The traditional view of Seti Is wars was that he restored the Egyptian empire after it had been lost in the time of Akhenaten. This was based on the chaotic picture of Egyptiancontrolled Syria and Palestine seen in the Amarna letters a cache of diplomatic correspondence from the time of Akhenaten found at Akhenatens capital at elAmarna in Middle Egypt. Recent scholarship however indicates that the empire was not lost at this time except for its northern border provinces of Kadesh and Amurru in Syria and Lebanon. While evidence for the military activities of Akhenaten Tutankhamun and Horemheb is fragmentary or ambiguous Seti I has left us an impressive war monument that glorifies his achievements along with a number of texts all of which tend to magnify his prowess on the battlefield. Burialedit Head of the mummy of Seti I Pharaoh Seti I detail of a wall painting from the Tomb of Seti I KV17 at the Valley of the Kings. Neues Museum Setis wellpreserved tomb KV17 was found in 1817 by Giovanni Battista Belzoni in the Valley of the Kings21 it proved to be the longest at 446 feet 136 meters22 and deepest of all the New Kingdom royal tombs. It was also the first tomb to feature decorations including the Book of the Heavenly Cow23 on every passageway and chamber with highly refined basreliefs and colorful paintings  fragments of which including a large column depicting Seti I with the goddess Hathor can be seen in the National Archaeological Museum Florence. This decorative style set a precedent which was followed in full or in part in the tombs of later New Kingdom kings. Setis mummy itself was discovered by mil Brugsch on June 6 1881 in the mummy cache tomb DB320 at Deir elBahri and has since been kept at the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.24 His huge sarcophagus carved in one piece and intricately decorated on every surface including the goddess Nut on the interior base is in Sir John Soanes Museum.25 Soane bought it for exhibition in his open collection in 1824 when the British Museum refused to pay the 2000 demanded.26 On its arrival at the museum the alabaster was pure white and inlaid with blue copper sulphate. Years of the London climate and pollution have darkened the alabaster to a buff colour and absorbed moisture has caused the hygroscopic inlay material to fall out and disappear completely. A small watercolour nearby records the appearance as it was. The tomb also had an entrance to a secret tunnel hidden behind the sarcophagus which Belzonis team estimated to be 100 meters 330 feet long.27 However the tunnel was not truly excavated until 1961 when a team led by Sheikh Ali AbdelRasoul began digging in hopes of discovering a secret burial chamber containing hidden treasures.27 The team failed to follow the original passage in their excavations and had to call a halt due to instabilities in the tunnel28 further issues with permits and finances eventually ended Sheikh Alis dreams of treasure27 though they were at least able to establish that the passage was over 30 meters 98 feet longer than the original estimate. In June 2010 a team from Egypts Ministry of Antiquities led by Dr. Zahi Hawass completed excavation of the tunnel which had begun again after the discovery in 2007 of a downwardsloping passage beginning approximately 136 meters 446 feet into the previously excavated tunnel. After uncovering two separate staircases they found that the tunnel ran for 174 meters 571 feet in total unfortunately the last step seemed to have been abandoned prior to completion and no secret burial chamber was found.28 Mummyedit From an examination of Setis extremely wellpreserved mummy Seti I appears to have been less than forty years old when he died unexpectedly. This is in stark contrast to the situation with Horemheb Ramesses I and Ramesses II who all lived to an advanced age. The reasons for his relatively early death are uncertain but there is no evidence of violence on his mummy. His mummy was found decapitated but this was likely caused by tomb robbers after his death. The Amun priest carefully reattached his head to his body with the use of linen cloths. It has been suggested that he died from a disease which had affected him for years possibly related to his heart. The latter was found placed in the right part of the body while the usual practice of the day was to place it in the left part during the mummification process. Opinions vary whether this was a mistake or an attempt to have Setis heart work better in his afterlife. Seti Is mummy is about 
1.7  metres 5 feet 7 inches tall.29 In April 2021 his mummy was moved from the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and 4 queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.30 Alleged coregency with Ramesses IIedit Around Year 9 of his reign Seti appointed his son Ramesses II as the crown prince and his chosen successor but the evidence for a coregency between the two kings is likely illusory. Peter J. Brand stresses in his thesis31 that relief decorations at various temple sites at Karnak Qurna and Abydos which associate Ramesses II with Seti I were actually carved after Setis death by Ramesses II himself and hence cannot be used as source material to support a coregency between the two monarchs. In addition the late William Murnane who first endorsed the theory of a coregency between Seti I and Ramesses II32 later revised his view of the proposed coregency and rejected the idea that Ramesses II had begun to count his own regnal years while Seti I was still alive.33 Finally Kenneth Kitchen rejects the term coregency to describe the relationship between Seti I and Ramesses II he describes the earliest phase of Ramesses IIs career as a prince regency where the young Ramesses enjoyed all the trappings of royalty including the use of a royal titulary and harem but did not count his regnal years until after his fathers death.34 This is due to the fact that the evidence for a coregency between the two kings is vague and highly ambiguous. Two important inscriptions from the first decade of Ramesses reign namely the Abydos Dedicatory Inscription and the Kuban Stela of Ramesses II consistently give the latter titles associated with those of a crown prince only namely the kings eldest son and hereditary prince or childheir to the throne along with some military titles.35 Hence no clear evidence supports the hypothesis that Ramesses II was a coregent under his father. Brand stresses that Ramesses claim that he was crowned king by Seti even as a child in his arms in the Dedicatory Inscription is highly selfserving and open to question although his description of his role as crown prince is more accurate...The most reliable and concrete portion of this statement is the enumeration of Ramesses titles as eldest kings son and heir apparent well attested in sources contemporary with Setis reign.36 See alsoedit Dorothy Eady List of colossal sculpture in situ Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Referencesedit  Sety I Menmaatre Sethos I King Sety I. Digital Egypt. UCL. Retrieved 15 February 2007.  Ancient Egyptian Royalty. Retrieved 21 July 2009.  a b Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson Ltd 1994. p.140  Michael Rice 1999. Whos Who in Ancient Egypt. Routledge.  J. von Beckerath 1997. Chronologie des egyptischen Pharaonischen in German. Phillip von Zabern. p. 190.  Peter J. Brand The Monuments of Seti I and their Historical Significance Epigraphic Historical and Art Historical Analysis pp.301302 PDF Brill 2000 pp.301302  Peter J. Brand The Lost Obelisks and Colossi of Seti I JARCE 34 1997 pp. 101114  Brand The Lost Obelisks pp. 106107  Brand The Lost Obelisks p. 114  Brand The Lost Obelisks p.107  Brand The Lost Obelisks p.104  a b Peter J. Brand 2000. The Monuments of Seti I Epigraphic Historical and Art Historical Analysis. Brill. p. 308.cite book CS1 maint numeric names authors list link  von Beckerath Chronologie p.190  Brand The Monuments of Seti I pp. 301302  J. Van Dijk The Date of the Gebel Barkal Stela of Seti I PDF in in D. Aston B. Bader C. Gallorini P. Nicholson  S. Buckingham eds Under the Potters tree. Studies on Ancient Egypt presented to Janine Bourriau on the Occasion of her 
70 th Birthday  Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 204 Uitgeverij Peeters en Departement Oosterse Studies Leuven  Paris  Walpole MA 2011 pp.325332.  J. van Dijk The Date of the Gebel Barkal Stela of Seti I PDF in D. Aston B. Bader C. Gallorini P. Nicholson  S. Buckingham eds Under the Potters tree. Studies on Ancient Egypt presented to Janine Bourriau on the Occasion of her 
70 th Birthday  Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 204 Uitgeverij Peeters en Departement Oosterse Studies Leuven  Paris  Walpole MA 2011 pp.325332.  D. A. Aston Radiocarbon Wine Jars and New Kingdom Chronology PDF gypten und Levante 2223 201213 pp. 289315.  Albright W. The smaller BethShean stele of Sethos I 13091290 B. C. Bulletin of the American schools of Oriental research feb 1952 p. 2432.  Dussaud R. Syria Revue dart oriental et darchologie 1952 2934 p. 386.  Brand P.J. 2000. The Monuments of Seti I. Brill Academic Pub. pp. 120122.  This pharaohs painted tomb was missing its mummy. 25 June 2020.  Pharaoh Seti Is Tomb Bigger Than Thought. Archived from the original on 20 April 2008. Retrieved 19 April 2008.  Legend of the Gods. Kegan Paul. 1912. Archived from the original on 25 April 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2011.  Rohl 1995 pp. 7173.  Egyptian Collection at the Sir John Soanes Museum. Archived from the original on 3 October 2010. Retrieved 15 February 2007.  Sir John Soanes museum recreates architects vision of pharaohs tomb. TheGuardian.com. 5 November 2017.  a b c ElAref Nevine 29 October 2009. Secret Tunnels And Ancient Mysteries. AlAhram Weekly. No. 970. Retrieved 31 January 2019.  a b Williams Sean 30 June 2010. No Secret Burial At End Of Seti I Tunnel. The Independent. Retrieved 30 January 2019.  Christine Hobson Exploring the World of the Pharaohs A Complete Guide to Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 1993 p. 97  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021.  Peter J. Brand 1998. Studies on the Historical Implications of Seti Is Monuments PDF. The Monuments of Seti I and their Historical Significance PhD thesis. University of Toronto. Archived PDF from the original on 10 June 2007. Retrieved 26 February 2011.  William Murnane 1977. Ancient Egyptian Coregencies. Seminal book on the Egyptian coregency system  W. Murnane 1990. The road to Kadesh A Historical interpretation of the battle reliefs of King Seti I at Karnak. SAOC. pp. 93 footnote 90.  K.A. Kitchen Pharaoh Triumphant The Life and Times of Ramesses II King of Egypt Benben Publication 1982 pp. 2730  Brand The Monuments of Seti I pp. 315316  Brand The Monuments of Seti I p. 316 Bibliographyedit Brand Peter J. The Monuments of Seti I Epigraphic Historical and ArtHistorical Analysis. E. J. Brill Leiden 2000 ISBN 9789004117709. Epigraphic Survey The Battle Reliefs of King Sety I. Reliefs and Inscriptions at Karnak vol. 4. Chicago 1985. Caverley Amice The Temple of King Sethos I at Abydos London Chicago 193358 4 volumes. Gaballa Gaballa A. Narrative in Egyptian Art. Mainz 1976 Hasel Michael G. Domination  Resistance Egyptian Military Activity in the Southern Levant 13001185 BC Leiden 1998. ISBN 9004109846 Kitchen Kenneth Pharaoh Triumphant The Life and Times of Ramesses II Warminster 1982. ISBN 0856682152 Liverani Mario Three Amarna Essays Monographs on the Ancient Near East 15 Malibu 1979. Murnane William J. 1990 The Road to Kadesh Chicago. Rohl David M. 1995. Pharaohs and Kings A Biblical Quest illustrated reprint ed.. Crown Publishers. ISBN 9780517703151. Schulman Alan R. Hittites Helmets  Amarna Akhenatens First Hittite War Akhenaten Temple Project volume II Toronto 1988 5379. Spalinger Anthony J. The Northern Wars of Seti I An Integrative Study. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 16 1979. 2946. Spalinger Anthony J. EgyptianHittite Relations at the Close of the Amarna Age and Some Notes on Hittite Military Strategy in North Syria Bulletin of the Egyptological Seminar 1 19795589. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seti I. Seti I  Archaeowiki.org The Karnak Hypostyle Hall Project website The complete titulary of Seti I 360 fullscreen photospheric visit of Seti I tomb v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Rulers of the Ancient Near East Territories dates 12345 Egypt Canaan Ebla Mari Kish Assur Akshak Akkad Uruk Adab Umma Lagash Ur Elam 40003200 BCE Naqada I Naqada II EgyptMesopotamia relations PreDynastic period 40002900 BCE Susa I Uruk period 40003100 BCE Anu Ziggurat 4000 BCE Anonymous Kingpriests Susa II Uruk influence or control 32003100 BCE ProtoDynastic period Naqada III Early or legendary kings Upper Egypt Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Lower Egypt Hedju Hor NyHor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner NatHor Mekh Double Falcon Wash 31002900 BCE Early Dynastic Period First Dynasty of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer Menes Neithhotep regent HorAha Djer Djet Merneith regent Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird Canaanites Jemdet Nasr period 31002900 BCE ProtoElamite period Susa III 31002700 BCE 2900 BCE Second Dynasty of Egypt Hotepsekhemwy NebraRaneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Early Dynastic Period I 29002700 BCE First Eblaite Kingdom First kingdom of Mari Kish I dynasty Jushur Kullassinabel Nangishlishma Entarahana Babum Puannum Kalibum 2800 BCE Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab Mashda Arwium Etana Balih Enmenuna MelemKish Barsalnuna Uruk I dynasty Meshkianggasher Enmerkar conqueror of Aratta 2700 BCE Early Dynastic Period II 27002600 BCE Zamug Tizqar Ilku Iltasadum Lugalbanda Dumuzid the Fisherman Enmebaragesi made the land of Elam submit6 Aga of Kish Gilgamesh Old Elamite period 27001500 BCE IndusMesopotamia relations 2600 BCE Third Dynasty of Egypt Djoser First Egyptian pyramids Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni Early Dynastic Period III 26002340 BCE Sagisu Aburlim Agurlim IbbiDamu BabaDamu Kish II dynasty 5 kings Uhub Mesilim UrNungal Udulkalama Labashum Lagash Enhegal Lugal shaengur Ur AImdugud UrPabilsag Meskalamdug Queen Puabi Akalamdug Enundaraanna Meshe Melamanna Lugalkitun Adab Ninkisalsi Medurba Lugaldalu 2575 BCE Old Kingdom of Egypt Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis Ur I dynasty Mesannepada King of Ur and Kish victorious over Uruk 2500 BCE Phoenicia 2500539 BCE Second kingdom of Mari IkunShamash IkuShamagan Ansud Saumu IshtupIshar IkunMari IblulIl Nizi Kish III dynasty KuBaba Akshak dynasty Unzi Undalulu Uruk II dynasty Ensha kushanna Mugsi Umma I dynasty Pabilgagaltuku Lagash I dynasty UrNanshe Akurgal Aannepada Meskiagnun Elulu Balulu Awan dynasty Peli Tata Ukkutahesh Hishur 2450 BCE Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas EnarDamu IsharMalik Ush Enakalle Elamite invasions 3 kings6 Shushun tarana Napilhush 2425 BCE KunDamu Eannatum King of Lagash Sumer Akkad conqueror of Elam 2400 BCE AdubDamu IgrishHalam IrkabDamu Kish IV dynasty PuzurSuen UrZababa Urur Lugalkinishedudu Lugalkisalsi Eiginimpae Meskigal UrLumma Il Gishakidu Queen Barairnun Enannatum Entemena Enannatum II Enentarzi Ur II dynasty Nanni MeshkiangNanna II Kikusiwetempti 2380 BCE Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Adab dynasty Lugalannemundu King of the four quarters of the world 2370 BCE IsarDamu EnnaDagan IkunIshar IshqiMari Invasion by Mari Anbu Anba Bazi Zizi of Mari Limer Sharrumiter6 Ukush Lugalanda Urukagina Luhishan 2350 BCE PuzurNirah IshuIl ShuSin Uruk III dynasty Lugalzagesi Governor of Umma King of all Sumer 2340 BCE Akkadian Period 23402150 BCE Akkadian Empire Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu Akkadian Governors Eshpum Ilshurabi Epirmupi Iliishmani 2250 BCE NaramSin Lugalushumgal vassal of the Akkadians 2200 BCE First Intermediate Period Seventh Dynasty of Egypt Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Second Eblaite Kingdom Third kingdom of Mari Shakkanakku dynasty Ididish ShuDagan IshmaDagan Vassals of the Akkadians SharKaliSharri Igigi Imi Nanum Ilulu 3 years Dudu Shuturul Uruk IV dynasty Urnigin Urgigir Lagash II dynasty PuzerMama UrNingirsu I Pirigme LuBaba Lugula Kaku HishepRatep Helu Khita PuzurInshushinak 2150 BCE Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Ur III period 21502000 BCE NrMr IshtupIlum IshgumAddu Apilkin Gutian dynasty 21 kings Laerabum Sium Kuda Uruk Puzurili UrUtu Umma II dynasty Lugalannatum vassal of the Gutians UrBaba Gudea UrNingirsu Urgar Nammahani Tirigan 2125 BCE Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Uruk V dynasty Utuhengal 2100 BCE Vassals of UR III Iddiilum IliIshar TuraDagan PuzurIshtar Vassals of Ur III7 Ur III dynasty Kings of Ur Sumer and Akkad UrNammu Shulgi AmarSin ShuSin 20251763 BCE Amorite invasions IbbiSin Elamite invasions Kindattu Shimashki Dynasty Middle Kingdom of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Third Eblaite Kingdom Amorites IbbitLim Immeya Indilimma Amorite Shakkanakkus HitialErra HanunDagan ... Lim Dynasty of Mari Amorites YaggidLim YahdunLim YasmahAdad ZimriLim Queen Shibtu Old Assyria PuzurAshur I Shalimahum Ilushuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I PuzurAshur II NaramSin Erishum II IsinLarsa period Amorites Dynasty of Isin IshbiErra ShuIlishu IddinDagan IshmeDagan LipitEshtar UrNinurta BurSuen LipitEnlil Erraimitti Enlilbani Zambiya Iterpisha Urdukuga Suenmagir Damiqilishu Dynasty of Larsa Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel NurAdad SinIddinam SinEribam SinIqisham SilliAdad WaradSin RimSin I ... RimSin II Uruk VI dynasty Alilahadum Sumubinasa NaramSin of Uruk Snkid Sniribam Sngmil Ilumgamil Anam of Uruk Irdanene RimAnum Nabiiliu Sukkalmah dynasty SiwePalarKhuppak Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu 18001595 BCE Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abraham Biblical Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Yamhad Yamhad dynasty Amorites Old Assyria ShamshiAdad dynasty 18081736 BCE Amorites ShamshiAdad I IshmeDagan I MutAshkur Rimush Asinum Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Nondynastic usurpers 17351701 BCE PuzurSin Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Adaside dynasty 1700722 BCE Belbani Libaya SharmaAdad I IptarSin Bazaya Lullaya ShuNinua SharmaAdad II Erishum III ShamshiAdad II IshmeDagan II ShamshiAdad III Ashurnirari I PuzurAshur III Enlilnasir I Nurili Ashurshaduni Ashurrabi I Ashurnadinahhe I EnlilNasir II Ashurnirari II Ashurbelnisheshu Ashurrimnisheshu Ashurnadinahhe II First Babylonian dynasty Old Babylonian Period Amorites Sumuabum SumulaEl SinmuballitSabium ApilSin Sinmuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna Abieshuh Ammiditana Ammisaduqa SamsuDitana Early Kassite rulers Second Babylonian dynasty Sealand Dynasty Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Second Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hyksos Pharaoh Ahmose I slaying a Hyksos Semqen AperAnati SakirHar Khyan Apepi Khamudi Mitanni 16001260 BCE Kirta Shuttarna I Parshatatar 15311155 BCE Tutankhamun New Kingdom of Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ahmose I Amenhotep I Third Babylonian dynasty Kassites AgumKakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashmanharbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I Burnaburiash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliashu IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak II Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Elamite period 15001100 BCE Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty UntashNapirisha Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb Hittite Empire Ugarit Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret Elamite Empire Shutrukid dynasty ShutrukNakhunte 11551025 BCE Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI Third Intermediate Period Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II Phoenicia Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Kingdom of Israel Saul Ishbosheth David Solomon SyroHittite states Middle Assyria EribaAdad I Ashuruballit I Enlilnirari Arikdenili Adadnirari I Shalmaneser I TukultiNinurta I Ashurnadinapli Ashurnirari III Enlilkudurriusur NinurtaapalEkur Ashurdan I NinurtatukultiAshur MutakkilNusku Ashurreshishi I TiglathPileser I AsharidapalEkur Ashurbelkala EribaAdad II ShamshiAdad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashurnirari IV Ashurrabi II Ashurreshishi II TiglathPileser II Ashurdan II Fourth Babylonian dynasty Second Dynasty of Isin Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur NeoElamite period 1100540 BCE 1025934 BCE Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Babylonian dynasties Period of Chaos Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna Marbitiaplausur Nabmukinapli 911745 BCE Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht Bakenranef Kingdom of Samaria Kingdom of Judah NeoAssyrian Empire Adadnirari II TukultiNinurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III ShamshiAdad V Shammuramat regent Adadnirari III Shalmaneser IV AshurDan III Ashurnirari V Ninth Babylonian Dynasty Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina five kings NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabushumaukin II Nabumukinzeri HumbanTahrid dynasty Urtak Teumman Ummanigash Tammaritu I Indabibi Humbanhaltash III 745609 BCE Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa Black Pharaohs Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun NeoAssyrian Empire Sargonid dynasty TiglathPileser Shalmaneser Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Ashurnadinshumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal Ashuretililani Sinsharishkun Sinshumulishir Ashuruballit II Assyrian conquest of Egypt Assyrian conquest of Elam 626539 BCE Late Period Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III NeoBabylonian Empire Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Median Empire Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages 539331 BCE Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Achaemenid Empire Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III Twentyeighth Dynasty of Egypt Twentyninth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 331141 BCE Argead dynasty and Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV Hellenistic Period Seleukos I Nikator Tetradrachm from Babylon Argead dynasty Alexander III Philip III Alexander IV Antigonid dynasty Antigonus I Seleucid Empire Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes 14130 BCE Kingdom of Judea Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Parthian Empire Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I 30 BCE116 CE Roman Empire Roman conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Judea Syria 116117 CE Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan Parthamaspates of Parthia 117224 CE Syria Palaestina Province of Mesopotamia Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV 224270 CE Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Coin of Ardashir I Hamadan mint. Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm 270273 CE Palmyrene Empire Vaballathus Zenobia Antiochus 273395 CE Roman Empire Province of Egypt Syria Palaestina Syria Province of Mesopotamia 395618 CE Byzantine Empire Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 618628 CE Sasanian conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Shahrbaraz Sahralanyozan Shahrbaraz Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Khosrow II Kavad II 628641 CE Byzantine Empire Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran Shapuri Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 639651 CE Muslim conquest of Egypt Muslim conquest of the Levant Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia Chronology of the Neolithic period Rulers of Ancient Central Asia  Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.  Hallo W. Simpson W. 1971. The Ancient Near East. New York Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 4849.  Rulers of Mesopotamia. cdli.ox.ac.uk. University of Oxford CNRS.  Thomas Ariane Potts Timothy 2020. Mesopotamia Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 9781606066492.  Roux Georges 1992. Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532534 Chronological Tables. ISBN 9780141938257.  a b c Per Sumerian King List  Unger Merrill F. 2014. Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 9781625646064. Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany Israel United States People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSetiIoldid1220465606 Categories Seti I 
13 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies 1279 BC deaths Ramesses I Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 maint numeric names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 2315 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width