Twosret - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Queen consort 
3 Regent 
4 Pharaoh 
5 Reign length Toggle Reign length subsection 
5.1 End of Twosrets reign 
6 Destruction of Twosrets mortuary temple  reuse of her tomb 
7 Monuments and inscriptions 
8 References 
9 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Twosret 37 languages  Asturianu  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Magyar  Nederlands Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus     srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty Twosret Tausret Tawosret Drawing of a Portrait of Tausret from her tomb in Thebes by mile Prisse dAvennes 1878. Pharaoh Reign 11911189 BC Predecessor Siptah Successor Setnakhte Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Merymaat K
3 ntmrjM3.t Strong bull beloved of Maat Kanakht Merymaat Nebanemnisutmiitum K
3 ntmrjM3.tnbnmnswmjJtm Strong bull beloved of Maat Lord beautiful of kingship like Atum Nebty name Geregkemet Wafkhasut GrgKmtwf
3 swt Founder of Egypt who vainquishes foreign countries Prenomen Praenomen Sitre Meryamun S
3 tRmrjtJmn Daughter of Ra beloved of Amun Hieroglyphic variants Nomen Tausret Setepenmut T
3 wsr.tstpnMwt Mighty Lady chosen of Mut1 TausretSetepenmut T
3 wsr.tstpnMwt Mighty Lady chosen of Mut Consort Seti II  Children KV56 mummy  Father Merneptah uncertain Mother Takhat uncertain Died 1189 BC Burial KV14 in the Valley of the Kings Monuments Mortuary temple in Western Thebes Dynasty 
19 th Dynasty Twosret also spelled Tawosret or Tausret d. 1189 BC conventional chronology was the last known ruler and the final pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt. She is recorded in Manethos Epitome as a certain Thuoris who in Homer is called Polybus husband of Alcandra and in whose time Troy was taken.2 She was said to have ruled Egypt for seven years but this figure included the nearly sixyear reign of Siptah her predecessor.3 Twosret simply assumed Siptahs regnal years as her own. While her sole independent reign would have lasted for perhaps one to one and a half years from 1191 to 1189 BC this number now appears more likely to be two full years instead possibly longer. Excavation work by the University of Arizona Egyptian Expedition 4 on her memorial temple temple of millions of years at Gournah strongly suggests that it was completed and functional during her reign and that Twosret started a regnal year 9 which means that she had two and possibly three independent years of rule once one deducts the nearly sixyear reign of Siptah. Her royal name Sitre Meryamun means Daughter of Re beloved of Amun.5 Familyedit See also Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Twosret or Tausrets birth date is unknown. She is thought to have been a daughter of Merneptah possibly a daughter of Takhat thereby making her sister to Amenmesse. Queen consortedit Foundation plaque bearing the double cartouches of Queen Twosret. From the mortuary temple of Twosret Tawesret Tausret at Thebes Egypt. 
19 th Dynasty. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London She was thought to be the second royal wife of Seti II. There are no children for Twosret and Seti II unless tomb KV56 represents the burial of their daughter.6 Theodore Davis identified Twosret and her husband in a cache of jewelry found in tomb KV56 in the Valley of the Kings. This tomb also contained objects bearing the name of Rameses II. There is no consensus about the nature of this tomb. Some Aldred thought this was the tomb of a daughter of Seti II and Tawosret but others Maspero thought this was a cache of objects originally belonging with the tomb of Tawosret herself.7 Regentedit After her husbands death she became first regent to Setis heir Siptah jointly with Chancellor Bay. Siptah was likely a stepson of Twosret since his mother is now known to be a certain Sutailja or Shoteraja from Louvre Relief E 269
01.8  Pharaohedit When Siptah died Twosret officially assumed the throne for herself as the Daughter of Re Lady of Tamerit Twosret of Mut9 and assumed the role of a Pharaoh. While it was commonly believed that she ruled Egypt with the aid of the Asiatic Chancellor Bay a recently published document by Pierre Grandet in a BIFAO 100 2000 paper shows that Bay was executed on Siptahs orders during Year 5 of this kings reign. The document is a hieratic ostracon or inscribed potshard and contains an announcement to the workmen of Deir ElMedina of the kings actions. No immediate reason was given to show what caused Siptah to turn against the great enemy Bay as the ostracon states. The recto of the document reads thus Year 5 III Shemu the 
27 th. On this day the scribe of the tomb Paser came announcing Pharaoh life prosperity and health has killed the great enemy Bay.10 This date accords well with Bays last known public appearance in Year 4 of Siptah. The ostracons information was essentially a royal order for the workmen to stop all further work on Bays tomb since the latter had now been deemed a traitor to the state.11 Aidan Dodson believes that Twosret engineered Bays downfall so that she would have total control at the palace court and need no longer share power with her political rival. As Dodson writes Although this act was nominally carried out in the name of the still young Siptah one can probably safely assume that the initiative was taken by Tawosret signaling her intention to share power no longer with her erstwhile colleague in regency Bay. While Bays name remained intact on many of his monuments it was probably at this point that his extraordinary representations in the barkshrine at Karnak were erased.12 Meanwhile Egyptian territories in Canaan seem to have become effectively independent under the overlordship of a man called Irsu. Papyrus Harris I the main source on these events seems to claim that Irsu and Twosret had allied themselves leaving Irsu free to plunder and neglect the land.13 Reign lengthedit Twosrets highest known date is a Year 8 II Shemu day 29 hieratic inscription found on one of the foundation blocks FB 2 of her mortuary temple at Gournah in 2011 by the University of Arizona Egyptian Expedition.14 Since this was only a foundation inscription and Twosrets temple although never finished as planned was at least partially completed it is logical to assume that some time must have passed before her downfall and the termination of work on her temple project. Richard Wilkinson stressed that Twosrets mortuary temple was largely structurally completed although bearing minimal decoration15 therefore she would have ruled for one or two more years beyond II Shemu 29 of her 
8 th Year for her temple to reach completion. As Richard Wilkinson writes in 2011 ....The discovery of the Year 8 
2 nd month of shemu day 29 hieratic inscription....has particular significance for it provides confirmation for the text we discovered in 2006 on an adjacent foundation block FB1 which was dated also to the eighth year of the queens reign. Although Tauserts reign including her regency for Siptah has been understood commonly as being seven years as stated by Manetho in his Aegyptiaca History or eight at the most the inscriptions on the foundation blocks show otherwise. Because they were made when the temple was begun and we now have archaeological evidence that the temple was completed or nearly so it must have taken a couple of years these texts indicate clearly that Tausert must have reigned nine or perhaps even ten years.16 Further study by Pearce Paul Creasman has concluded that the temple was functionally operational prior to its destruction.17 Twosret could hence have possibly ruled for 6 to 20 more months after the inscription date to achieve these levels of completion thus starting her 
9 th regnal year around the interval of IV AkhetI Peretwhen her husband died since she assumed Siptahs reign as her own or perhaps longerbefore Setnakhtes rule began. Or she could have had a nearly full 
9 th year reign including the 
6 year reign of Siptah. Pearce Creasman writes in 2013 that if the foundations of Twosrets temple were laid in her eighth year and construction of the temple was completed or nearly so Tausret must have ruled long enough past her eighth regnal year to see this accomplished. At least an additional year maybe two.18 End of Twosrets reignedit Main article End of the 
19 th Dynasty Twosrets reign ended in a civil war which is documented in the Elephantine stela of her successor Setnakhte who became the founder of the Twentieth dynasty. While it is not known if she was overthrown by Setnakhte or whether she died peacefully in her own reign and a conflit broke out at court over her succession the former scenario is the most likely scenario. Her immediate 
20 th dynasty successor Setnakhte and his son Ramesses III described the late 
19 th dynasty as a time of chaos and Setnakhte usurped the joint KV14 tomb of Seti II and Twosret but reburied Seti II in tomb KV15 while deliberately replastering and redrawing all images of Twosret in tomb KV14 with those of himself. Setnakhtes decisions here may demonstrate his dislike and presumably hatred for Twosret since he chose to reinter Seti II but not Twosret.19 Setnakhte himself does not seem to have harboured any animosity towards Siptah. Twosret likely erased Siptahs own royal cartouches in his KV47 royal tomb and replaced the cartouches of Siptah with those of Seti II in KV14 Twosrets own tomb once she had presumably begun her own reign as pharaoh. As Dodson writes Taken together it seems that although Tawosret appears to have granted Siptah a burial it was one that denied his status as a king and was combined with Tawosrets desire to refocus her royal affiliations on her husband rather than the young man for whom she had ruled for half a decade.20 Setnakhte however reinstated Siptahs cartouches in the young kings tomb which suggests that this persons opponent was not Siptah but rather Siptahs successor Twosret.21 It appears most likely that Setnakhte overthrew Twosret from power in a civil war. Setnakhtes son and successor Ramesses III later decided to exclude both Twosret and even Siptah of the 
19 th dynasty from his Medinet Habu list of Egyptian kings thereby delegitimizing them in the eyes of the Egyptian citizenry.2223 Destruction of Twosrets mortuary temple  reuse of her tombedit A gold necklace that belonged to Queen Twosret Pearce Creasman writes in 2013 that Twosrets 
20 th dynasty successors felt the overwhelming need to usurp her KV14 tomb and comprehensively destroy her mortuary temple. Twosret was one of the last ruling descendants of Ramesses II the Great of the 
19 th dynasty and the founders of the 
20 th dynasty of Egypt presumably feared the shadow cast by this female pharaoh. Therefore the founder of the 
20 th Dynasty Sethnakht or his longruling son Ramesses III set out against Tausrets memory and its physical manifestations. This dramatic refutation of the legitimacy of their unrelated 
19 th Dynasty predecessor likely made it easier for their own lineage to take root and overpower what must have been a substantial number of other potential claimants to the throne. Ramesses II from whom Tausret is generally believed to be descended had fathered as many as 100 children. Tausrets royal cousins and potential heirs must have been legion....The attacks on Tausrets monuments proved effective so much so that when the site of Tausrets Theban temple was very briefly surveyed and selectively dug in 1896 by a team under the supervision of W. M. Flinders Petrie only a few stones of the foundation remained.24 Twosrets KV14 tomb in the Valley of the Kings has a complicated history it was started in the reign of Seti II. Tomb scenes show Twosret accompanying Siptah but Siptahs name had later been replaced by that of Seti II presumably by Twosret who wished to associate herself with her late husband. The tomb was then usurped by Setnakhte and extended to become one of the deepest royal tombs in the valley while Twosrets sarcophagus was reused by prince Amenherkhepeshef in KV13. Hartwig Altenmuller believes that Seti II was buried in one of the rooms in KV14 and later reburied in KV15. Others question this scenario.25 A mummy found in KV35 and known as Unknown Woman D has been identified by some scholars as possibly belonging to Twosret but there is no other evidence for this other than the correct Nineteenth Dynasty period of mummification.2 Monuments and inscriptionsedit Relief of Tausert holding two sistrums at Amada Temple Nubia. It is believed that expeditions were conducted during her reign to the turquoise mines in Sinai and in Palestine and statues have been found of her at Heliopolis and Thebes. Her name is also found at Abydos Hermopolis Memphis and in Nubia. Inscriptions with Twosrets name appear in several locations The Bilgai Stela belonged to Twosret. It records the erection of a monument in the area of Sebennytos.26 A pair statue of Tawosret and Siptah is now in the Staatliche Sammlung fr gyptische Kunst Munich no 122. Siptah is shown seated on Twosrets lap.27 In the temple at Amada Twosret is depicted as a Great Royal Wife and Gods Wife.26 A statue from Heliopolis depicts Twosret and her names are inscribed with a mixture of male and female epithets. Twosret herself is depicted as a woman.26 A cartouche of hers believed to come from Qantir in the Delta has been found Twosret and Siptahs names have been found associated with the turquoise mines at Serabit el Khadim and Timna in the Sinai  Palestine.28 A faience vase bearing a cartouche of Twosret was found at Tell Deir Alla in Jordan.28 Twosret constructed a Mortuary temple next to the Ramesseum but it was never finished and was only partially excavated by Flinders Petrie in 1897 although recent reexcavation by Richard H. Wilkinson and Pearce Paul Creasman shows it is more complex than first thought. The temple was excavated by the Tausert Temple Project 2004 to present. Twosrets coffin later usurped by prince Amunherkhepeshef. Referencesedit  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. pp 156  158  a b J. Tyldesley Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt 2006 Thames  Hudson  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Handbook of Ancient Egyptian Chronology Brill 2006 p.214  TAUSERT TEMPLE PROJECT 20102011 SEASON PDF.  Clayton p.158  Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson 1987 ISBN 0500051283  Theban Mapping Project Tomb 56. Archived from the original on 20080926. Retrieved 20100526.  Gae Callender The Cripple the Queen  the Man from the North KMT Volume 17 No.1 Spring 2006 p.52  Tydlesey Joyce 2006 The Complete Queens of EgyptAmerican University in Cairo Press  Pierre Grandet Lexecution du chancelier Bay O.IFAO 1864 BIFAO 100 2000 pp.339345  Gae Callender The Cripple the Queen  the Man from the North KMT Spring 2006 p.54  A. Dodson Poisoned Legacy The Fall of the Nineteenth Egyptian Dynasty American University in Cairo 2010 p.107  Hans Goedicke Irsu the Khasu in Papyrus Harris Wiener Zeitschrift fr die Kunde des Morgenlandes Vol. 71 1979 pp. 117  Now labeled Foundation Block Text 4. See Richard H. Wilkinson Tausert Temple Project 201011 Season The Ostracon The Journal of the Egyptian Study Society 22 Fall 2011 8 fig. 4. Additional foundation inscriptions were discovered in previous seasons. Foundation Block Text 2 was found in the 2007 excavation season and bears the date Regnal Year seven I Akhet 23 and this is the earliest dated inscription found at the temple so construction most likely began late in the latter half of year seven. The original publication with a mistranslation of this inscription is idem Tausert Temple Project 2007 Season The Ostracon 18 No. 1 Summer 2007 7 fig. 9. The corrected translation appears in idem Tausert Temple Project 2008 Season The Ostracon 19 No. 1 Fall 2008 p.7.  Richard H. Wilkinson History of the Temple in The Temple of Tausret The University of Arizona Egyptian Expedition Tausret Temple Project 20042011 p.166.  Tausert Temple Project 201011 Season p.10  Pearce Paul Creasman Excavations at PharaohQueen Tausrets Temple of Millions of Years 2012 Season PDF Journal of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities 39 20122013 p.15.  Pearce Creasman An Elusive Female Pharaoh and Her Temple of Millions of Years Newsletter of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities 2013 p.2  Hartwig Altenmller The Tomb of Tausert and Setnakht in Valley of the Kings ed. Kent R. Weeks New York FriedmanFairfax Publishers 2001 pp.22231  Dodson Poisoned Legacy p.111  Dodson Poisoned Legacy p.111  121122  Epigraphic Survey Medinet Habu IV Festival Scenes of Ramesses III University of Chicago Oriental Institute Publications vol. 51 Chicago The University of Chicago Press 1940 pl. 203. Cf. Donald B. Redford Pharaonic KingLists Annals and DayBooks A Contribution to the Study of the Egyptian Sense of History SSEA Publication 4 Mississauga Canada Benben Publications 1986 pp.3637  Medinet Habu Canon  Pearce Creasman An Elusive Female Pharaoh and Her Temple of Millions of Years Newsletter of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities 2013 p.1  Theban Mapping Project Tomb KV14. Archived from the original on 20170606. Retrieved 20100526.  a b c Vivienne G. Callender Queen Tausret and the End of Dynasty 19 Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur Bd. 32 2004 pp. 81104  J. von Beckerath Queen Twosre as guardian of Siptah in Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 48 1962 7074  a b Itamar Singer Merneptahs Campaign to Canaan Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research No. 269 Feb. 1988 pp. 110 Bibliographyedit Gae Callender The Cripple the Queen  the Man from the North KMT Vol17 No.1 Spring 2006 pp. 4963 Leonard H. Lesko A Little More Evidence for the End of the Nineteenth Dynasty Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt Vol. 5 1966 pp. 2932 accessible through JSTOR Richard H. Wilkinson eds THE TEMPLE OF TAUSRET Tausret Temple Project 20042011 The University of Arizona Archaeology Expedition 2011. Dated texts found in the Temple are placed on pages 121130 Richard H. Wilkinson ed. Tausret Forgotten Queen  Pharaoh of Egypt Oxford University Press 2012. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Queens of Ancient Egypt Protodynastic Period to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Neithhotep Benerib Khenthap Herneith Nakhtneith Penebui Merneith Seshemetka Semat Serethor Betrest II Menka Nimaathap Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Hetephernebti Djeseretnebti Djefatnebti Meresankh I IV Hetepheres I Meritites I Henutsen Khentetka Meresankh II Hetepheres II Meresankh III Khamerernebty I Persenet Hekenuhedjet Khamerernebty II Rekhetre Bunefer V Khentkaus I Neferhetepes Meretnebty Khentkaus II Khentkaus III Reptynub Khuit I Meresankh IV Setibhor Nebet Khenut Nimaethap II VI Iput I Khuit II Ankhesenpepi I Ankhesenpepi II Nubwenet Meritites IV InenekInti Nedjeftet Neith Iput II Udjebten Ankhesenpepi III Ankhesenpepi IV Nitocris Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Neferu I Neferukayet Iah Tem Neferu II Ashayet Henhenet Sadeh Kawit Kemsit XII Neferitatjenen Neferu III Keminub Senet Khenemetneferhedjet I Nofret II Khenmet Khenemetneferhedjet II Neferthenut Meretseger Aat Khenemetneferhedjet III Sobekneferu 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Nofret Nubhetepti Senebhenas Neni Senebsen Tjan Ineni Nubkhaes Aya Abetni Satsobek XIV Tati XVI Mentuhotep XVII Nubemhat Sobekemsaf Haankhes Tetisheri Ahhotep I Ahmose Inhapy Sitdjehuti Ahhotep II New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII AhmoseNefertari AhmoseSitkamose AhmoseHenuttamehu AhmoseMeritamun Ahmose Mutnofret Hatshepsut Iset Satiah MerytreHatshepsut Nebtu Menhet Menwi and Merti Nebsemi Tiaa Nefertari Iaret Mutemwiya Tiye Gilukhipa Sitamun Iset Tadukhipa  Kiya Nefertiti Meritaten Neferneferuaten Ankhesenamun Tey Mutnedjmet Nebetnehat XIX Sitre Tuya Tanedjemet Nefertari Isetnofret Henutmire Maathorneferure Meritamen Bintanath Nebettawy Merytre Isetnofret II Takhat Twosret Tiaa Anuketemheb XX TiyMerenese Iset TaHemdjert Tyti Tiye Duatentopet Henutwati Tawerettenru Nubkhesbed Baketwernel Tentamun 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Tentamun Mutnedjmet Karimala XXII Karomama Penreshnes Maatkare Tashedkhonsu Nesitaudjatakhet Nesitanebetashru Kapes Karomama I Tadibast III XXIII Karomama II XXV Pebatjma Tabiry Abar Khensa Peksater Arty Qalhata Tabekenamun Takahatenamun Naparaye Atakhebasken Malaqaye Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Mehytenweskhet Khedebneithirbinet I Takhuit Tentkheta Nakhtubasterau Ladice XXVII Atossa Artystone Parmys Amestris Damaspia Parysatis XXXI Stateira I Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Roxana Stateira II Parysatis II Eurydice II of Macedon Ptolemaic Eurydice Berenice I Arsinoe I Arsinoe II Berenice II Arsinoe III Cleopatra I Syra Cleopatra II Cleopatra III Cleopatra IV Cleopatra Selene Berenice III Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Berenice IV Cleopatra VII Arsinoe IV Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Ptolemaic Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTwosretoldid1222685580 Categories 
12 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Female pharaohs Queens consort of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt 
13 thcentury BC births 1189 BC deaths 
13 thcentury BC clergy 
12 thcentury BC clergy 
13 thcentury BC Egyptian women Late Bronze Age collapse 
12 thcentury BC Egyptian women Regents of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 7 May 2024 at 1026 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width