Siamun - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Manetho 
3 Reign length 
4 Monuments and campaign in Canaan 
5 Burial 
6 Siamun and Solomon 
7 References Toggle the table of contents Siamun 28 languages  Azrbaycanca  Catal Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Magyar  Nederlands Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh For other uses see Siamun disambiguation. Siamun Psinaches Manetho Siamun on a relief from Memphis Pharaoh Reign 986967 BC Predecessor Osorkon the Elder Successor Psusennes II Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Merimaat K
3 ntmrjM
3 t Strong bull beloved of Maat Second Horus name Kanekhet Merimaat Samerienamun Periemkhawef K
3 ntmrjM
3 ts
3 mrjnJmn prjmwf Strong bull beloved of Maat beloved son of Amun who has emerged from his body Prenomen Praenomen Netjerkheperre Setepenamun NrjprRstpnJmn Divine is the manifestation of Ra the chosen one of Amun Second prenomen Netjekheperre Meriamun NrjprRmrjJmn Divine is the manifestation of Ra beloved of Amun Nomen Siamun S3 Jmn Son of Amun Second nomen Nesutsiamun Nswt s3 Jmn King son of Amun Consort Karimala Died 967 BC Burial Unknown possibly reburied in NRT III at Tanis Dynasty 
21 st Dynasty Neterkheperre or NetjerkheperreSetepenamun Siamun was the sixth pharaoh of Egypt during the Twentyfirst Dynasty. He built extensively in Lower Egypt for a king of the Third Intermediate Period and is regarded as one of the most powerful rulers of the Twentyfirst Dynasty after Psusennes I. Siamuns prenomen NetjerkheperreSetepenamun means Divine is The Manifestation of Ra Chosen of Amun1 while his name means son of Amun.2 Familyedit Very little is known of the family relationships of Siamun. In 1999 Chris Bennett made a case for a Queen Karimala known from an inscription in the temple of Semna being the daughter of Osorkon the Elder.3 She is called both Kings Daughter and Kings Wife. Her name suggests she may have been Libyan which would fit in with her being the daughter of Osorkon the Elder Manethos Osochor. Given the date of the inscription a year 14 she might have been the queen of either king Siamun or king Psusennes II. Bennett prefers a marriage to Siamun because in that case she could have taken over the position of Viceroy of Kush Neskhons as a religious figurehead in Nubia after the death of the latter in year 5 of king Siamun. What is more a marriage to her might explain how Siamun an Egyptian judging by his nomen came to succeed a clearly Libyan Osochor.3 Manethoedit Siamun is often identified with the last king of Manethos 
21 st Dynasty Psinaches. This king is credited with a reign of only nine years which subsequently had to be amended to 19 years on the basis of an inscription from the Karnak Priestly Annals mentioning a Year 17 of king Siamun. However there is no real basis for interpreting the name Psinaches as a corruption of the name Netjerkheperresetepenamun Siamun. Recently it has been suggested that Manethos Psinaches might rather be a reference to king Tutkheperre Shoshenq as the direct successor of Manethos Osorkon the Elder.4 Reign lengthedit Ankhefenmut adores the royal name of pharaoh Siamun in this doorway lintel. The highest attested year for Siamun is a Year 17 the first month of Shemu day lost mentioned in fragment 
3 B lines 35 from the Karnak Priestly Annals.5 It records the induction of Hori son of Nespaneferhor into the Priesthood at Karnak.6 This date was a lunar Tepi Shemu feast day. Based on the calculation of this lunar Tepi Shemu feast Year 17 of Siamun has been shown by the German Egyptologist Rolf Krauss to be equivalent to 970 BC.7 Hence Siamun would have taken the throne about 16 years earlier in 986 BC.8 A stela dated to Siamuns Year 16 records a landsale between some minor priests of Ptah at Memphis.9 The Year 17 inscription is an important palaeographical development because it is the first time in Egyptian recorded history that the word pharaoh was employed as a title and linked directly to a kings royal name as in Pharaoh Siamun here.10 Henceforth references to Pharaoh Psusennes II Siamuns successor Pharaoh Shoshenq I Pharaoh Osorkon I and so forth become commonplace. Prior to Siamuns reign and all throughout the Middle and New Kingdom the word pharaoh referred only to the office of the king. Monuments and campaign in Canaanedit Bronze Sphinx of Siamun Louvre Museum. According to the French Egyptologist Nicolas Grimal Siamun doubled the size of the Temple of Amun at Tanis and initiated various works at the Temple of Horus at Mesen.11 He also built at Heliopolis and at Piramesse where a surviving stone block bears his name.11 Siamun constructed and dedicated a new temple to Amun at Memphis with 6 stone columns and doorways which bears his royal name. Finally he bestowed numerous favours onto the Memphite Priests of Ptah. In Upper Egypt he generally appears eponymously on a few Theban monuments although Siamuns High Priest of Amun at Thebes Pinedjem II organised the removal and reburial of the New Kingdom royal mummies from the Valley of the Kings in several hidden mummy caches at Deir ElBahari Tomb DB320 for protection from looting. These activities are dated from Year 1 to Year 10 of Siamuns reign.12 One fragmentary but well known surviving triumphal relief scene from the Temple of Amun at Tanis depicts an Egyptian pharaoh smiting his enemies with a mace. The kings name is explicitly given as Neterkheperre Setepenamun Siamun beloved of Amun in the relief and there can be no doubt that this person was Siamun as the eminent British Egyptologist Kenneth Kitchen stresses in his book On the Reliability of the Old Testament.13 Siamun appears here in typical pose brandishing a mace to strike down prisoners now lost at the right except for two arms and hands one of which grasps a remarkable doublebladed ax by its socket.14 The writer observes that this double bladed axe or halberd has a flared crescent shaped blade which is close in form to the Aegean influenced double axe but is quite distinct from the PalestinianCanaanite double headed axe which has a different shape that resembles an X.15 Thus Kitchen concludes Siamuns foes were the Philistines who were descendants of the Aegeanbased Sea Peoples and that Siamun was commemorating his recent victory over them at Gezer by depicting himself in a formal battle scene relief at the Temple in Tanis. Paul S. Ash has challenged this theory stating that Siamuns relief portrays a fictitious battle. He points out that in Egyptian reliefs Philistines are never shown holding an axe and that there is no archaeological evidence for Philistines using axes. He also argues that there is nothing in the relief to connect it with Philistia or the Levant.16 Aside from the Egyptian reliefs excavations from Gezer have revealed evidence of the Egyptian destruction of the city in the 
10 th century BC concurrent with the period of Siamuns reign. 17 Burialedit Although Siamuns original royal tomb has never been located it has been proposed that he is one of two completely decayed mummies in the antechamber of NRTIII Psusennes Is tomb on the basis of ushabtis found on them which bore this kings name. Siamuns original tomb may have been inundated by the Nile which compelled a reburial of this king in Psusennes Is tomb.18 Siamun and Solomonedit It has been suggested that Siamun was the unnamed pharaoh of the Bible who gave in marriage his daughter to king Solomon in order to seal an alliance between the two 
1 Kings 31 and later conquered Gezer and gave it to Solomon as well 
1 Kings 916. This identification is supported by Kenneth Kitchen and William G. Dever1920 but has been challenged by other scholars such as Paul S. Ash and Mark W. Chavalas with the latter stating that it is impossible to conclude which Egyptian monarch ruled concurrently with David and Solomon.21 Edward Lipiski suggested that The attempt at relating the destruction of Gezer to the hypothetical relationship between Siamun and Solomon cannot be justified factually since Siamuns death precedes Solomons accession. Lipiski also argued that the thenunfortified Gezer was destroyed late in the 
10 th century and that its taker was most likely pharaoh Shoshenq I of the 
22 nd Dynasty.22 Dever however challenges these positions arguing that Siamun reigned from 978 to 959 BCE coinciding with Solomons early years of reign and that such diplomatic marriages are well attested in the ancient Near East he also states that archaeological excavations in Gezer show that the site had been refortified in 950 BCE during Solomons reign only to be later destroyed by Shoshenq I during his raid against Israel.20 Moreover according to Kenneth Kitchen the occupation of Gezer by Pharaoh Siamun is attested by a triumphal relief scene from the Temple of Amun at Tanis depicts an Egyptian pharaoh smiting his enemies with a mace. The kings name is explicitly given as Neterkheperre Setepenamun Siamun beloved of Amun in the relief and there can be no doubt that this person was Siamun. Siamun appears here in typical pose brandishing a mace to strike down prisoners now lost at the right except for two arms and hands one of which grasps a remarkable doublebladed ax by its socket.14 The writer observes that this double bladed axe or halberd has a flared crescent shaped blade which is close in form to the Aegean influenced double axe but is quite distinct from the PalestinianCanaanite double headed axe which has a different shape that resembles an X.15 Thus Kitchen concludes Siamuns foes were the Philistines who were descendants of the Aegeanbased Sea Peoples and that Siamun was commemorating his recent victory over them at Gezer by depicting himself in a formal battle scene relief at the Temple in Tanis.23 This conclusion is also shared by Krystal V. L. Pierce who also points to a scarab of Siamun discovered in Tell el Farah as further evidence for his campaign in the Levant.24 However Paul S. Ash has challenged this theory stating that Siamuns relief portrays a fictitious battle. He points out that in Egyptian reliefs Philistines are never shown holding an axe and that there is no archaeological evidence for Philistines using axes. He also argues that there is nothing in the relief to connect it with Philistia or the Levant.16 Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Siamun.  Peter Clayton Chronology of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994. p.174  1 
21 st Dynasty  a b Chris Bennett Queen Karimala Daughter of Osochor GM 173 1999 pp.78  Norbert Dautzenberg On the identity of King Psinaches GM 240 2014 115118  K.A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt TIPE 1100650 BC 
3 rd ed. Warminster Aris  Phillips Ltd p.423  Kitchen TIPE p.278  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss  David Warburton editors Handbook of Ancient Egyptian Chronology Handbook of Oriental Studies Brill 2006 p.474  Hornung Krauss  Warburton op. cit. p.493  Kitchen TIPE p.279  JM Kruchten Les annales des prtres de Karnak XXIXXIIImes dynasties et autres textes contemporains relatifs  linitiation des prtres dAmon Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 32 1989. pp.4748  a b Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Blackwell Books 1992 pp.318  Kitchen TIPE pp.422423  K.A. Kitchen On the Reliability of the Old Testament OROT William B. Eerdmans Publishing 2003. p.109  a b Kitchen OROT pp.109  p.526  a b Kitchen OROT pp.109110  a b Ash Paul S November 1999. David Solomon and Egypt A Reassessment JSOT Supplement. Sheffield Academic Press. pp. 3846. ISBN 9781841270210.  G.Dever William 1967. Excavations at Gezer. The Biblical Archaeologist. 30 2 60. doi
10.2 3073210954. JSTOR 3210954. S
2 CID 166198868.  Bill Manley ed. The missing tombs of Tanis in The Seventy Great Mysteries of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson Ltd. p.97  Kitchen OROT p. 108.  a b Dever William G. 2020. Has Archaeology Buried the Bible. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 9781467459495.  Chavalas Mark W. Spring 2001. Review of David Solomon and Egypt A Reassessment by Paul S. Ash. Journal of Biblical Literature. 120 1 152. doi
10.2 3073268603. JSTOR 3268603.  Lipinski Edward 2006. On the Skirts of Canaan in the Iron AgeOrientalia Lovaniensia Analecta. Leuven Belgium Peeters. pp. 9697. ISBN 9789042917989.  Kitchen K. A. 2006. On the Reliability of the Old Testament. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 9780802803962.  Pierce Krystal V. L. 2022. Egypt and the Levant in the Third Intermediate Period Iron IBIIIA. In Keimer Kyle H. Pierce George A. eds.. The Ancient Israelite World. Taylor  Francis. p. 662. ISBN 9781000773248. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSiamunoldid1221223930 Categories 
10 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 967 BC deaths Gezer Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 28 April 2024 at 1644 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width