Shoshenq II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Shoshenq IIs enigmatic identity 
2 Independent reign 
3 Death and burial 
4 References 
5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Shoshenq II 27 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Mirands Nederlands  Polski Portugus    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Shoshenq II Gold funerary mask of Shoshenq II in the Cairo Museum Pharaoh Reign 887885 BC Predecessor Osorkon I Successor Takelot I most likely or Tutkheperre Shoshenq Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Heqakheperre Setepenre q
3 prRstpnR The manifestation of Ra rules the chosen one of Ra Nomen Shoshenq Meri Amun .nq mriJmn Shoshenq beloved of Amun Consort Nesitanebetashru Nesitaudjatakhet Died 885 BC Burial Tanis Dynasty 
22 nd Dynasty Heqakheperre Shoshenq II or Shoshenq IIa1 was a pharaoh of the Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt. He was the only ruler of this dynasty whose tomb was not plundered by tomb robbers. His final resting place was discovered within an antechamber of Psusennes Is tomb at Tanis by Pierre Montet in 1939. Montet removed the coffin lid of Shoshenq II on March 20 1939 in the presence of king Farouk of Egypt himself.2 It proved to contain many jewelencrusted bracelets and pectorals along with a beautiful hawkheaded silver coffin and a gold funerary mask.3 The facemask had been placed upon the head of the king.4 Montet later discovered the intact tombs of two Twentyfirst Dynasty kings Psusennes I and Amenemope a year later in February and April 1940 respectively. Shoshenq IIs prenomen Heqakheperre Setepenre means The manifestation of Ra rules the chosen one of Ra.5 Shoshenq IIs enigmatic identityedit A pectoral of Shoshenq II featuring a solar bark There is a small possibility that Shoshenq II was the son of Shoshenq I. Two bracelets from Shoshenq IIs tomb mention king Shoshenq I while a pectoral was inscribed with the title Great Chief of the Ma Shoshenq a title which Shoshenq I employed under Psusennes II before he became king.6 These items may be interpreted as either evidence of a possible filial link between the two men or just mere heirlooms. A high degree of academic uncertainty regarding the parentage of this king exists some scholars today contend that Shoshenq II was actually a younger son of Shoshenq Iwho outlived Osorkon I and Takelot Idue to the discovery of the aforementioned items naming the founder of the 
22 nd Dynasty within his intact royal Tanite tomb. As the German Egyptologist Karl JansenWinkeln observes in the recent 2005 book on Egyptian chronology The commonly assumed identification of this king with the earlier HP and son of Osorkon I by KA Kitchen does not appear to be very probable.7 A forensic examination of Shoshenq IIs body by Dr. Douglas Derry the head of Cairo Museums anatomy department reveals that he was a man in his fifties when he died.8 Hence Shoshenq II could have easily survived Osorkon Is 
35 year reign and ruled Egypt for a few years before Takelot I came to power. Moreover Sextus Julius Africanuss generally more accurate copy of Manethos Epitome explicitly states that 3 Kings intervened between Osorkon I and Takelot I.9 While Manethos suggested position for these three kings cannot be presently verified due to the paucity of evidence for this period and the brevity of their reigns another of these poorly known monarchs would be Tutkheperre Shoshenq who was an early Dynasty 22 ruler since he is now monumentally attested in both Lower and Upper Egypt at Bubastis and Abydos respectively.10 Evidence that Shoshenq II was a predecessor of Osorkon II is indicated by the fact that his hawkheaded coffin is stylistically similar to a hawkheaded lid which enclosed the granite coffin of king Harsiese A from Medinet Habu.11 Harsiese A was an early contemporary of Osorkon II and likely Takelot I too since the latter did not firmly control Upper Egypt in his reign. This implies that Shoshenq II and Harsiese A were near contemporaries since Harsiese A was the son of the High Priest of Amun Shoshenq C at Thebes and thus the grandson of Osorkon I. Harsieses funerary evidence places Shoshenq II roughly one or two generations after Osorkon I and may date him to the brief interval between Takelot I and Osorkon I at Tanis.12 In this case the objects naming Shoshenq I in this kings tomb would simply be heirlooms rather than proof of an actual filial relation between Shoshenq I and II. This latter interpretation is endorsed by Jrgen von Beckerath in his 1997 book Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten who believes Shoshenq II was actually an elder brother of Takelot I. The view that Shoshenq II was an elder brother of Takelot I is also endorsed by Norbert Dautzenberg in a GM 144 paper.13 Von Beckerath however places Shoshenq II between the reigns of Takelot I and Osorkon II at Tanis.14 Kenneth Kitchen in his latest 1996 edition of The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt c.1100650 BC maintains that Shoshenq II was the High Priest of Amun Shoshenq C son of Osorkon I and Queen Maatkare who was appointed as the junior coregent to the throne but predeceased his father.15 Kitchen suggests such a coregency is reflected on the bandages of the Ramesseum mummy of Nakhtefmut which contain the dates Year 3 Blank and Year 33 Second Heb Sed respectively.16 The Year 33 date mentioned here almost certainly refers to Osorkon I since Nakhtefmut wore a ring which bore this kings prenomen. Kitchen infers from this evidence that Year 33 of Osorkon I is equivalent to Year 3 of Shoshenq II and that the latter was Shoshenq C himself.17 Unfortunately however the case for a coregency between Osorkon I and Shoshenq II is uncertain because there is no clear evidence that the Year 3 and Year 33 bandages on Naktefmuts body were made at the same time. These two dates were not written on a single piece of mummy linenwhich would denote a true coregency. Rather the dates were written on two separate and unconnected mummy bandages which were likely woven and used over a period of several years as the burial practices of the Amun priests show. A prime example is the Mummy of Khonsmaakheru in Hamburg which contains separate bandages dating to Years 11 12 and 23 of Osorkon Ior a minimum period of 12 Years between their creation and final use. Altenmller 2000 A second example is the mummy of Djedptahiufankh the Third or Fourth Prophet of Amun which bears various bandages from Years 5 10 and 11 of Shoshenq I or a spread of six years in their final use for embalming purposes. As these two near contemporary examples show the temple priests simply reused whatever old or recycled linens which they could gain access to for their mummification rituals. The Year 3 mummy linen would hence belong to the reign of Osorkons successor. Secondly none of the High Priest Shoshenq Cs own childrenthe priest Osorkon whose funerary papyrus P. Denon C is located in the Russian National Library in St. Petersburg or a second priest named Harsiese likely king Harsiese A who dedicated a Bes statue in memory of his father now in Durham Museumgive royal titles to their father on their own funerary objects. The priest Osorkon only calls himself the son of the High Priest Shoshenq rather than the title Kings Son in his funerary papyri which would presumably have been created long after his fathers death.18 On Harsiese JacquetGordon notes that there is no good evidence to suggest that the 
1 st prophet Shoshenq C ever claimed or was accorded royal rank.19 She observes that Harsiese designated his father as a High Priest of Amun on a Bes statue without any accompanying royal name or prenomen and stresses that if Shoshenq C had even the slightest pretensions to royal rank his son would not have omitted to mention this fact. We must therefore conclude that he had no such pretensions.2021 This implies that the High Priest Shoshenq C was not king Shoshenq II. While Shoshenq Cs name is indeed written in a cartouche on the Bes statue no actual royal name or prenomen is ever given. An example of a kings son who enclosed his name in a cartouche on a monument but never inherited the throne was Wadjmose a son of the New Kingdom king Thutmose I. Independent reignedit Pectoral of Shoshenq II. More significantly Shoshenq IIs intact burial did not contain a single object or heirloom naming Osorkon Ian unlikely situation if Osorkon did indeed bury his own son. Kitchen notes that this kings burial goods included a pectoral that was originally inscribed for the Great Chief of the Ma Shoshenq Ibefore the latter became kingand a pair of bracellets of Shoshenq I as king but no later objects.22 This situation appears improbable if Shoshenq II was indeed Shoshenq C Osorkon Is son who died and was buried by his own father. Other Dynasty 21 and 22 kings such as Amenemope and Takelot I for instance employed grave goods which mentioned their parents names in their own tombs. This suggests that Heqakheperre Shoshenq II was not a son of Osorkon I but someone elses son perhaps Shoshenq I. Karl JansenWinkeln writes in the most recent book on Egyptian chronology that As the individuals interred in the Tanite royal tombs often bore objects belonging to their parents this king Shoshenq II is probably a son of Shoshenq I.7 Since this pharaohs funerary objects such as his silver coffin jewel pectorals and cartonnage all give him the unique royal name Heqakheperre he was most likely a genuine king of the 
22 nd Dynasty in his own right and not just a minor coregent. Jrgen von Beckerath adopts this interpretation of the evidence and assigns Shoshenq II an independent reign of 2 years at Tanis.14 In their 2005 academic publication on Egyptian chronology the Egyptologists Rolf Krauss and David Alan Warburton also ascribed Shoshenq II an independent reign of between 1 and 2 years in the 
22 nd dynasty although they place Shoshenq IIs brief reign between that of Takelot I and Osorkon II.23 The German Egyptologist Thomas Schneider in a 2010 paper has accepted the validity of the reference in Manethos epitome to the 3 Tanite kings from Africanus version and placed the reigns of both Shoshenq II and Tutkheperre Shoshenq in the interval between Osorkon I and Takelot I.24 The exclusive use of silver for the creation of Shoshenq IIs coffin is a potent symbol of his power because silver was considerably rarer in Egypt than gold.25 Death and burialedit View of tomb NRT III showing where Shoshenq II was buried and discovered The silver coffin of Shoshenq II Dr. Derrys medical examination of Shoshenq IIs mummy reveals that the king died as a result of a massive septic infection from a head wound.26 The final resting place of Shoshenq II was certainly a reburial because he was found interred in the tomb of another king Psusennes I of the Twentyfirst Dynasty. Scientists have found evidence of plant growth on the base of Shoshenq IIs coffin which suggests that Shoshenq IIs original tomb had become waterlogged27 hence a need to rebury him and his funerary equipment in another tomb. As Aidan Dodson writes It is abundantly clear that the presence of Shoshenq II within NRT III Psusennes Is tomb was the result of a reburial. Apart from the presence of the kings coffinettes within an extremely mixed group of secondhand jars the broken condition of the trough of the kings silver coffin showed that it had received rough handling in antiquity.28 Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shoshenq II.  1 At the October 2007 Egyptological Conference on the History and Chronology of the Libyan Period in Egypt at Leiden University the conference members voted unanimously to designate him as Shoshenq IIa.  Bob Brier Egyptian Mummies Unravelling the Secrets of an Ancient Art William Morrow  Company Inc. New York 1994. p.145  Sheshonq II  Brier p.144  Peter A. Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt Thames and Hudson London 1994. p.185  Kenneth A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC 
3 rd edition 1996 Aris  Phillips Ltd. p.117  a b Karl JansenWinkeln The Chronology of the Third Intermediate Period Dyns 2224 in Handbook of Egyptian Chronology ed. Rolf Krauss Erik Hornung David Warburton Brill 2005 p.237  Douglas E. Derry Note on the Remains of Shashanq Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte 39 1939 pp.549551  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten Philipp von Zabern Mainz am Rhein 1997 pp.95  Eva R. Lange Ein Neuer Knig Schoschenk in Bubastis Gttinger Miszellen 203 2004 pp.6572  Aidan M. Dodson The Canopic Equipment of the Kings of Egypt Kegan Paul Intl London 1994. pp.90  92  J. von Beckerath p.98  Norbert Dautzenberg Bemerkungen zu Schoschenq II. Takeloth II. und Pedubastis II. Gttinger Miszellen 144 1995 pp.2129  a b J. von Beckerath pp.98  191  Kitchen pp.117119  Kitchen p.110  Kitchen p.308  Helen JacquetGordon book review of KA Kitchens The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 B.C. Bibliotheca Orientalis 32 1975 pp.358359  JacquetGordon pp.358360  JacquetGordon p.35  Kitchen p.117  Kitchen pp.117118  Rolf Krauss  David A. Warburton Chronological Table for the Dynastic Period in Handbook of Egyptian Chronology ed. Rolf Krauss Erik Hornung David Warburton Brill 2005 p.493  Thomas Schneider Contributions to the Chronology of the New Kingdom and the Third Intermediate Period Aegypte und Levante 20 2010 p.403  Christine Hobson Exploring the World of the Pharaohs A complete Guide to Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 1987. p.123  Derry pp.549551  Derry pp.549551  Dodson p.89 Further readingedit Altenmller Hartwig. 2000. Lederbnder und Lederanhnger von der Mumie des Chonsumaacheru and Die Mumienbinden des Chonsumaacheru in Altgypten 30 pp. 7376 8889 1021
14.2  ISBN 3860975404 Guy Brunton Some Notes on the Burial of Shashanq HeqaKheperRe Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte 39 1939 541547 N. Dautzenberg Bemerkungen zu Schoschenq II. Takeloth II. und Pedubastis II Gttinger Miszellen 144 1995 2129 D. E. Derry Note on the Remains of Shashanq Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte 39 1939 549551 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleShoshenqIIoldid1217191171 Categories 885 BC deaths 
9 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian mummies Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 4 April 2024 at 1043 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width