Tutkheperre Shoshenq - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Evidence for existence 
2 Twentysecond Dynasty timeline 
3 References 
4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Tutkheperre Shoshenq 4 languages Franais Italiano Magyar  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian pharaoh Tutkheperre Shoshenq Shoshenq IIb Pharaoh Reign circa 8
80 s BC Predecessor Unknown Successor Unknown Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Tutkheperre 1 Nomen Shoshenq Dynasty 
22 nd Dynasty Tutkheperre Shoshenq or Shoshenq IIb2 is an obscure Third Intermediate Period ancient Egyptian pharaoh whose existence was until recently doubted. In 2004 a GM 203 German article by Eva R. Lange on a newly discovered stone block decoration from the Temple of Bubastis that bore his rare royal prenomen Tutkheperre confirmed his existence because his name is found in Lower and Upper Egypt.3 Tutkheperres prenomen translates approximately as Appearance or Coming Forth of the Image of Re. Evidence for existenceedit This king was first attested in Ostracon Louvre E.31886 discovered at Abydos in Upper Egypt by mile Amlineau 18501915 in his 
19 th century excavations. This ostracon is now in the Louvre Museum and was examined by M. A. Bonheme in a 1995 paper titled Les Chechanquides Qui Combien4 According to Bonheme the Ostracon contains the name Tutkheperre ...Amun Shoshenq MeryAmun written in black ink and was discovered among votive deposits starting from the New Kingdom onwards near the First Dynasty Tomb of Osiris at Abydos in Upper Egypt.5 The ostracon evidence was not considered conclusive evidence for this kings existence since the writer of this object was assumed to have mistakenly written the small bird or chick symbol for Tut instead of the White Crown symbol for Hedj as in king Hedjkheperre Shoshenq I. However in her 2004 GM paper Lange notes that the name Tutkheperre cannot be a mistake for either Shoshenq I or for Tjetkheperre Psusennes IIs prenomen because their hieroglyphic symbols are completely different.6 Secondly the prenomen Tutkheperre is inscribed in an architectural building in Bubastis Lower Egypt. Langes GM 203 article established that this king was genuine and distinct from Shoshenq I or Psusennes II. It examines an architectural fragment from the Great Temple of Bubastis which mentions his unique prenomen and nomen Tutkheperre Shoshenq. The likelihood of an error here is remote because these stone architectural blocks were created by professionally trained royal artisans who would not mistakenly transcribe a kings throne name onto a royal monument or temple. Tutkheperre Shoshenqs reign was probably brief because he is unattested beyond these two documents. Twentysecond Dynasty timelineedit Karl JansenWinkeln surmises in a footnote at the conclusion of Langes paper that this new king should be dated to the first half of the 
22 nd Dynasty because his rule is attested in Upper and Lower Egypt. This is a logical deduction since Shoshenq III of the 
22 nd Dynasty lost effective control over Upper Egypt in his 
8 th year with the accession of Pedubast I at Thebes. Secondly Lange notes that Tutkheperre Shoshenq is documented at the Temple of Bubastis where other early 
22 nd Dynasty monarchs such as Osorkon I and Osorkon II are well known for their building projects there. Thus he should be placed somewhere between these two kings. While his precise location in the framework of the 
22 nd Dynasty is a mystery Tutkheperre is more likely to have been one of the unknown 3 Kings  apart from Shoshenq II who ruled Egypt between Osorkon I and Takelot I as Africanus generally more accurate copy of Manethos Epitome states.78 The only fact which is certain is that he could not intervene in the transition between Shoshenq I to Osorkon I because Osorkon I certainly succeeded his father. This leaves a short interregnum of a few years in the transition between Osorkon I to Takelot I during the 8
80 s BC before Takelot I becoming king. Tutkheperre certainly ruled Egypt before the reign of Osorkon II who adopts the generic Ramesses IIbased prenomen of Usimare SetepenreSetepenamun for his royal name. Several shortlived kings could plausibly fit into this transition period such as Shoshenq II at 23 years and Tutkheperre Shoshenq because Takelot I was a relatively minor son of Osorkon I by Queen Tashedkhons who was a lesser wife of this king. Takelot I may thus have been obliged to wait a while before assuming power in favour of other higher ranking royal family members with stronger claims to the throne. Referencesedit  Based on the style of 
22 nd dynasty royal names the missing part is likely to be setepenAmun. Lange p.69.  1 At the October 2007 Egyptological Conference on the History and Chronology of the Libyan Period in Egypt at Leiden University the conference members voted unanimously to designate him as Shoshenq IIb this does not however imply that his existence is recognized by all scholars at this time there is agreement as to how to refer to him.  Eva R. Lange Ein Neuer Knig Schoschenk in Bubastis GM 2032004 pp.6571.  M. A. Bonheme Les Chechanquides Qui Combien BSFE 1341995 pp.5354.  Bonheme op. cit. pp.5354  Lange op. cit. p.68  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronology of the Egyptian pharaohs Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten Mainz am Rhein Verlag Philipp von Zabern. 1997 p.95  Thomas Schneider Contributions to the Chronology of the New Kingdom and the Third Intermediate Period Egypt and the Levant 20 2010. pp.375376 Further readingedit mile Amlineau Les nouvelles fouilles dAbydos 18971898 fl 147. Eva R. Lange Ein Neuer Knig Schoschenk in Bubastis Gttinger Miszellen 2032004 pp. 6571. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTutkheperreShoshenqoldid1195567657 Categories 
9 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 January 2024 at 1100 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width