Shoshenq IV - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Burial 
2 References Toggle the table of contents Shoshenq IV 19 languages   Catal Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Bahasa Melayu  Srpskohrvatski     Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Shoshenq IV Stela of the Chief of the Libu Niumateped likely issued in regnal year 8 of Shoshenq IV1 Pharaoh Reign 798785 BC Predecessor Shoshenq III Successor Pami Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Hedjkheperre Setepenre prR stp.nR Radiant is the manifestation of Ra the chosen one of Ra Nomen Shoshenq Meryamun Sabast Netjerheqaiunu nq mrjJmn zBstt nr hq Iwnw2 Shoshenq beloved of Amun son of Bast divine ruler of Iunu Burial NRT V Tanis Dynasty 
22 nd Dynasty Hedjkheperre Setepenre Shoshenq IV was an ancient Egyptian ruler of the 
22 nd Dynasty between the reigns of Shoshenq III and Pami. In 1986 David Rohl proposed that there were two king Shoshenqs bearing the prenomen Hedjkheperre  i the wellknown founder of the dynasty Hedjkheperre Shoshenq I and ii a later pharaoh from the second half of the dynasty whom Rohl called Hedjkheperre Shoshenq b due to his exact position in the dynasty being unknown.3 Following a proposal first suggested to him by Pieter Gert van der Veen in 1984 the British Egyptologist Aidan Dodson in 1993 supported the new kings existence by demonstrating that the earlier Hedjkheperre Shoshenq bore simple epithets in his titulary whereas the later Hedjkheperre Shoshenqs epithets were more complex.4 Dodson suggested that the ruler that Kenneth Kitchen in his standard work on Third Intermediate Period chronology5 had numbered Shoshenq IV  bearing the prenomen Usermaatre  should be removed from the 
22 nd Dynasty and replaced by Rohls Hedjkheperre Shoshenq b renumbering the latter as Shoshenq IV. At the same time the old Usermaatre Shoshenq IV was renumbered as Shoshenq VI. Dodsons historical summary of the new King Shoshenq IVs discovery and his supportive evidence for that kings independent existence from Hedjkheperre Shoshenq I appeared in an article entitled A New King Shoshenq Confirmed in 19
93.4  Rohl and Dodsons combined arguments for the existence of a new 
22 nd Dynasty Tanite king called Hedjkheperre Shoshenq IV are accepted by Egyptologists today including Jurgen von Beckerath and Kitchen  the latter in the preface to the third edition of his book on The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt.6 As Dodson pointed out while Shoshenq IV shared the same prenomen as his illustrious ancestor Shoshenq I he is distinguished from Shoshenq I by his use of an especially long nomen  Shoshenqmeryamunsibastnetjerheqaon which featured both the sibast son of Bast and netjerheqaon godruler of Heliopolis epithets.7 These two epithets were only gradually employed by the 
22 nd Dynasty pharaohs starting from the reign of Osorkon II. By contrast Shoshenq Is nomen simply reads Shoshenqmeryamun. Shoshenq Is immediate successors Osorkon I and Takelot I also never used epithets beyond the standard meryamun beloved of Amun. In his 1994 book on the Canopic Equipment of the Kings of Egypt Dodson observes that when the sibast epithet appears during the dynasty of Osorkon II it is rather infrequent while the netjerheqawaset godruler of Thebes and netjerheqaon epithets are only exclusively attested in the reigns of that monarchs successors  that is Shoshenq III Pami and Shoshenq V.8 This suggests that the newly identified Hedjkhperre Shoshenq IV was a late Taniteera king who ruled in Egypt either during or after the reign of Shoshenq III. Rohl had already pointed out in 1989 that the cartouches of a Hedjkheperre Shoshenq appear on a stela St. Petersburg Hermitage 5630 dated to Year 10 of the king.9 This stela mentions a Great Chief of the Libu Niumateped who is also attested in a Year 8 usually attributed to Shoshenq V. Since the title Chief of the Libu is only documented from Year 31 of Shoshenq III onwards it seems this new king must have ruled contemporary with or after Shoshenq III. Dodson noted that the Hedjkheperre Shoshenq on the stela bore the long form titulary now attributed to Hedjkhperre Shoshenq IV thus confirming that the stela cannot be dated to Hedjkheperre Shoshenq I.10 In his 1993 paper Dodson proposed to place Shoshenq IVs reign after the last attested regnal date for Shoshenq III in Year 39 arguing that the discovery of Shoshenq IVs burial in the tomb of Shoshenq III at Tanis makes it likely that he was part of the 
22 nd Dynasty Tanite line. Dodson would therefore place Hedjkheperre Shoshenq IV between Shoshenq III and Pami. Burialedit A rendering of the tomb NRT V showing the two sarcophagi. Excavation work in the looted NRT V Tanite tomb of Shoshenq III revealed the presence of two sarcophagi one inscribed for Usermaatresetepenre Shoshenq III and the other being an anonymous sarcophagus. The unmarked sarcophagus however was clearly a secondary introduction according to its position in the tomb.11 In the Tanite tombs debris several fragments were found from one or two canopic jars bearing the cartouches of a Hedjkheperre Shoshenq. Rohl had pointed out that the Staatliche Museum in Berlin possessed a canopic chest for Hedjkheperre Shoshenq I and that these jars from the tomb of Shoshenq III were too large to fit inside the Berlin canopic chest. Rohl used the evidence of the jars as the key element of his theory that there were indeed two Hedjkheperre Shoshenqs.7 Dodson noted that the Tanite canopic vessels bear the name HedjkheperreSetpenremeryamunsibastnetjerheqaon and since the epithet netjerheqaon god ruler of Heliopolis was never employed by the 
22 nd Dynasty kings until the reign of Shoshenq III this is clear evidence that the new Shoshenq IV was buried in Shoshenq IIIs Tanite tomb and must have succeeded this king.12 It also establishes that the king buried in the second sarcophagus in Shoshenq IIIs tomb was certainly not Shoshenq I. Dodson was initially reluctant to accept Rohls proposal for a second Hedjkheperre Shoshenq but his own research into the archaeological evidence led him to revise his opinion Having implicitly rejected such a conclusion in 1986 further study of the canopic fragments as part of my general treatment of royal canopics has now led me rather to support the existence of two Shoshenqs with the prenomen Hedjkheperre.7 This is now the mainstream consensus view within Egyptology. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shoshenq IV. Referencesedit  JansenWinkeln Karl 2014. Die Grofrsten der Libu im westlichen Delta in der spten 22. Dynastie PDF. Journal of Egyptian History. 7 2 194202. doi
10.1 1631874166512340017.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen  Mnchner gyptologische Studien vol 46 Mainz am Rhein Verlag Philipp von Zabern 1999. ISBN 3805323107 pp.19091.  D. Rohl Questions and Answers on the Chronology of Rohl and James Chronology  Catastrophism Workshop 19861 p. 22.  a b A. Dodson A new King Shoshenq confirmed Gttinger Miszellen 137 1993 pp.5358.  K. A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC 
1 st edition 1973 p. 87.  K. A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt 1100650 BC 
3 rd edition 1996  Y p.xxvi  a b c A. Dodson op. cit. 1993 p.55.  A. Dodson The Canopic Equipment of the Kings of Egypt 1994 p. 93.  D. Rohl The Early Third Intermediate Period Some Chronological Considerations Journal of the Ancient Chronology Forum 3 1989 pp.6667.  A. Dodson op.cit. 1993 pp.5556.  A. Dodson op.cit. 1994 p. 93.  A. Dodson op. cit. 1993 pp.5455 Preceded by Shoshenq III Pharaoh of Egypt 798  785 BC Twentysecond dynasty of Egypt Succeeded by Pami v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleShoshenqIVoldid1206206485 Categories 785 BC deaths 
8 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 11 February 2024 at 1405 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width