Bakenranef - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Literary sources Toggle Literary sources subsection 
1.1 Legal reforms 
2 Contemporary records 
3 References 
4 External links Toggle the table of contents Bakenranef 28 languages Alemannisch   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Polski Portugus Romn  Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Bakenranef Bocchoris Apis stela dated to Year 6 of Bakenranefs reign found in Saqqara. Pharaoh Reign 725720 BC Predecessor Tefnakht Successor None Egypt united under Shebitqo Upper Kingdom Pharaoh Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Wahkare Constant is the Heart of Re Nomen Bakenranef Servant in his name Dynasty 
24 th Dynasty Western Delta Bakenranef known by the ancient Greeks as Bocchoris Ancient Greek  Bkkhris1 Latin Bocchoris or Bochchoris   Bkhkhris Latin Bochchoris was briefly a king of the 
24 th Dynasty of Egypt. Based at Sais in the western Delta he ruled Lower Egypt from c. 725 to 720 BC. Though the Ptolemaic period Egyptian historian Manetho2 considers him the sole member of the 
24 th Dynasty modern scholars include his father Tefnakht in that dynasty. Although Sextus Julius Africanus quotes Manetho as stating that Bocchoris ruled for six years some modern scholars again differ and assign him a shorter reign of only five years based on evidence from an Apis Bull burial stela. It establishes that Bakenranefs reign ended only at the start of his 
6 th regnal year which under the Egyptian dating system means he had a reign of 5 full years. Bakenranefs prenomen or royal name Wahkare means Constant is the Spirit of Re in Egyptian.3 Literary sourcesedit Manetho is the source for two events from Bakenranefs reign. The first is the story that a lamb uttered the prophecy that Egypt would be conquered by the Assyrians a story later repeated by such classical authors as Claudius Aelianus De Natura Animalis 
12.3 . The second was that Bakenranef was captured by Shebitqo a king of the 
25 th Dynasty who executed Bakenrenef by having him burned alive. A Kushite king Shebitqo extended his rule over the whole of Egypt which had been split since the 
21 st Dynasty. Diodorus Siculus writing about three centuries after Manetho adds some different details. Diodorus states that although Bakenranef was contemptible in appearance he was wiser than his predecessors 
1.6 5. The Egyptians attributed to him a law concerning contracts which provided for a way to discharge debts where no bond was signed it was observed down to Diodorus time 
1.7 9. For this and other acts Diodorus included Bocchoris as one of the six most important lawgivers of ancient Egypt. For a minor kinglet briefly in control of the Nile Delta this is an unexpectedly prominent ranking He was a surprising choice Robin Lane Fox observes4 Perhaps some Greeks unknown to us had had close dealings with him from his reign we have scarabseals bearing his Egyptian name one of which found its way into a contemporary Greek grave on Ischia up near the Bay of Naples. Ischia was the earliest of eighthcentury BC Greek colonies in Italy. The Roman historian Tacitus mentions that many Greek and Roman writers thought he had a part in the origin of the Jewish nation Most writers however agree in stating that once a disease which horribly disfigured the body broke out over Egypt that king Bocchoris seeking a remedy consulted the oracle of Hammon and was bidden to cleanse his realm and to convey into some foreign land this race detested by the gods. The people who had been collected after diligent search finding themselves left in a desert sat for the most part in a stupor of grief till one of the exiles Moses by name warned them not to look for any relief from God or man forsaken as they were of both but to trust to themselves taking for their heavensent leader that man who should first help them to be quit of their present misery. They agreed and in utter ignorance began to advance at random. Nothing however distressed them so much as the scarcity of water and they had sunk ready to perish in all directions over the plain when a herd of wild asses was seen to retire from their pasture to a rock shaded by trees. Moses followed them and guided by the appearance of a grassy spot discovered an abundant spring of water. This furnished relief. After a continuous journey for six days on the seventh they possessed themselves of a country from which they expelled the inhabitants and in which they founded a city and a temple. Tacitus Histories 
5.3  Shebitqo deposed and executed Bakenranef by burning him alive at the stake. This effectively ended the shortlived 
24 th Dynasty of Egypt as a potential rival to the Nubian 
25 th Dynasty. Although the Manethonic and classical traditions maintain that it was Shebitqos invasion which brought Egypt under Kushite rule the king burning his opponent BocchorisBakenranef alive there is no direct evidence that Shebitqo did slay Bakenranef and although earlier scholarship generally accepted the tradition it has recently been treated more sceptically.5 Legal reformsedit King Bakenranef has been credited with initiating a land reform but the brevity of his reign and the small geographical extent of the area he ruled together with the indirect character of the historical evidence for it has cast some doubt upon this.6 Diodorus credits Bakenranef with abolishing debt slavery a claim based upon a nowlost work by the historian Hecateus of Abdera. It is possible that Hecateus invented the story in order to support an ideological debate over debt slavery in Greek society.7 Contemporary recordsedit Despite the importance implied by these writers few contemporary records of Bakenranef have survived. The chief inscription of his reign concerns the death and burial of an Apis bull during Years 5 and 6 of his reign the remainder are a few stelae that Auguste Mariette recovered while excavating the Serapeum of Saqqara. In a tomb in Tarquinia in Italy was found an inscribed vase with his names. Referencesedit  Bakenranefs name is consistently Bocchoris in the Greek accounts and in Tacitus the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics has permitted the reconstruction of his authentic Egyptian name.  Manetho frags. 64 65 translation in W.G. Waddell Manetho Cambridge Harvard University 1997 p. 165  Clayton Peter A. 1994. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. London Thames and Hudson. p. 188. ISBN 9780500050743.  Fox Robin Lane 2008. Travelling Heroes In The Epic Age of Homer. Allen Lane. p. 31. ISBN 9780713999808.  Wenig Steffen 1999. Studien Zum Antiken Sudan Akten Der 7. Internationalen Tagung Fr Meroitische Forschungen Vom 14. Bis 19. September 1992 in Gosenbei Berlin. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 203. ISBN 9783447041393.  Markiewicz Tomasz 2008. Bocchoris the Lawgiveror was He Really. Journal of Egyptian History. 1 2 309330. doi
10.1 163187416608786121293.  Markiewicz Tomasz 2005. Security for debt in the demotic papyri. Journal of Juristic Papyrology. 35 141167. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bakenranef. Preceded by Tefnakht Pharaoh of Egypt 
24 th Dynasty Succeeded by Conquered by Shebitqo v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBakenranefoldid1212909079 Categories 
8 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt 
8 thcentury BC births 
8 thcentury BC deaths Executed Egyptian people Executed ancient Egyptian people Nile Delta People executed by ancient Egypt People executed by Egypt by burning 
1 stmillennium BC executions Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Latinlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 10 March 2024 at 0413 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width