Palermo Stone - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Description 
2 Archaeological history 
3 Uncertainties 
4 Significance 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Sources 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Palermo Stone 48 languages Afrikaans    Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus   Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska   Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Palermo stone Fragment of a stele known as the Royal Annals of the Old Kingdom of Ancient Egypt Not to be confused with Palermo Fragment. Palermo Stone The Palermo Stone the fragment of the Egyptian Royal Annals housed in Palermo Italy Height 
43.5  cm Width 25 cm Created c. 2338 BC Discovered before 1859 Present location Palermo Sicily Italy The Palermo Stone is one of seven surviving fragments of a stele known as the Royal Annals of the Old Kingdom of Ancient Egypt. The stele contained a list of the kings of Egypt from the First Dynasty c. 31502890 BCE through to the early part of the Fifth Dynasty c. 23922283 BCE and noted significant events in each year of their reigns. It was probably made during the Fifth Dynasty.1 The Palermo Stone is held in the Regional Archeological Museum Antonio Salinas in the city of Palermo Italy from which it derives its name.2 The term Palermo Stone is sometimes applied to all seven surviving fragments of the Royal Annals including those held in museums in Cairo and London. The fragments are also sometimes described collectively as the Cairo Annals Stone3 although the term Cairo Stone is also used to mean only those fragments of the Royal Annals now in Cairo. The Palermo Stone and other fragments of the Royal Annals preserve what is probably the oldest historical text that has survived from Ancient Egypt and form a key source for Egyptian history in the Old Kingdom.4 Descriptionedit The Royal Annals stele of which the Palermo Stone formed part may originally have been about 60 cm high and 
2.1 m wide. The fragments are composed of a compact hard black stone probably a form of basalt. The Palermo Stone itself is an irregular shieldshaped fragment 
43.5  cm high 25 cm wide and 
6.5  cm thick maximum dimensions. The inscription on the front recto of the Palermo Stone consists of six horizontal bands or registers of hieroglyphic text running right to left. The first register lists the names of predynastic kings of Lower Egypt identified as such by the wearing of the Red Crown. The second and subsequent registers contain portions of royal annals for pharaohs of the First to Fourth Dynasties that is lists of the key events in each year of the reign of each king arranged chronologically. The second register on the Palermo Stone begins with the final year entries for a king of the First Dynasty whose name is not preserved but who is generally assumed to be either Narmer or Aha.5 The rest of the second register is taken up with the first nine annual entries for this kings successor who is again not named on the fragment but is assumed to be either Aha or his successor Djer. The remainder of the inscription on this side continues with royal annals down to the kings of the Fourth Dynasty. The text continues on the back verso of the Palermo Stone cataloguing events during the reigns of pharaohs down to Neferirkare Kakai third ruler of the Fifth Dynasty.6 From the surviving fragments it is unclear whether the Royal Annals originally continued beyond this point in time. Where a king is named the name of his mother is also recorded such as Betrest mother of the First Dynasty king Semerkhet and Meresankh I mother of the Fourth Dynasty king Seneferu.2 Information recorded in the Royal Annals as preserved on the Palermo Stone includes measurements of the height of the annual Nile flood see Nilometer the inundation details of festivals such as Sed festivals taxation sculpture buildings and warfare.7 Archaeological historyedit The Royal Annals of Egypt showing a suggested reconstruction of the stele and the positions of the seven surviving fragments. P is the Palermo Stone nos. 15 are the Cairo fragments and L is the London fragment A fragment of the Royal Annals on display at the Petrie Museum London which is inscribed with part of the Khasekhemwy register and at the bottom with a sign from the Sneferu register The original location of the stele is unknown and none of the surviving fragments have a secure archeological provenance. One fragment now in Cairo is said to have been found at an archaeological site at Memphis while three other fragments now in Cairo were said to have been found in Middle Egypt. No find site for the Palermo Stone itself has been suggested. The Palermo Stone was purchased by a Sicilian lawyer Ferdinand Guidano in 1859 and it has been in Palermo since 1866. On 19 October 1877 it was presented to the Palermo Archaeological Museum by the Guidano family where it has remained since. There are five fragments of the Royal Annals in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo four of which were acquired between 1895 and 1914. The fifth was purchased on the antiquities market in 1963. One small fragment is in the Petrie Museum of University College London forming part of the collection of the archeologist Sir Flinders Petrie and purchased by him in 1914. The importance of the Palermo Stone was not recognized until it was noticed by a visiting French archaeologist in 1895. The first full publication and translation was that done in 1902 by Heinrich Schfer. Uncertaintiesedit There are uncertainties regarding the date of the Palermo Stone and of the Royal Annals it records. It is unknown whether the inscription was done all at once or whether it was added to over time. It is also unknown whether or not it dates from the latest period it describes i.e. from no later than the Fifth Dynasty. It has been suggestedby whom that the stele was made much later perhaps in the Twentyfifth Dynasty 747656 BCE. It seems clear from the content of the inscription that even if the Royal Annals as preserved by the Palermo Stone and other fragments were not carved during or soon after the period they describe they are directly based on an Old Kingdom original.8 further explanation needed It is also unknown whether all the surviving fragments are parts of the same stele or whether they come from separate copies. None of the smaller fragments held in Cairo have any clear provenance and they might not all be genuine.910 Various parts of the ancient text are in widely varying states of preservation which makes the text difficult to decipher. If the text is a later copy rather than a Fifth Dynasty original errors and invention may have crept in during the copying process.9 Significanceedit The Palermo Stone and the other associated fragments of the Royal Annals are a vital source for the history of the Old Kingdom and for example preserve names of members of the royal families during the first five dynasties which are not otherwise recorded. The surviving Royal Annals fragments contains the names of the following pharaohs HorAha 
1 st dynasty. Djer also 
1 st dynasty. Den also 
1 st dynasty. Semerkhet also 
1 st dynasty. Nynetjer 
2 nd dynasty. Khasekhemwy also 
2 nd dynasty. Huni 
3 rd dynasty. Sneferu 
4 th dynasty. Khufu also 
4 th dynasty builder of the Great Pyramid of Giza. Djedefre also 
4 th dynasty first pharaoh using the sun symbol in a royal cartouche. Shepseskaf also 
4 th dynasty Userkaf 
5 th dynasty founder of the 
5 th dynasty. Sahure also 
5 th dynasty Neferirkare Kakai also 
5 th dynasty New Kingdom Egyptian king lists such as the Turin Canon 
13 th century BCE and the Abydos king list reign of Seti I 12941279 BCE identify Menes probably Narmer c. 3100 or 3000 BCE as the first king of the First Dynasty and so credit him with unifying Egypt. However the top register of the Royal Annals names some predynastic rulers of Upper and Lower Egypt presumably referring to a time before Egypt was unified. Identification of these kings with historical persons remains controversial. The ancient historian Manetho may have used information similar to the complete Royal Annals stele to construct his chronology of the early dynasties of Egypt forming part of his Aegyptiaca History of Egypt written during the third century BCE although the surviving king list most closely related to his work as preserved by later ancient and later writers is the Turin Canon. 11 The Palermo stone also mentions 9 predynastic pharaohs from Lower Egypt. These may be mythical kings preserved through oral tradition or may even be completely fictitious.121314 pu Hsekiu alternatively Seka Khayu Tiu also known as Teyew Thesh also known as Tjesh and Tesh Neheb Wazner also Wazenez Wadjenedj and possibly Wenegbu Mekh a See alsoedit Saqqara Tablet List of pharaohs Referencesedit  Dodson Aidan 2004 The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt p.62. Thames  Hudson ISBN 0500051283.  a b Schir Saverio 9 February 2021. The Palermo Stone and its unsolved mysteries. palermoviva.it.  Dodson  Hsu Hsu ShihWei 2010 The Palermo Stone the Earliest Royal Inscription from Ancient Egypt Altoriental. Forsch. Akademie Verlag 37 2010 1 6889.  Lloyd Alan B. 1988 Commentary on Herodotus 99132 p.8.  ONeill John P. Egyptian Art in the Age of the Pyramids. p.349. Yale University Press. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1999. ISBN 0870999079  Shaw Ian 2003 The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.5. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0192804588.  Wilkinson Toby A. H. 2000 Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt. New York Columbia University Press p.
23 ff.  a b Wilkinson Toby A. H. 1999. Early Dynastic Egypt. London Routledge p.64.  OMara P.F. 1979. The Palermo Stone and the Archaic Kings of Egypt. California Paulette Pub. Co. p.113131.  Tetley C. 2014 The Reconstructed Chronology of the Egyptian Kings Archived 20170211 at the Wayback Machine Vol I  II Whangarei New Zealand. ISBN 9780473293383  Helck Untersuchungen zu Manetho und den gyptischen Knigslisten 1956 Berlin AkademieVerlag. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und Altertumskunde gyptens 18  OMara Was there an Old Kingdom historiography Is it datable 1996 Orientalia 65 197208  Wilkinson Toby A. H. 2000. Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt. p.85 New York Columbia University Press. ISBN 0710306679. Sourcesedit Partial and dated English translation of the text in J.H. Breasted 1906. Ancient Records of Egypt vol. I sections 76167. Chicago University of Chicago Press. St. John Michael 1999. The Palermo Stone An Arithmetical View. London University Bookshop Publications. ISBN 0953686507 Wilkinson Toby A. H. 2000. Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt. New York Columbia University Press. ISBN 0710306679. Wilkinson Toby A. H. 1999. Early Dynastic Egypt. London Routledge. ISBN 0203024389. OMara P.F. 1979. The Palermo Stone and the Archaic Kings of Egypt. Calif Paulette Pub. Co 113131. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Palermo stone. Extract of a lecture given by T.A.H. Wilkinson University College London 2000 Image of London fragment and translation Petrie Museum Gallery of images of Palermo Stone and Cairo fragments and more by J.D. Degreef. Christine Tetleys book. v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePalermoStoneoldid1219778208 Categories 
25 thcentury BC steles 
24 thcentury BC steles 1859 archaeological discoveries Ancient Egyptian King lists Ancient Egyptian stelas Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Egyptian Museum Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from March 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 April 2024 at 1921 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width