Takelot III - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign length 
2 Papyrus Berlin 3048 
3 Successor 
4 References 
5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Takelot III 22 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Italiano  Magyar  Polski Portugus  Srpskohrvatski   Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Takelot III Relief of Takelot III from Karnak temple Pharaoh Reign 774 B.C. 759 B.C. Predecessor Osorkon III Successor Rudamun Royal titulary Horus name Hor Wadjtawy rwtwj Horus flourishing of the two lands Nebty name Wadjtawy Wtwj Flourishing of the two lands Golden Horus Wadjtawy Wtwj Flourishing of the two lands Prenomen Praenomen Usermaatre Setepenamun WsrMtRstpnJmn Powerful is the Maat of Ra the chosen one of Amun Shorter form Usermaatre WsrMtR Powerful is the Maat of Ra Nomen Takelot Meriamun Siese TkltsstmrjJmn Takelot beloved of Amun son of Isis Hieroglyphic variant Consorts Irtiubast Kakat Betjet Father Osorkon III Mother Tentsai Dynasty 
23 rd Dynasty Usermaatre Setepenamun Takelot III SiEse reigned 774759 BC was Osorkon IIIs eldest son and successor. Takelot III ruled the first five years of his reign in a coregency with his father according to the evidence from Nile Quay Text No.13 which equates Year 28 of Osorkon III to Year 5 of Takelot III and succeeded his father as king the following year. He served previously as the High Priest of Amun at Thebes. He was previously thought to have ruled Egypt for only 7 years until his 
13 th Year was found on a stela from Ahmeida in the Dakhla Oasis in 20
05.1  Reign lengthedit Takelot is attested by several documents a donation stela from Gurob which calls him The First Prophet of AmunRe General and Commander Takelot a stone block from Herakleopolis which calls him the Chief of PiSekhemkheperre and kings son by Tentsai Quay Text No.13 as noted above and Quay Text No.4 which records his Year 
6.1  A graffito on the roof of the Temple of Khonsu which records his Year 7 was long believed to be his Highest Year date. However in February 2005 a hieratic stela from Year 13 of his reign was discovered by a Columbia University archaeological expedition in the ruins of a temple at Amheida the Dakhla Oasis.2 Their subsequent analysis of this dated document conclusively established this kings identity as Takelot III.3 This documentwhich measures between 4248 cm wide between 4751 cm high and between 1016 cm thickhas now been published in JEOL 39 2006 by Dr. Olaf Kaper and Robert Demare.4 Part of the abstract for their article is given below ...The stela belongs to a group of finds documenting the temple of the God Thoth...in the western part of the Dakhla Oasis...during the Third Intermediate Period. One block of temple decoration was found in the name of king Petubastis I and the stela under discussion was set up in the temple to which this block belonged. The stelas principal text has five lines in which the date of the stela is given as Year 13 of Takeloth III c. 740 BCE as well as the name of the god Thoth of SAwHAt the local deity. The stela records a land donation to the temple on the part of the local governor chief of a Libyan tribe and it concludes with a list of eleven priests who are beneficiaries of this donation....Another donation stela erected by the same governor is known from the temple of Seth in Mut Dakhleh.5 The governor mentioned here is NesDjehuti or Esdhuti who appears as the Chief of the Shamin Libyans in both the aforementioned Year 13 stela of Takelot III and also in the Smaller Dakhla Stela.67 The smaller Dakla stela dates to Year 24 of the Nubian king Piye.8 This could mean that Takelot III and Piye were near contemporaries during their respective reigns. It suggested that an important graffito at Wadi Gasuswhich apparently links the Gods Wife Amenirdis I hence Shabaka here to Year 19 of a Gods Wife Shepenupetis a synchronism between a Nubian ruler and an Upper Egyptian Libyan king thereby equating Year 12 of Shabaka to Takelot III rather than the shortlived Rudamun. This graffito would have been carved prior to Piyes Nubian conquest of Egypt in his 
20 th Yearby which time both Takelot III and Rudamun had already died. However new evidence on the Wadi Gasus graffito published by Claus Jurman in 2006 has now redated the carving to the 
25 th dynastic Nubian period entirelyto Year 12 of Shabaka and Year 19 of Taharqa rather than to the 
23 rd dynastic Libyan eraand demonstrates that they instead pertain to Amenirdis I and Shepenupet II respectively based on palaegraphic and other evidence collated by Jurman at Karnak rather than the Nubian Amenirdis I and the Libyan Shepenupet I daughter of Osorkon III.9 The Gods Wife Shepenupet II was Piyes daughter and Taharqas sister. Jurman notes that no evidence from the innermost sanctuary of the chapel of Osiris Heqadjet at Karnak shows Shepenupet I associated with Piyes daughter Amenirdis I.10 The Wadi Gasus graffiti were written in 2 separate handstyles and the year date formulas for 12 and 19 were also written differently which suggests that they are unlikely to have been composed at the same time.10 This means that the Year 19 date cannot be assigned to Takelot III and likely belongs to the Nubian king Taharqa instead. Papyrus Berlin 30
48 edit Frederic Payraudeau once noted that Takelot III likely ruled Egypt for a minimum of 14 Years and was presumably the unknown Year 19 Egyptian monarch recorded at Wadi Gasus. He based his interpretation on the evidence of Papyrus Berlin 3048 the only surviving administrative document on papyri for the entire Libyan period. This document which is explicitly dated to Year 14 of a Takelot SiEse Meryamun i.e. either Takelot II or III records a marriage contract which was witnessed by Vizier Hor and 2 Royal Treasurers Bakenamun and Djedmontuiufankh respectively. The papyrus has traditionally been assigned to Takelot II since this rulers highest date is his Year 25 whereas Takelot IIIs highest unequivocal date was only thought to be his Year 7. The author observed 3 pieces of evidence which taken together could have supported the attribution of this papyrus to Takelot III instead. Firstly Payraudeau stressed that P. Berlin 3048 specifically mentions two Royal treasurers. The fact that 2 treasurers served Pharaoh at the same time is inconsistent with the known facts for the period from the reign of Osorkon II until the early years of Osorkon III at Thebes when only a single person from one influential family served in this office. They were the descendants of Djedkhonsuiufankh A who was the Fourth Prophet of Amun under Takelot I Nakhtefmut A Harsiese C and Djedkhonsuiufankh C. Djedkhonsuiufankh As son Nakhtefmut A first assumed the office of Royal Treasurer under Osorkon II then Nakhtefmut As son Harsiese C in turn succeeded him likely under Takelot II. Finally Harsiese Cs son Djedkhonsuiufankh C occupied this office from the end of Takelot IIs reign until the early years of Osorkon IIIs reign under whom he is attested. Since three direct descendants of one powerful family held the office of Royal Treasurer in the period around Takelot IIs reign it is unlikely that Djedmontuiufankh could have intervened in office as early as Year 14 of Takelot II since he was not even connected to this family. Hence the only other viable candidate for Djedmontuiufankhs master is Takelot III for whom no Royal Treasurer is known with certainty. Secondly the Vizier Hor who is mentioned in Papyrus Berlin 3048 was thought to be the same person who is named as the father of Vizier Nebneterou in several Nubian and Saite era genealogical documents.11 This also makes it far more plausible that P. Berlin 3048 belongs to Takelot III since Hor would have served as Vizier only a few years prior to the start of the Nubian Dynasty in Egypt under Piye and would explain his sons later attestations in Nubian and Saite documents. In contrast Takelot II died long before Piye conquered Egypt in his 
20 th Year. Finally the author noted that the Royal Treasurer Djedmontuiufankh son of Aafenmut II lists his family genealogy on the opposite side of this papyrus. Payraudeau 8485 This specific list of his family tree is given HarsieseBakenkhonsuHarsieseAafenmut IMerkhonsuHarsiesename lostHarsieseAafenmut IIDjedmontuiufankhHarsiese. An Aafenmut a scribe of the Chief Treasurer was buried under Osorkon I bracelets on his Mummy bore this kings prenomen. Frederic notes that an identification of this person with one of the listed predecessors of Djedmontuiufankh is certain here since this person functioned as a scribe of the Treasurya state office with which Djedmontuiufankhs family was intimately linked. However this Aafenmut was probably Aafenmut I rather than Aafenmut II Djedmontuiufankhs father since this persons son could not have lived beyond three family generations under Takelot I Osorkon II and the High Priest Nimlot C from the reign of Osorkon I into Year 14 of Takelot II as the author notes. Payraudeau also highlights the existence of the funerary stela of a certain Harsiese son of Merkhonsu which was found at the Ramesseum and has been stylistically dated to the 
9 th Century BC in the period around Takelot I or Osorkon IIs reign to support his hypothesis that both Aafenmut I and Merkhonsu were direct ancestors of Djedmontuiufankh. As an aside the author believed that Nile Quay Text No.
45 which according to Gerardus Broekman in JEA 882002 records either Year 17 18 or 25 of an anonymous Theban king who ruled after Shoshenq IIImay perhaps be ascribed to Takelot III based on the evidence of Papyrus Berlin 30
48.1 2 Since Year 13 of Takelot III is now attested it was possible that the Year 14 date in this document also belongs to his reign rather than that of Takelot II. However Payraudeau has since changed his views here and instead assigns this papyrus to Takelot II based on the mention of a certain Harsiesedesignated the fourth prophet of Amunin this document who is known to have served in office during king Takelot IIs reign.13 This means that Takelot IIIs highest date is his 
13 th year. The fact that the chief of the ShaminLibyans a NesDjehuti is attested in the same office in both Year 13 of Takelot III and Year 24 of Piye also shows that the interval between these two kings dates was close in time also it is unlikely that Takelot III ruled Egypt for 19 years since his brother Rudamun succeeded him at Thebes and Rudamun in turn was succeeded in this city by king Ini who ruled here for at least 5 years before Thebes fell permanently under Kushite control during Piyes reign.14 Successoredit Takelot III was the husband of Irtiubast who is named as a Kings Daughter on the coffin of their son Osorkon G.15 Another Irtiubast B appears to be a daughter of the king.16 He was ultimately succeeded in power by his younger brother Rudamun who was another son of Osorkon III rather than by any of his 3 known sons the PrinceHigh Priest Osorkon F a Prince Ihtesamun who is known from the stela of his grandson Ankhfenmut in Croydon Central Library and finally the Second Prophet of Amun Djedptahefankh D who is attested in statue Tbingen 1734 and in stela CG 41006 of his greatgranddaughter Nakhtbasteru.17 This development suggests that Takelot III must have reached an advanced age to have outlived all of his sons since it was unusual for a brother of a king to assume the throne if the king still had a son who was living.18 Traditional Egyptian custom required that the son of a king directly succeed his father. Referencesedit  a b Frdric Payraudeau Le rgne de Taklot III et les dbuts de la domination Koushite GM 198 2004 pp.7980  Olaf Kaper and Robert Demare A Donation Stela in the Name of Takeloth III from Amheida Dakhleh Oasis PDF Jaarbericht Ex Oriente Lux JEOL 39 2006 pp.1937  Kaper  Demare PDF pp.29 3133  Kaper  Demare PDF p.22  Kaper  Demare JEOL 39 abstract  Kaper  Demaree pp.3132  K.A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt c.1100650 BC 
3 rd ed. Warminster 1996. p.371  Jac Janssen The Smaller Dakhla Stele JEA 54 1968 pp.16671  Claus Jurman Die Namen des Rudjamun in der Kapelle des OsirisHekadjet. Bemerkungen der 3. Zwischenzeit un dem Wadi GasusGraffito GM 210 2006 pp.6991  a b Jurman GM 210 pp.6891  Herman De Meulenaere Le Vizir Nebneterou BIFAO 861986 pp.143149  Broekman pp.170178  Frdric Payraudeau Takeloth III Considerations on Old and New Documents in The Libyan Period in Egypt. Historical and Cultural Studies into the 
21 st
24 th Dynasties Proceedings of a Conference at Leiden University 2527 October 2007 G. Broekman RJ Demaree  O.E. Kaper eds Peeters Leuven 2009 p.294  Payraudeau The Libyan Period in Egypt p.296  Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 2004. p.227  Helmut Brandl with a contribution by Joachim Friedrich Quack A Bichrome Faience Statuette of Bastet from the Reign of Takeloth III Tuna el Gebel IV  Festschrift fr Dieter Kessler Munich 2013 6789. httpswww.academia.edu93426
83 ABichromeFaienceStatuetteofBastetfromtheReignofTakelothIII  Aston  Taylor pp.132136  Payraudeau GM 198 pp.8788 Bibliographyedit D.A. Aston  J.H. Taylor The Family of Takelot III and the Theban TwentyThird Dynasty in M.A. Leahy Libya and Egypt c.1300750 BC. London School of Oriental and African Studies Centre of Near and Middle Eastern Studies and The Society for Libyan Studies 1990 Gerard Broekman The Nile Level Records of the TwentySecond and TwentyThird Dynasties in Karnak A Reconsideration of their Chronological Order JEA 882002 pp. 165178. Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson 2004 J.P. Elias A Northern Member of the Theban TwentyThird Dynasty Discussions in Egyptology 31 1995 5767. K.A. Kitchen The Third Intermediate Period in Egypt c.1100650 BC 
3 rd ed. Warminster 1996. Frdric Payraudeau Le rgne de Taklot III et les dbuts de la domination Koushite GM 1982004 pp. 79
90.1 . Olaf Kaper and Robert Demare A Donation Stela in the Name of Takeloth III from Amheida Dakhleh Oasis Jaarbericht Ex Oriente LuxJEOL 39 2006 pp. 1937 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTakelotIIIoldid1221641217 Categories 
8 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
8 thcentury BC clergy Pharaohs of the Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt Theban High Priests of Amun Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 May 2024 at 0313 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width