Psamtik II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Campaigns and battles 
2 Monuments 
3 Successor 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Psamtik II 35 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Psamtik II Psammetichus II Psammetichus II making an offering Pharaoh Reign 595589 BC Predecessor Necho II Successor Apries Royal titulary Horus name Prenomen Praenomen Neferibre Nomen Psamtik Psammetichus Consort Takhuit Children Apries Ankhnesneferibre Father Necho II Mother Khedebneithirbinet I Died 589 BC Dynasty 
26 th dynasty Psamtik II Ancient Egyptian NfrjbR Psmk pronounced Psamk1 known by the GraecoRomans as Psammetichus or Psammeticus was a king of the Saitebased Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt 595 BC  589 BC. His prenomen NeferIbRe means Beautiful is the Heart of Re.2 He was the son of Necho II.3 Campaigns and battlesedit Psamtik II led a foray into Nubia in 592 BC marching as far south as the Third or even the Fourth Cataract of the Nile according to a contemporary stela from Thebes Karnak which dates to Year 3 of this kings name and refers to a heavy defeat that was inflicted upon the kingdom of Kush.4 A wellknown graffito inscribed in Greek on the left leg of the colossal seated statue of Ramesses II on the south side of the entrance to the temple of Abu Simbel records that When King Psammetichus i.e. Psamtik II came to Elephantine this was written by those who sailed with Psammetichus the son of Theocles and they came beyond Kerkis as far as the river permits. Those who spoke foreign tongues Greek and Carians who also scratched their names on the monument were led by Potasimto the Egyptians by Amasis.5 Kerkis was located near the Fifth Cataract of the Nile which stood well within the Cushite Kingdom.6 Statue of Psamtik II. Louvre Museum Statue of Psamtik II. Louvre Museum This was the first confrontation between Egypt and Nubia since the reign of Tantamani. A Kushite king named Anlamani had revived the power of the kingdom of Napata. Psamtik IIs campaign was likely initiated to destroy any future aspirations the Kushites may have had to reconquer Egypt. The Egyptian army advanced to Pnubs Kerma and the capital city of Napata in a series of fierce battles where they looted its temples and destroyed the royal Kushite statues.7 The Kushite capital was sacked under the reign of the native Kushite king Aspelta who was the younger brother of Anlamani and the son of Senkamanisken. The Year 3 Karnak stela is dated to II Shemu day 10 of Psamtik IIs reign and states that The army that your Majesty sent to Nubia has reached the land of Pnubs....Nubians from all parts of Kush had arisen against him their hearts full of anger when he attacked those who had rebelled against him there because he was furious at those who had arisen against him. His Majesty took part in the combat as soon as he reached the battle. The rebels capitulated before a single arrow was unleashed against them....Those who tried to flee did not succeed and were brought back as prisoners four thousand two hundred men.8 Psamtik IIs victory stela from Kalabsha which records his campaign against Kush As a result of Psamtiks devastating campaign Kushs power was crushed and its kings from Aspelta onwards lost any opportunity of ever regaining control of Egypt. Instead the Nubian rulers decided to shift their capital further south from Napata to the relative safety of Mero. Curiously however Psamtik II does not appear to have capitalized on his victory. His troops retreated back to the First Cataract and Elephantine continued to be the southern border of Egypt. An outcome of this campaign was the deliberate destruction of monuments belonging to the 
25 th Dynasty Kushite kings in Egypt by hacking out their names and the emblems of royalty from their statues and reliefs.6 Later in 591 BC during the fourth year of his reign Psamtik II launched an expedition into Palestine to foment a general Levantine revolt against the Babylonians that involved among others Zedekiah of the Kingdom of Judah.9 Or according to Danel Kahn 592 B.C. seems to be the date of the military reconquest of the Levant by Psammetichus II.10 Monumentsedit Psamtik II was both a dynamic warrior pharaoh as well as a prolific builder in his brief 
6 year reign. A significant Saite temple was likely built by Psamtik II and his son Apries at the village of ElMahalla ElKubra which lies equidistant from Sebennytos and Behbeit ElHagar in the Lower Nile Delta.11 Officials from the Napoleonic expedition to Egypt observed an extraordinary number of pharaonic building elements of granite and turquoise reused in modern buildings at this site this discovery was subsequently confirmed by Nestor LHte in 1828 who counted more than 120 granite columns built into this villages mosque alone.12 A 
1.8  metre long fragment of red granite with the name of Psamtik II and a door lintel of Apries was also seen at ElMahalla ElKubra.11 Under Psamtik IIs reign a pair of obelisks more than 
21.7 9 metres high were erected in the temple of Heliopolis the first Emperor of Rome Augustus later had one of the obelisks today known as the Obelisk of Montecitorio which had probably been thrown down by the Persian invaders in 525 BC brought to Rome in 10 BC.11 Psamtik II also constructed a kiosk on Philae island. This kiosk today represents the oldest known monument known on the island and consisted of a double row of four columns which were connected by screen walls.11 The Temple of Hibis was founded by Psamtik II at Kharga Oasis. Another view of the reconstructed Temple of Hibis at Kharga Oasis in December 2008. Obelisk of Psamtik II now called Obelisk of Montecitorio used as a Roman sundial the famous Horologium Augusti in Rome. In the background is the Italian Chamber of Deputies building13 Psamtik II was also responsible for founding the Templehouse at Hibis in ElKharga Oasis for the triad of Amun Mut and Khonsu with significant installations for the cult of Osiris.14 This 
19.5  x 26 metre temple was originally situated on the bank of an ancient lake which has now disappeared and its temple decorations were only completed under the Persian kings Darius I and possibly Darius II.11 The Hibis temple consisted of a hypostyle hall with twobytwo papyrus capital columns a hall of offerings three sanctuaries in the rear section of the temple and a chapel at the side of the sanctuaries for the cult of Psamtik II.14 The front of the temple house of Hibis featured a pronaos with four papyrus bundle columns and screen walls. During the construction of the pronaos the side walls were extended for the addition of a courtyard. This extension was however only carried out in the 
30 th Dynasty by Nectanebo I and Nectanebo II. The eight papyrus columns of the pronaos still show the New Kingdom type of open bellshaped capitals.15 A massive sandstone gateway through an outer enclosure wall still stands almost 5 metres tall and was constructed during the Ptolemaic or Roman periods.16 Many inscriptions and decrees were carved on the gateway on a wide variety of topics such as taxation inheritance the court system and the rights of women with the earliest text dating to 49 AD.16 The Temple of Psamtik II at Hibis was completely preserved until 1832 when its roof and portions of the temple were removed for the construction of an aluminium factory.15 Only excavation work by the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 19101911 and restorations performed by the Egyptian Antiquities Service arrested its decline.15 Today the Hibis temple remainstogether with the Oracle or Ammoneion of Siwaas the best preserved and bestdocumented temple of the early Egyptian Late Period and is therefore a primary monument to the history of Egyptian temple building.15 Successoredit See also Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt family tree When Psamtik II died in 589 BC he was succeeded by Apries who was his son by Queen Takhut a Princess of Athribis. Psamtik and Queen Takhut were also the parents of Menekhubaste a Priestess of Atum at Heliopolis and Ankhnesneferibre a Gods Wife of Amun who served in this powerful office in Upper Egypt to the end of the Saite period in 525 BC when Egypt was conquered by the Persians.17 The date of Psamtik IIs death is mentioned in the Adoption stela of Ankhnesneferibre Year 7 I Akhet day 
23.1 8 Referencesedit  Ray J. D. 1990. The names Psammetichus and Takheta. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 76 196199. doi
10.2 3073822031. JSTOR 3822031. Retrieved 19 August 2022.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames and Hudson 1994. p.195  Roberto Gozzoli Psammetichus II Reign Documents and Officials London 2017 ISBN 9781906137410 p. 18 the fatherson relation is known from Herodotus and confirmed by an inscription on a statue  The New Encyclopdia Britannica Micropdia Vol.9 
15 th edition 2003. p.756  king Psammetichus II Psamtik II. Touregypt.net. Retrieved 20111120.  a b Britannica p.756  Charles Bonnet  Dominique Valbelle The Nubian Pharaohs The American University in Cairo Press 2005. p.166167  Bonnet  Valbelle pp.166167  Alan B. Lloyd The Late Period in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt ed. Ian Shaw Oxford Univ. Press 2002 paperback p.381  Kahn Danel 2008. Some Remarks on the Foreign Policy of Psammetichus II in the Levant 595589 B.C.. Journal of Egyptian History. 1 1 139157. doi
10.1 163187416608784118811.  a b c d e Dieter Arnold Temples of the Last Pharaohs Oxford University Press 1999. p.76  Nestor LHte Sur le Nil avec Champollion Lettres journaux et dessins indits de Nestor LHte premier voyage en Egypte 18281830  Nasrallah Laura Salah 2019. Archaeology and the Letters of Paul. Oxford University Press. p. 205. ISBN 9780199699674.  a b Arnold p.77  a b c d Arnold Temples p.79  a b Hibis. Egyptsites.co.uk. Retrieved 20111120.  Christian Settipani Nos anctres de lAntiquit 1991. pp.153  161  Bonnet  Valbelle p.170 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePsamtikIIoldid1164302623 Categories 589 BC deaths 
6 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 8 July 2023 at 1808 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width