Cambyses II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Background 
3 Early life 
4 Military campaigns Toggle Military campaigns subsection 
4.1 Preparations against Egypt and the conquest of Cyprus 
4.2 Conquest of Egypt and its surroundings 
4.3 Further conquests 
5 Policies in Egypt 
6 Administration 
7 Personality 
8 Marriages 
9 Death and succession 
10 See also 
11 Notes 
12 References 
13 Sources Toggle the table of contents Cambyses II 63 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca      Catal etina Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Ozbekcha    Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Trke  Ting Vit Winaray   Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ruler of the Achaemenid Empire from 530 to 522 BC Cambyses II  King of Kings Great King King of Persia King of Babylon Pharaoh of Egypt King of Countries Cambyses left kneeling as pharaoh while worshipping an Apis bull 524 BC King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Reign 530  July 522 BC Predecessor Cyrus the Great Successor Bardiya Coruler Cyrus the Great 530 BC Pharaoh of Egypt Reign 525  July 522 BC Predecessor Psamtik III Successor Bardiya Royal titulary Horus name smtwj Sematawy The one who has united the Two Lands Prenomen Praenomen mswtr Mesutre The offspring of Ra lord of the Two Lands Nomen kmbyt Kembychet Cambyses 1 Died July 522 BC Agbatana EberNari Consort See below Dynasty Achaemenid Father Cyrus the Great Mother Cassandane Religion IndoIranian religion possibly Zoroastrianism Cambyses II Old Persian  romanized Kabjiya was the second King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire from 530 to 522 BC. He was the son and successor of Cyrus the Great r.550  530 BC and his mother was Cassandane. Before his accession Cambyses had briefly served as the governor of northern Babylonia under his father from April to December 538 BC. Afterwards he resided in the Babylonian cities of Babylon and Sippar before being appointed by his father as coruler in 530 BC. His father then set off on an expedition against the Massagetae of Central Asia where he met his end. Cambyses thus became the sole ruler of the vast Achaemenid Empire facing no reported opposition. His relatively brief reign was marked by his conquests in North Africa notably Egypt which he conquered after his victory over the Egyptian pharaoh Psamtik III r.526525 BC at the battle of Pelusium in 525 BC. After having established himself in Egypt he expanded the empires holdings in Africa including the conquest of Cyrenaica. In the spring of 522 BC Cambyses hurriedly left Egypt to deal with a rebellion in Persia. While en route in Syria EberNari he received a wound to the thigh which was soon affected by gangrene. Cambyses died three weeks later at a location called Agbatana which is most likely the modern city of Hama. He died childless and was thus succeeded by his younger brother Bardiya who ruled for a short period before being overthrown by Darius the Great r.522486 BC who went on to increase the power of the Achaemenids even further. Etymologyedit The origins of the name of Cambyses Old Persian  romanized Kabjiya is disputed in scholarship according to some scholars the name is of Elamite origin whilst others associate it with Kambojas an Iranian people who inhabited northwestern India.2 The name of Cambyses is known in other languages as Elamite Kanbuziya Akkadian Kambuziya Aramaic Kanbz.2 Backgroundedit Cambyses was the eldest son of Cyrus the Great r.550530 BC and Cassandane.
2 a Cambyses had a younger brother named Bardiya and three sisters named Artystone Atossa and Roxanne.3 Cambyses paternal grandfather was his namesake Cambyses I the king of Persis from 600 to 559 BC.2 The family was descended from a line of rulers of Persian tribes who starting with Cyrus in Anshan expanded their reach over Persis subjugating the Median Empire the NeoBabylonian Empire Lydia and Central Asia thus establishing the Achaemenid Empire.3 Early lifeedit Overview of the ruins of Babylon In April 538 BC Cambyses was appointed by his father as the governor of the northern part of Babylonia including its city Babylon whilst the central and southern part continued to be directly supervised by Cyrus and his bureaucrats. Before his appointment Cambyses had taken part in a ritual at the regular New Year festival on 27 March 538 BC where he received the royal sceptre in Esagila a temple dedicated to the god Marduk. His governorship however lasted only nine months Cyrus dismissed him from the post in December 538 BC for unknown reasons. After his dismissal Cambyses continued to mostly reside in the Babylonian cities of Babylon and Sippar.2 According to Babylonian records both Cambyses and Cyrus carried the title of King of Babylon King of the Lands in 5387 BC which indicates that Cyrus had appointed him as coruler some years before his campaign against the Massagetae.24 Cyrus younger son Bardiya was given his own realm in Central Asia which was exempted from paying tribute.5 Cambyses reportedly took part in the expedition against the Massagetae but due to his being the heir to the throne he was sent back to Persia before Cyrus fell to the Massagetae.2 Cambyses had his fathers body carried to Pasargadae in Persis where he was buried in a tomb that had been prepared for him earlier.5 Military campaignsedit Preparations against Egypt and the conquest of Cyprusedit Evolution of the Achaemenid Empire. Cambyses accession to the Achaemenid throne was relatively smooth.5 Ruling over a vast but young empire Cambyses preserved his authority over the subjugated lands but also expanded his dominion over Egypt the last prominent power in the Near East. According to the French Iranologist Pierre Briant this must not be seen as a more or less irrational and uncontrollable desire to take over the entire inhabited world.6 On the contrary Cambyses action had already been planned by his father who wanted to unify Babylonia with the lands of the TransEuphrates an area that stretched from Posideium to Egypt.7 This would eventually require conquering the lands situated between the Euphrates and Nile rivers and therefore necessitated conflict with Egypt which had previously and more recently shown interest in the area.6 The incumbent pharaoh of Egypt was Amasis II who had been ruling since 5
70.6  His ally Polycrates a Greek ruler of Samos posed a considerable threat to the Achaemenids launching several raids that jeopardised Achaemenid authority.8 However Polycrates eventually forsook his Egyptian allies and reached out to Cambyses whose plans he was well acquainted with.6 His sudden change of alliances was undoubtedly due to his uneasy position with the Spartans raising a force against him and the rising hostility of some of the Samian aristocrats who preferred partnership with Egypt. Another former ally of Amasis II the Carian military leader Phanes of Halicarnassus had also joined Cambyses after escaping assassins sent by the pharaoh.9 Cambyses before starting his expedition into Egypt had seized Cyprus from Amasis II which was reportedly a heavy blow to the latter.6 Conquest of Egypt and its surroundingsedit Main article First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt Imaginary 
19 thcentury illustration of Cambyses II meeting Psamtik III. By 526 BC Amasis II had died and his son Psamtik III had succeeded him thus weakening Egypts position.8 In the meantime Cambyses had made substantial preparations for his army. He had essentially laid the foundations for the Persian navy which was crucial to his ambitions to conquer Egypt. The navy was created using men and equipment from Phoenicia and Asia Minor. During his march to Egypt Cambyses made a treaty with the Arabs who controlled the desert area between Gaza and the Egyptian frontier. This treaty granted Cambyses sufficient water for his forces to reach the Nile.9 This also paved the way for Cambyses to extend his authority over the unsubdued lands between Egypt and Persia including Gaza a prominent commercial region which equalled that of Sardis in Lydia.10 The region served as the headquarters for the Persian expedition into Egypt.11 In 525 BC Cambyses finally invaded Egypt. In the spring of that year the Persian and Egyptian forces clashed at Pelusium where the Persians emerged victorious.2 According to one author Cambyses was able to defeat the Egyptians by putting cats sheep dogs and other animals that the Egyptians considered sacred in the front lines. This led the Egyptians to cease using their war engines for fear of killing an animal and angering the gods.12 The forces of Cambyses then laid siege to Memphis where Psamtik III and his men had fortified themselves. Despite the considerable resistance by the pharaohs forces Cambyses captured Memphis and established a PersianEgyptian garrison there. The length of the siege is not specified by the 
5 thcentury BC Greek historian Herodotus.11 Regardless by summer all of Egypt was under Persian suzerainty.2 Cambyses now adopted the aspirations of the last pharaohs in seeking to control the neighbouring lands towards the west Libya and Cyrenaica and south Nubia.11 Further conquestsedit The Libyans and soon the Greeks of Cyrene and Barca willingly acknowledged the authority of Cambyses and as proof of their submission sent offerings to Cambyses.112 As a demonstration of his generosity Cambyses had Amasis IIs Greek widow Ladice returned to Cyrene.11 Cambyses originally intended to make an expedition against the Phoenician state of Carthage but it was ultimately called off due to his Phoenician subjects reluctance to make war against their own people.11 In the south Cambyses followed the same policy of the last pharaohs to keep the Kingdom of Kush in check and had a garrison established at Elephantine.13 According to Herodotus Cambyses campaigns against Ammon in the Siwa Oasis and Ethiopia ended catastrophically.14 He states that the reason behind this defeat was the madness of Cambyses who at once began his march against Ethiopia without any orders for the provision of supplies and without for a moment considering the fact that he was to take his men to the ends of the earth.14 This is called the Lost Army of Cambyses. However according to Briant the deliberate bias against Cambyses raises doubts about the accuracy of Herodotuss version.14 Herodotus statement is contradicted by other sources that do not suggest a catastrophe for his forces even though the obstacles of the campaign possibly compelled Cambyses to withdraw.14 Archaeological proof indicates that the Achaemenids made use of the stronghold of Dorginarti south of Buhen during the time they controlled Egypt.14 Policies in Egyptedit Statue of an Apis. In accordance with the traditional Egyptian royal custom Cambyses took the titles of king of Upper and Lower Egypt and descendant of the gods Ra Horus Osiris used by the previous Egyptian pharaohs. Cambyses used propaganda to show his Egyptian conquest as a legitimate unification with the native Egyptians and that he was himself of Egyptian descent claiming to be the son of Princess Nitetis a daughter of the pharaoh Apries. At Sais Cambyses had himself crowned in the temple of the goddess Neith as part of a religious ritual during which he made sacrifices to the Egyptian gods.2 According to ancient historians Cambyses rule of Egypt was marked by brutality looting temples ridiculing the local gods and defilement of the royal tombs.2 Historians such as Herodotus put an emphasis on Cambyses supposed killing of the Egyptian sacred bull Apis.215 However no looting of temples has been reported by contemporary Egyptian sources.2 In addition Cambyses is said to have ordered the burial of an Apis in a sarcophagus.216 The successor of the Apis died in 518 BC four years after Cambyses had already died.2 The epitaph of the Apis buried in 524 BC states Year 6 third month of the season Shemou day 10  under the Majesty of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt ... endowed with eternal life the god was brought in peace toward the good West and laid to rest in the necropolis in his place which is the place which his Majesty had made for him after all the ceremonies had been done for him in the embalming hall ... It was done according to everything his Majesty had said ...15 A legend on the sarcophagus also says Cambyses the king of Upper and Lower Egypt ... made as his monument to his father ApisOsiris a large sarcophagus of granite dedicated by the king ... endowed with all life with all perpetuity and prosperity  with all health with all joy appearing eternally as king of Upper and Lower Egypt.15 This thus debunks Cambyses supposed killing of the Apis and according to Briant proves that Herodotus documented bogus reports.15 Rather Cambyses took part in the preservation and burial ceremony of an Apis.15 Other similar sources also make mention of Cambyses careful treatment towards Egyptian culture and religion.16 According to the Egyptian Demotic Chronicle Cambyses decreased the immense income that the Egyptian temples received from the Egyptian pharaohs. Only the three main temples were given permission to maintain all their entitlements.2 In response to this action Egyptian priests who had lost their entitlements circulated spurious stories about Cambyses.217 The issue with the temples dated back to the earlier pharaohs who had also tried to reduce the economic power of the temples.18 This issue would continue until the demise of ancient Egypt.18 Like Cyrus in Babylon Cambyses allowed the Egyptian nobility to maintain their jurisdictions.16 Administrationedit Achaemenid coin minted at Sardis possibly under Cambyses II. Although a tax system existed during the reigns of Cyrus and Cambyses it was not a systematic one and thus the subjects of the king were either obligated to give gifts or pay taxes.19 As was the case during his fathers reign Cambyses satraps were all of Persian stock Gubaru in BabyloniaTransEuphrates Aryandes in Egypt Oroetes in Sardis Mitrobates in Dascylium Dadarsi in Bactria and Vivana in Arachosia. Likewise the imperial treasurer in Babylon Mithradata was also from a Persian family. Indeed the senior officials and officers accompanying Cambyses in Egypt were composed solely of Persians.20 The most notable of these Persians were relatives of the king such as his cousin Darius who occupied high offices under Cyrus and Cambyses and serving as a spearbearer under the latter.21 Darius father Hystaspes served as the governor of Parthia and Hyrcania or at least held a prominent role there. Important offices centred around the king was also occupied by the Persians as in the case of Prexaspes who served as the messagebearer of Cambyses and Sisamnes who was the royal judge but later executed by Cambyses.20 Personalityedit According to Herodotus Cambyses was labelled a despot by the Persians due to his being halfmad cruel and insolent. However this would seem to be part of later Persian and Egyptian propaganda critical of Cambyses. Indeed due to Cambyses willingness to consolidate authority to himself the Persian tribal nobility were increasingly antagonistic towards him.2 Marriagesedit In Achaemenid Persia marriages between family members such as halfsiblings nieces and cousins took place but were not seen as incestuous. However Greek sources state that brothersister and fatherdaughter marriages allegedly took place inside the royal family yet it remains problematic to determine the reliability of these accounts.22 According to Herodotus Cambyses supposedly married two of his sisters Atossa and Roxane.222 This would have been regarded as illegal. However Herodotus also states that Cambyses married Otanes daughter Phaidyme whilst his contemporary Ctesias names Roxane as Cambyses wife but she is not referred to as his sister.22 The accusations against Cambyses of committing incest are mentioned as part of his blasphemous actions which were designed to illustrate his madness and vanity. These reports all derive from the same Egyptian source that was antagonistic towards Cambyses and some of these allegations of crimes such as the killing of the Apis bull have been confirmed as false which means that the report of Cambyses supposed incestuous acts is questionable.22 Death and successionedit In the spring of 522 BC Cambyses hurriedly left Egypt to deal with a rebellion in Persia.23 Before he left the country he made Egypt into a satrapy under the governorship of the Persian Aryandes.23 However Cambyses died shortly after under disputed circumstances. By most accounts while Cambyses was on his way through Syria EberNari he received a wound to the thigh which soon became gangrenous.23 Cambyses died three weeks later in July at a location called Agbatana which is most likely the modern city of Hama.2 He died childless2 and was succeeded by his younger brother Bardiya.24 According to Darius who was Cambyses lancebearer at the time Bardiya decided that he could not succeed as King of Kings and died by his own hand in 522 BC. Herodotus and Ctesias ascribe his death to an accident. Ctesias writes that Cambyses despondent from the loss of family members stabbed himself in the thigh while working with a piece of wood and died eleven days later from the wound. Herodotus story is that while mounting his horse the tip of Cambyses scabbard broke and his sword pierced his thigh. Some modern historians suspect that Cambyses was assassinated either by Darius as the first step to usurping the empire for himself or by supporters of Bardiya.25 Cambyses was buried in Neyriz in southeastern Persis. As reported in the Persepolis Administrative Archives sacrifices were offered in his name.26 At the time of Cambyses death the Achaemenid Empire was stronger than ever reaching from Cyrenaica to the Hindu Kush and from the Syr Darya to the Persian Gulf.27 See alsoedit Cambysene Cambyses Romance Notesedit  According to 
5 thcentury BC Greek historian Ctesias the mother of Cambyses II was Amytis a daughter of the last Median king Astyages r.585550 BC. However according to the Russian Iranologist Muhammad Dandamayev this statement is not trustworthy.2 Referencesedit  Posener Georges 1936. Bibliothque de lUniversit Bordeaux Montaigne ed.. La premire domination perse en gypte. Bibliothque dtudes. Cairo Institut Franais dArchologie Orientale 3036. ISSN 02593823. OCLC 5042163.  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w Dandamayev 1990 pp. 726729.  a b Dandamayev 1993 pp. 516521.  Briant 2002 p. 519.  a b c Briant 2002 p. 50.  a b c d e Briant 2002 p. 51.  Briant 2002 pp. 49 51.  a b Briant 2002 p. 52.  a b Briant 2002 p. 53.  Briant 2002 pp. 5354.  a b c d e f Briant 2002 p. 54.  Forster E. S. 1941. Dogs in Ancient Warfare. Greece  Rome 1030 114117. httpwww.jstor.orgstable641375  Briant 2002 pp. 5455.  a b c d e Briant 2002 p. 55.  a b c d e Briant 2002 p. 57.  a b c LlewellynJones 2017 p. 69.  LlewellynJones 2017 p. 68.  a b Briant 2002 p. 60.  Dandamayev 2000.  a b Briant 2002 p. 82.  Briant 2002 pp. 82 771.  a b c d Brosius 2000.  a b c Briant 2002 p. 61.  Briant 2002 p. 102.  Van De Mieroop 2003 p. 336.  Jacobs  Rollinger 2021 p. 490.  Briant 2002 p. 62. Sourcesedit Briant Pierre 2002. From Cyrus to Alexander A History of the Persian Empire. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9781575060316. Brosius Maria 2000. Women i. In PreIslamic Persia. Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. London et al. Archived from the original on 20200313. Retrieved 20190921.cite encyclopedia CS1 maint location missing publisher link Dandamayev Muhammad A. 2000. Achaemenid taxation. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Dandamayev Muhammad A. 1993. Cyrus iii. Cyrus II The Great. Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. IV Fasc. 7. pp. 516521. Dandamayev Muhammad A. 1990. Cambyses II. Encyclopaedia Iranica Vol. IV Fasc. 7. pp. 726729. Jacobs Bruno Rollinger Robert 2021. A Companion to the Achaemenid Persian Empire. John Wiley  Sons. ISBN 9781119174288. LlewellynJones Lloyd 2017. The Achaemenid Empire. In Daryaee Touraj ed.. King of the Seven Climes A History of the Ancient Iranian World 3000 BCE  651 CE. UCI Jordan Center for Persian Studies. pp. 1236. ISBN 9780692864401. Schwab Andreas Schtze Alexander 2023. Herodotean soundings the Cambyses logos. Tbingen Narr Francke Attempto. ISBN 9783823383291. Van De Mieroop Marc 2003. A History of the Ancient Near East. Blackwell History of the Ancient World. Hoboken NJ Wiley. ISBN 9780631225522. JSTOR 25608373. Strassler Robert B. The Landmark Herodotus The Histories. Anchor Books 2009. Cambyses II Achaemenid dynasty Died 522 BC Preceded by Cyrus the Great King of Kings of Persia 530522 BC Succeeded by Bardiya Preceded by Psamtik III Pharaoh of Egypt XXVII Dynasty 525522 BC v t e Median and Achaemenid kings Family tree Median 728550 BC Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages Achaemenid 550330 BC Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cyrus II Cambyses II Smerdis Gaumata Darius the Great Darius I Xerxes the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Nothus Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Italics indicate kings not directly attested and so possibly legendary. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Rulers in the Achaemenid Empire Family tree  Achaemenid Kingdom Kings of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Achaemenes Ariaramnes Arsames Teispes Cyrus I Cambyses I Cyrus the Great Cambyses II Bardiya Darius the Great Xerxes I Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Mnemon Artaxerxes III Ochus Artaxerxes IV Arses Darius III Codomannus Artaxerxes V Bessus Satraps of Lydia Tabalus Mazares Harpagus Oroetus Bagaeus Otanes Artaphernes I Artaphernes II Pissuthnes Tissaphernes Cyrus the Younger Tissaphernes Tithraustes Tiribazus Struthas Autophradates Spithridates Satraps of Hellespontine Phrygia Mitrobates Megabazus Megabates Oebares II Artabazus I Pharnabazus I Pharnaces II Pharnabazus II Ariobarzanes Artabazus II Pharnabazus III Arsites Satraps of Cappadocia Datames Ariamnes I Mithrobuzanes Ariarathes I Greek Governors of Asia Minor cities Miltiades Demaratus Gongylos Eurysthenes Prokles Histiaeus Aristagoras Themistocles Archeptolis Aridolis Amyntas II Philiscus Dynasts of Lycia Kheziga Kybernis Kuprlli Harpagus Teththiweibi Kheriga Kherei Arbinas Artembares Artumpara Mithrapata Perikle Dynasts of Caria Lygdamis I Artemisia Pisindelis Lygdamis II Adusius satrap Hecatomnus Mausolus Artemisia II Idrieus Ada Pixodarus Orontobates Kings of Macedonia Amyntas I of Macedon Alexander I of Macedon Kings of Tyre Mattan IV Boulomenus Abdemon Evagoras Azemilcus Kings of Sidon Eshmunazar I Tabnit Queen Amoashtart regent Eshmunazar II Bodashtart Yatonmilk Anysos Tetramnestos Baalshillem I Baana Baalshillem II Abdashtart I Tennes Evagoras II Abdashtart II Abdashtart III Satraps of Armenia Artasyrus Orontes I Darius III Orontes II Satraps of Egypt Aryandes Pherendates Achaemenes Arsames Pherendates II Sabaces Mazaces Satraps of Bactria Hystaspes Dadarsi Masistes Bessus Satraps of Media Hydarnes Hydarnes the Younger Atropates Satraps of Cilicia Syennesis Camisares Mazaeus Arsames Other known satraps Megabyzus Abrocomas Belesys Syria Ochus Hyrcania Satibarzanes Aria Atizyes Greater Phrygia Phrataphernes Parthia Ariobarzanes Persis Abulites Susiana Mazaeus Babylon In most territories Achaemenid rulers were succeeded by Hellenistic satraps and Hellenistic rulers from around 330 BC v t e Kings of Babylon List of kings of Babylon Royal titles Period Dynasty Kings foreign ruler vassal king female Old Babylonian Empire 18941595 BC I Sumuabum SumulaEl Sabium ApilSin SinMuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna AbiEshuh AmmiDitana AmmiSaduqa SamsuDitana II Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Unknown king  Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Kassite period 17291157 BC III Gandash Agum I Kashtiliash I Unknown king AbiRattash Kashtiliash II Urzigurumash Agum II HarbaShipak Shiptaulzi Unknown king Burnaburiash I Ulamburiash Kashtiliash III Agum III KadashmanSah Karaindash KadashmanHarbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I BurnaBuriash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Babylonian period 1157732 BC IV Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur V Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi VI Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna VII Marbitiaplausur VIII Nabmukinapli Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabusumaukin II NeoAssyrian period 732626 BC IX Nabumukinzeri TiglathPileser III Shalmaneser V Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon II Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Aurndinumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Sennacherib Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal amaumaukin Ashurbanipal Kandalanu Snumulir Sinsharishkun NeoBabylonian Empire 626539 BC X Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Babylon under foreign rule 539 BC  AD 224 Persian period 539331 BC XI Cyrus II Cambyses II Bardiya Nebuchadnezzar III Darius I Nebuchadnezzar IV Xerxes I Shamasheriba Belshimanni Artaxerxes I Xerxes II Sogdianus Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV NidinBel  Darius III Hellenistic period 331141 BC XII Alexander III Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antigonus I Monophthalmus XIII Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Seleucus Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III Megas Antiochus Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Timarchus Demetrius I Soter Alexander Balas Demetrius II Nicator Parthian period 141 BC  AD 224 XIV Mithridates I Phraates II Rinnu Antiochus VII Sidetes Phraates II Ubulna Hyspaosines Artabanus I Mithridates II Gotarzes I Asiabatar Orodes I Ispubarza Sinatruces Phraates III Piriustana Teleuniqe Orodes II Phraates IV Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Vonones II Vologases I Pacorus II Artabanus III Osroes I Vologases III Parthamaspates Vologases IV Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV Category Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 National Norway Germany Israel United States Sweden Czech Republic Netherlands Poland People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCambysesIIoldid1218798431 Categories Cambyses II 522 BC deaths 
6 thcentury BC Kings of the Achaemenid Empire 
6 thcentury BC Pharaohs Kings of the Achaemenid Empire Pharaohs of the Achaemenid dynasty of Egypt Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt Deaths from gangrene Kings of the Lands Teispids Fratricides Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Old Persian ca. 600400 B.C.language text CS1 maint location missing publisher Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 13 April 2024 at 2226 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width