Teos of Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 
1.1 Expedition against Persians 
1.2 Betrayal and end 
2 Sources 
3 Bibliography 
4 External links Toggle the table of contents Teos of Egypt 34 languages   Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Euskara Franais Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Occitan Polski Romn   Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia 
4 th century BC Egyptian Pharaoh Teos Djedhor Djedher Tachos Takhos Fragment of a faience saucer inscribed with the name of Teos. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Pharaoh Reign 36103598 BCE12 Coregency Three years with Nectanebo I Predecessor Nectanebo I Successor Nectanebo II Royal titulary Horus name Khaemmaat Seshemtawy 
3 jmM
3 tsmt
3 wj Who appears as Maat Leader of the Two Lands Nebty name Merymaat Sahperunetjeru MrjM
3 ts
3 prwnrw Golden Horus Khubaqet Wafkhasut wjb
3 qtw
3 f
3 swt The ruling king who destroys foreign countries Prenomen Praenomen Irimaatenre Jrjm
3 tnR Carrying out the Justice of Ra Nomen Djedhor Setepeninhuret d r stp n jnj rt Horus Says he will live Chosen of Anhur3 Children Khedebneithirbinet II4 Father Nectanebo I Dynasty 
30 th Dynasty Djedhor better known as Teos Ancient Greek  or Tachos Ancient Greek  was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the 
30 th Dynasty. Biographyedit A son of his predecessor Nectanebo I Teos was his coregent for three years5 before ascending to the throne in 36160 BCE. Expedition against Persiansedit Nectanebos success in the Nile Delta against the invading Persian armies in 37473 BCE encouraged Teos to start to plan a military expedition into Palestine and Phoenicia which were territories controlled by the Persians. Taking advantage of a moment of weakness for the Achaemenid Empire due to riots in some satrapies in Asia Minor Teos sought assistance from both the octogenarian king Agesilaus II of Sparta and the Athenian general Chabrias including a number of mercenaries and 200 triremes from Greece.6 However to finance such an expedition Teos had to impose new taxes and to expropriate the goods of the temples destroying the delicate balance artfully established by his father Nectanebo. This action ensured to Teos both the required finances and a great unpopularity.789 Athenian General Chabrias left with Spartan king Agesilaus center in the service of Egyptian king Nectanebo I and his regent Teos Egypt 361 BCE. The operation against the Persians started with Chabrias as the admiral of the fleet Agesilaus as the commander of the Greek mercenaries and Teoss nephew Nakhthorheb as the leader of the machimoi Diodorus Siculus certainly exaggerating claimed that the machimoi were 80000 in number10. Teos placed himself in the supreme command of the expedition the position claimed by Agesilaus leaving his brother Tjahapimu the father of Nakhthorheb in Egypt as his regent. The expedition made its way to Phoenicia without particular problems.119 Betrayal and endedit Teos cartouche fragment Unfortunately for Teos his brother Tjahapimu was plotting against him. Taking advantage of Teoss unpopularity and with the support of the priestly classes Tjahapimu convinced his son Nakhthorheb to rebel against Teos and to make himself pharaoh. Nakhthorheb persuaded Agesilaus to join his side by taking advantage of the several disagreements that had arisen between the Spartan king and the pharaoh. Nakhthorheb was acclaimed pharaoh  better known today as Nectanebo II  and the betrayed Teos had no alternative but to flee to Susa the court of his enemies.119 Knowledge of the final fate of Teos comes from the inscription by a noble called Wennefer who also participated in Teoss unfortunate expedition as a physician. Wennefer was sent by Nectanebo II in search of Teos and managed to have him held by the Persian king Artaxerxes II at Susa. Wennefer then had Teos brought back with him in chains to the Egyptian pharaoh.8 Sourcesedit  Lloyd 1994 p. 358.  Depuydt 2006 p. 270.  Late Period Dynasty 30 Teos accessed January 22 2007  Dodson  Hilton 2004.  Lloyd 1994 p. 341.  Lloyd 1994 pp. 348349.  Lloyd 1994 p. 343.  a b Wilkinson 2010 pp. 45759.  a b c Grimal 1992 pp. 377378.  Lloyd 1994 p. 342.  a b Lloyd 1994 p. 341 349. Bibliographyedit Depuydt Leo 2006. Saite and Persian Egypt 664 BC  332 BC. In Hornung Erik Krauss Rolf Warburton David A. eds.. Ancient Egyptian Chronology. Brill LeidenBoston. pp. 265283. ISBN 9789004113855. Dodson Aidan Hilton Dyan 2004. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson Ltd. ISBN 0500051283. Grimal Nicolas 1992. A History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford Blackwell Books. ISBN 9780631174721. Lloyd Alan B. 1994. Egypt 404322 B.C.. In Lewis D.M. Boardman John Hornblower Simon et al. eds.. The Cambridge Ancient History 
2 nd ed. vol. VI  The Fourth Century B.C. Cambridge University Press. pp. 337360. ISBN 0521233488. Wilkinson Toby 2010. The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt. London Bloomsbury. ISBN 9781408810026. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Teos. Livius.org Teos Preceded by Nectanebo I Pharaoh of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty Succeeded by Nectanebo II v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTeosofEgyptoldid1107658059 Categories 
4 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt 
4 thcentury BC Egyptian people Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 August 2022 at 0455 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width