File:Palermo stone predynastic series.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FilePalermo stone predynastic series.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 800  328 pixels. Other resolutions 320  131 pixels  946  388 pixels. Original file 946  388 pixels file size 437 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionPalermo stone predynastic series.jpg English Palermo Stone closeup of the predynastic series of  most likely mythicalfictitious  ancient Egyptian rulers 1 name destroyed 2 HsekiuSeka 3 Khayu 4 TiuTeyew 5 TheshTjesh 6 Neheb 7 WaznerWadjenedjWenegbu 8 Mekh 9 name destroyed Date 1902 Source Abhandlungen der Kniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften aus dem Jahre.. Author Kniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin Other versions This file has been extracted from another file  Abhandlungen der Kniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften aus dem Jahre 1902 16765759871.jpg Licensing This file is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 
1.0  Universal Public Domain Dedication. The person who associated a work with this deed has dedicated the work to the public domain by waiving all of their rights to the work worldwide under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights to the extent allowed by law. You can copy modify distribute and perform the work even for commercial purposes all without asking permission. httpcreativecommons.orgpublicdomainzero
1.0 deed.enCC
0 Creative Commons Zero Public Domain Dedicationfalsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts copyright status copyrighted dedicated to the public domain by copyright holder copyright license Creative Commons CC0 License inception 1902 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 0909 21 April 2019 946  388 437 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs TalkList of pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org      Usage on arz.wikipedia.org                Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Palermsk deska 1. dynastie Usage on es.wikipedia.org Tyesh Horus Ny Usage on fa.wikipedia.org                  Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Khaiou Seka roi Tiou Neheb Thesh Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on mk.wikipedia.org      Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Khayu Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Hsekiu Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Tiu Texe Hessequiu Uazner Caau Neebe Mequete Usage on simple.wikipedia.org Wazner Usage on th.wikipedia.org  View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 300 dpi Vertical resolution 300 dpi Software used GIMP 
2.1 
0.1 0 File change date and time 1054 21 April 2019 Y and C positioning Centered Exif version 
2.2 1 Meaning of each component Y Cb Cr does not exist Supported Flashpix version 1 Color space sRGB Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFilePalermostonepredynasticseries.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width