Ptolemy IX Soter - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background and early life 
2 First reign 116107 BC Toggle First reign 116107 BC subsection 
2.1 Will of Ptolemy VIII 
2.2 Divorce remarriage and intervention in Seleucid civil war 
2.3 Expulsion from Alexandria 
3 King of Cyprus 10788 BC 
4 Second reign 8881 BC Toggle Second reign 8881 BC subsection 
4.1 Restoration 
4.2 Roman claims and First Mithridatic War 
4.3 Death and succession 
5 Regime Toggle Regime subsection 
5.1 Relationship with Rome 
6 Marriages and issue 
7 Notes 
8 References 
9 Bibliography 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy IX Soter 44 languages     Catal etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus     srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog     Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Ptolemy IX Lathyros 
2 nd
1 st century BC king of Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy IX Soter Probable bust of Ptolemy IX Pharaoh King of the Ptolemaic Kingdom Reign 116107 BC with Cleopatra III 8881 BC Predecessor Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III 116 BC Ptolemy X Alexander I 88 BC Successor Ptolemy X Alexander I 107 BC Berenice III 81 BC Royal titulary Horus name srmswtnpwn nrjprw snsnmsntntzst Djosermesuthenahapuankh netjerikheperu sensenmesekhenetsaAset Distinguished through his birth together with the living Apis godlike at conception twin in his birthplace with the son of Isis  Second Horus Name knt jtypsmtmrjmjpwn rdjn.fbwsdwwrwmjpttnnjtnrw Kanakht itypesedjemtamerimihapuankh redjenefhabusedashauwerumiptahtatjenenitnetjeru The strong bull and sovereign who shines in Tamery like the living Apis bull whom has been given many Sed festivals like Ptah Tatjenen and father of the gods Nebty name siswmwt.frnstjt.f jjtwj m mrw Sekhasumutefhernesutitef ititawy em Maatkheru Second Nebty name wrpti ntin smnhpwmiwti Werpehty Khentishenehe Semenhepumidjehutiaa Third Nebty name wrpti smWwr itiiwtwimmrw mnibrnrwrmw Werpehty Sekhemwadjwer Itiiwatawyemmaatkheru Menkhibkhernetjeruremetju Golden Horus nbtmri .fmw nbbwsdmitnnitnrwnsyt itysmnhpwmiwti Nebtamery Heqaefemhaau Nebhabusedmitatenenitnetjerunesut Itysemenhepumidjehutiaa Lord of Egypt who rules in joy the lord of the Sed festival like PtahTatenen king of the Gods who determines the laws like the great god Thoth Second Golden Horus name zptmri .fmw nbbwsdwwrwmiit.fPttnnsmswnrw zp.n.fnsytnrmnwnt itywMt smnhpwmiwti Sheseptamery Heqaefemhaau Nebhabusedashauwerumiitefptatatenensemsunetjeru Shesepenefnesytenraemqenunekhet Itiwedjamaat Semenhepumidjehutiaa Who seizing Egypt rules in joy the lord of many great Sed festivals like his father PtahTatenen the oldest of the Gods  Prenomen Praenomen iwnnrmnnrtmrtmwt.sntt stp.npt irimtr smnimn Iwaennetjermenekhnetjeretmeretmutesnedjetet Setepenptah Irimaatre Sekhemankhamun 1 Nomen ptwlmis nt mript Petulemis Ankhdjet meryptah Ptolemaios living forever beloved of Ptah Consorts Cleopatra IV of Egypt m. 119 BC divorced 115 BC Cleopatra Selene m. 115 BC divorced 107 BC Children Two legitimate sons Berenice III Queen of Egypt Ptolemy XII King of Egypt Ptolemy King of Cyprus Cleopatra V Queen of Egypt perhaps Father Ptolemy VIII of Egypt Mother Cleopatra III of Egypt Born 1432 BC1 or 14039 BC2 Died December 81 BC Dynasty Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemy IX Soter IInote 1 Greek   Ptolemaos Str Ptolemy the Saviour commonly nicknamed Lathyros  Lthuros chickpea3 was twice King of Ptolemaic Egypt. He was the son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III. He reigned as Ptolemy Philometor Soter in joint rule with his grandmother Cleopatra II and mother Cleopatra III from 116 to 107 BC and then again as Ptolemy Soter from 88 to 81 BC. Ptolemy IX became the heir apparent after the murder of his halfbrother Ptolemy Memphites in 130 BC during a civil war between Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II. On his fathers death in 116 BC he became coregent with Cleopatra II until 115 BC and with Cleopatra III. He eventually quarrelled with his mother and in 107 BC she deposed him and replaced him with his younger brother Ptolemy X. However Ptolemy IX succeeded in seizing control of Cyprus. From there he invaded Judaea but was prevented by Ptolemy X from invading Egypt 103102 BC. In 88 BC the Alexandrians expelled Ptolemy X and restored Ptolemy IX to the throne. He reigned alone until 81 BC when he appointed his daughter Berenice III as coregent shortly before his own death. She succeeded him as ruler. Background and early lifeedit Coin of Ptolemy VIII When the Ptolemaic king Ptolemy V died in 180 BC he left three children Ptolemy VI Cleopatra II and Ptolemy VIII. All three ruled together from 169 BC until 164 BC when Ptolemy VIII expelled his brother from power. In 163 BC he was expelled in turn and forced to withdraw to Cyrene. However when Ptolemy VI died in 145 BC Ptolemy VIII was invited back to Egypt to serve as king marrying his sister Cleopatra II also sister and widow of Ptolemy VI. The relationship between Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II rapidly deteriorated especially when Ptolemy VIII took Cleopatra III daughter of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II as a second wife. The conflict eventually led to a civil war with Cleopatra II on one side and Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III on the other 132126 BC. Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III were victorious but reconciled with Cleopatra II and restored her as coregent in 124 BC.4 Ptolemy IX was the son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III. The exact date of his birth is a bit unclear. As pharaoh his Horus name was Distinguished through his birth together with the living Apis twin in his birthplace with the son of Isis which seems to indicate that he was born in the same year as an Apis bull i.e. 1432 BC.1 This would put his birth two years before his parents marriage which took place in 141 BC.5 Some historians like Gnther Hlbl consider this insuperable and propose to place his birth in 140 or 139 BC instead.2 Initially Ptolemy IX was not the heir to the throne  that was Ptolemy Memphites the son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II who was roughly the same age as him. In 1343 BC Ptolemy IX served as the annual priest of Alexander the Great the year after Ptolemy Memphites had done the same.61 However during the civil war in 130 BC Cleopatra II attempted to have Ptolemy Memphites crowned as her coruler so Ptolemy VIII had him murdered leaving Ptolemy IX as the heir. Around 117 BC Ptolemy IX was sent to Cyprus reportedly at his mothers request where he served as governor of the island strategos nauarchos archiereus archikynegos.7 Shortly before this he had married his sister Cleopatra IV who probably gave birth to two sons while the couple was on Cyprus the future Ptolemy XII in 117 BC and Ptolemy future king of Cyprus c.116 BC.8 First reign 116107 BCedit Will of Ptolemy VIIIedit Coronation of Ptolemy IX depicted at Kom Ombo On 28 June 116 Ptolemy VIII died. According to Justin Ptolemy VIIIs will left Cleopatra III in charge of Egypt with the right to choose either Ptolemy IX or his younger brother Ptolemy X as her coregent. Cyrene was left to Ptolemy VIIIs illegitimate son Ptolemy Apion. Justin further claims that Cleopatra III wanted to choose Ptolemy X but the people of Alexandria rioted and forced her to choose Ptolemy IX.9 Pausanias implies that Cleopatra IIIs request to send Ptolemy IX to Cyprus in 117 BC had been intended to get him out of the way in order to enable Ptolemy Xs succession.10 Some historians have found this account plausible.11 However Chris Bennett argues that it is a false story that was invented by Cleopatra III at a later date. He points out that Justins story assumes that Cleopatra III was the only living queen at the time of Ptolemy VIIIs death. Documentary evidence shows that Cleopatra II was still alive in 116 BC which makes it unlikely that Cleopatra III would have been allowed sole power to decide who would be king.12 At any rate Cleopatra II Cleopatra III and Ptolemy IX in that order are listed together as corulers in surviving papyrus documents from October 116 BC. Ptolemy IX received the epithet Philometor Soter Motherloving Saviour. This was the same epithet that Cleopatra II and taken on during her civil war with Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra III which suggests that she played a controlling role in the new regime.11 Ptolemy X was sent to Cyprus to serve as governor of Cyprus soon after Ptolemy IXs accession. Divorce remarriage and intervention in Seleucid civil waredit Cleopatra II died some time before April 115 BC and at this point Cleopatra III became the dominant force in the government. Ptolemy IX was forced to divorce his sisterwife Cleopatra IV who went off and married her cousin the Seleucid king Antiochus IX r. 11595 BC whose mother Cleopatra Thea13 was Cleopatra IIIs sister.14 Antiochus IX was waging a war against his halfbrother Antiochus VIII r. 12596 BC who was married to Cleopatra IVs elder sister Tryphaena. On the way to meet Antiochus IX Cleopatra IV stopped in Cyprus where she recruited an army and seized control of the Cypriot fleet in order to aid Antiochus IX.15 Perhaps as a result of this in 114113 BC Ptolemy X proclaimed himself King of Cyprus openly declaring his opposition to Ptolemy IX.1611 Meanwhile Ptolemy IX married his younger sister Cleopatra Selene with whom he soon had a daughter Berenice III.1 Cleopatra Selene was not made coregent with her new husband as would have been normal. Instead in documents from this period the royal couple were Cleopatra III and Ptolemy IX who were integrated into the Ptolemaic dynastic cult as the Theoi Philometores Soteres The Motherloving Saviour Gods.17 Ptolemy IX supported Antiochus IX in his conflict with Antiochus VIII. In 114 BC Cleopatra IV had been captured and murdered by Antiochus VIIIs wife Tryphaena who was murdered in turn by Antiochus IX in 111 BC.17 In 109 BC Ptolemy IX sent Antiochus IX fresh troops to aid him in a campaign against the Jewish ruler Hyrcanus I of the Hasmonean dynasty.18 Expulsion from Alexandriaedit In autumn 107 BC a new conflict broke out between Cleopatra III and Ptolemy IX. Pausanias claims that Cleopatra III wounded a number of her own eunuch servants and displayed them to the people as evidence that her son had attempted to have her assassinated causing the Alexandrians to riot and expel Ptolemy IX from the city. While this was taking place Ptolemy X had left Cyprus and sailed to Pelusium. Cleopatra III then had him brought to Alexandria and placed on the throne as her new coregent.19317 Ptolemy IX had left his two sons behind when he fled Alexandria. He also abandoned Cleopatra Selene who now seems to have been married to Ptolemy X.20 King of Cyprus 10788 BCedit After his expulsion from Alexandria Ptolemy IX went to the isle of Cyprus. There forces loyal to Cleopatra III and Ptolemy X rebuffed him forcing him to retreat to Seleucia in Pieria. From there he mounted another invasion of Cyprus in 106 BC which succeeded in conquering the island.21 He initially maintained control of Cyrene but it seems to have come under the control of his half brother Ptolemy Apion some time after 105 BC. Apion protected his position by publishing a will which left all his territories to Rome in the event that he died without heirs a method which was often used by Hellenistic kings to prevent rivals from attempting to depose or assassinate them. However he actually died without heirs in 96 BC meaning that Rome inherited the territory.2218 In 103 BC the new Hasmonean King Alexander Jannaeus led an army to conquer Ptolemais Akko. The city appealed to Ptolemy IX for help and he sailed over and caused Jannaeus to lift his siege. He then invaded Galilee defeated Jannaeus in a battle at Asophon near the River Jordan and despoiled Judaea with impunity.23 Fearing that Ptolemy IX was planning to use Judaea as a springboard for an invasion of Egypt Cleopatra III and Ptolemy X invaded Judaea themselves. Ptolemy X invaded Phoenicia by sea and then marched inland to Damascus while Cleopatra III besieged Ptolemais Akko. Ptolemy IX attempted to slip past them and into Egypt but Ptolemy X managed to rush back and stop him. Ptolemy IX spent the winter encamped at Gaza before deciding to sail back to Cyprus in early 102 BC. Nothing further is known about his activities until 88 BC.18 Second reign 8881 BCedit Restorationedit Probable bust of Ptolemy IX Museum of Fine Arts Boston. The army and people of Alexandria turned against Ptolemy X in spring 88 BC and expelled him from Egypt. The Alexandrians then recalled Ptolemy IX to the throne. Ptolemy IX was formally recrowned as Pharaoh at Memphis in November. In his first reign Ptolemy had borne the epithet Philometor Soter Motherloving saviour but on his return he dropped the Philometor since it recalled his mother. The cults and memory of Cleopatra III and Ptolemy X seem to have been officially suppressed.24 When Ptolemy IX returned to Egypt the south of the country had been under the control of Egyptian rebels since 91 BC. Ptolemy sent a large force south in November 88 BC under the command of the general Hierax. Thebes was quickly recaptured and severely sacked.25 Ptolemaic control was restored as far south as Philae but Lower Nubia which had come under the control of the kingdom of Meroe during the revolt was not reclaimed.24 Roman claims and First Mithridatic Waredit After his expulsion from Alexandria Ptolemy X made an attempt to invade Cyprus and recapture control but was killed in the attempt. Before his death however he had taken out a large loan from the Roman Republic in return for which he produced a will which left his kingdom to the Romans. Although they chose not to take advantage of this the possibility of Roman intervention hung over Ptolemy IX for the rest of his reign and forced him to adopt a highly deferential posture with the Romans.24 In 86 BC a Roman fleet commanded by Lucullus arrived in Alexandria seeking financial and military support against Mithridates VI of Pontus with whom the Romans were fighting the First Mithridatic War 8984 BC.26 Ptolemy hosted Lucullus magnificently but did not offer him any material support.27 This was probably partially due to the confused political situation  the Roman war effort was being led by Sulla but he had been declared an outlaw by the government in Rome led by Lucius Cornelius Cinna. Moreover Mithridates VI had managed to capture Ptolemys sons who had been on Cos since 103 BC.24 Death and successionedit On 5 August 81 BC Ptolemy IX promoted his daughter Berenice III who had previously been the wife and coregent of Ptolemy X to the status of coregent. Some sources claim that Ptolemy IX had made Berenice III his coregent at the start of his second reign in 88 BC but all documentary evidence shows that he reigned alone until 
81 BC. Ptolemy died shortly thereafter probably in December of the same year leaving her alone on the throne. After a few months of sole rule her cousin Ptolemy XI was placed on the throne as her coregent murdered her was murdered himself and was replaced by Ptolemy XII another child of Ptolemy IX.1243 Regimeedit In August 115 BC Ptolemy IX travelled down the Nile to Elephantine in order to celebrate the festival there in honour of the Great God of the Nile  a traditional Pharaonic duty which was meant to give thanks for the inundation and ensure the success of the next. The fact that Ptolemy IX carried this ritual out personally rather than letting a local priest carry it out in his stead shows the extent to which Ptolemy embraced the Pharaonic role.28 It is possible that construction of certain buildings occurred during the first reign of Ptolemy IX. This would have included work on the Dendera Temple complex and on the temple in Edfu. Relationship with Romeedit A Roman embassy led by the senator Lucius Memmius arrived in Egypt in 112 BC. As part of his visit he was given a tour of the Fayyum region. Papyrus letters survive that instruct all local officials to treat him with the greatest respect and provide him with the most luxurious accommodation. The visit is a sign of the extent to which the Ptolemies now sought to conciliate the Roman Republic. It is also an early example of Roman tourism in Egypt which would become a major phenomenon in the Roman imperial period. A set of four graffiti at Philae provide evidence for another set of early Roman tourists. Dated to 116 BC they are the earliest known examples of the Latin language to be found in Egypt.17 Marriages and issueedit Rare drachms of Ptolemy XII minted at Paphos Cyprus in 53 BC29 Ptolemy IX is only known to have married twice first to Cleopatra IV from c.119 BC until he was forced to divorce her in 115 BC and secondly to Cleopatra Selene from 115 BC until he abandoned her during his flight from Alexandria in 107 BC. At least three children are attested for Ptolemy IX. The birth dates and parentage of his two sons Ptolemy XII and Ptolemy of Cyprus are disputed.30 According to Justin Cleopatra Selene and Ptolemy IX had two children.31 The historian John Whitehorne noted that the existence of those two children is doubted and they might have died at a young age.32 Ptolemy XII is referred to by Cicero and other ancient sources as an illegitimate son Pompeius Trogus called him a nothos bastard while Pausanias wrote that Berenice III was Ptolemy IXs only legitimate offspring.33 This has discouraged the identification of Ptolemy XII and Ptolemy of Cyprus with the two sons mentioned by Justin. Michael Grant suggested that Ptolemy XIIs mother was a Syrian or a partly Greek concubine while Gnther Hlbl suggested that she was a member of the Egyptian elite.34 However John Pentland Mahaffy and Christopher Bennett argue that they were considered illegitimate simply because their mother had not been a coregnant queen. They propose Cleopatra IV as the mother in which case Ptolemy XII and Ptolemy of Cyprus would have been born in 117 and 116 BC respectively. Bennett further proposes that Ptolemy XII and Ptolemy of Cyprus are identical with the two sons mentioned by Justin.1 The mother of Ptolemy IXs daughter Berenice III is not certain either. Cleopatra IV and Cleopatra Selene are candidates with the former favoured by modern scholarship.35 Bennett noted that Berenice IIIs legitimacy was never questioned by ancient historians and the illegitimacy of Ptolemy IX and Cleopatra IVs marriage makes it more probable that Berenice III was the result of a legitimate marriage that is between her father and Cleopatra Selene.3637 Name Image Birth Death Notes Ptolemy XII 117 or c.98 BC FebruaryMarch 51 BC King of Egypt 8058  5551 BC Ptolemy 116 or c.96 BC 58 BC King of Cyprus 8058 BC Berenice III Late 115 or early 114 BC April 80 BC Coregent with Ptolemy X 10188 BC Queen of Egypt 8180 BC Notesedit  Numbering the Ptolemies is a modern convention. Older sources may give a number one higher or lower. The most reliable way of determining which Ptolemy is being referred to in any given case is by epithet e.g. Philopator. Ptolemy IX also took the same title Soter as Ptolemy I. In older references and in more recent references by the German historian Huss Ptolemy IX may be numbered VIII. Referencesedit  a b c d e f Bennett Chris. Ptolemy IX. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 11 November 2019.  a b Hlbl 2001 p. 203  a b c Ptolemy Soter II and Ptolemy Alexander I at LacusCurtius  Chapter XI of E. R Bevans House of Ptolemy 1923  Hlbl 2001 pp. 172203  Bennett Chris. Cleopatra III. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 11 November 2019.  Bennett Chris. Ptolemy Memphites. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 11 November 2019.  Pausanias 

1.9.1  OGIS 143  Bennett Chris. Cleopatra IV. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Justin Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 

39.3.1   Pausanias 

1.9.1   a b c Hlbl 2001 pp. 204205  Bennett Chris. Cleopatra II. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Antiochus IX at Livius.org  Ptolemy VI Philometor and Cleopatra II at Livius.org  Justin 

39.3.2   Bennett Chris. Ptolemy X. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  a b c d Hlbl 2001 pp. 206207  a b c Hlbl 2001 pp. 207210  Justin historian Epitome of Pompeius Trogus 

39.4.1  Pausanias 

1.9.2   Bennett Chris. Cleopatra Selene. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Diodorus Bibliotheca 34
35.3 
9 a Justin 

39.4.1 2  Bennett Chris. Ptolemy Apion. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 12 November 2019.  Josephus Antiquities of the Jews 
13.3 24364  a b c d e Hlbl 2001 pp. 211213  Pausanias 

1.9.3   Plutarch Life of Lucullus 23 Appian Mithridatica 33  Cicero Ac. 

1.2.1 1  Hlbl 2001 pp. 205206  Ioannis Svoronos Ta nomismata tou kratous ton Ptolemaion Athens 1904 vol. III p. 302 n1838  vol. IIIIV plate LXI n22 23.  Werner Hu gypten in hellenistischer Zeit. C. H. Beck Munich 2001 p. 674675  Justin Epitome of the Philippic History 
39.4   Whitehorne 1994 p. 176.  Sullivan 1990 p. 92.  Fletcher 2008 p. 353.  LlewellynJones Lloyd 2013 2012. Cleopatra V Berenike III. In Bagnall Roger S. Brodersen Kai Champion Craige B. Erskine Andrew Huebner Sabine R. eds.. The Encyclopedia of Ancient History 13 Vols.. Vol. III BeCo. WileyBlackwell. ISBN 9781405179355.  Bennett 1997 p. 54.  Bennett Chris. Berenice III. Egyptian Royal Genealogy. Retrieved 16 November 2019. Bibliographyedit Bennett Christopher J. 1997. Cleopatra V Tryphna and the Genealogy of the Later Ptolemies. Ancient Society. 28. Peeters Publishers 3966. doi
10.2 1
43 AS.

28.0.6 30068. ISSN 00661619. Fletcher Joann 2008. Cleopatra the Great The Woman Behind the Legend. Hodder  Stoughton. ISBN 9780340831731. Hlbl Gnther 2001. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire. London  New York Routledge. ISBN 0415201454. Sullivan Richard 1990. Near Eastern Royalty and Rome 10030 BC. Phoenix Supplementary Volume. Vol. 24. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 9780802026828. Whitehorne John 1994. Cleopatras. Routledge. ISBN 9780415058063. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ptolemy IX. Ptolemy IX Lathyrus entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Ptolemy IX Soter at Thebes by Robert Ritner Ptolemy IX Soter Ptolemaic dynasty Born 1432 BC Died 81 BC Regnal titles Preceded by Helenus of Cyrene Governor of Cyprus 117 BC116 BC Succeeded by Ptolemy X Preceded by Ptolemy VIII Pharaoh of Egypt 116 BC107 BC with Cleopatra III and Cleopatra IV Succeeded by Cleopatra III Ptolemy X Preceded by Helenus of Cyrene King of Cyprus 10588 BC Succeeded by Chaereas Preceded by Ptolemy X Berenice III Pharaoh of Egypt 88 BC81 BC Succeeded by Berenice III v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePtolemyIXSoteroldid1212187594 Categories 
2 ndcentury BC births 81 BC deaths 
2 ndcentury BC Pharaohs 
1 stcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic dynasty Ptolemaic governors of Cyprus Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greeklanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 6 March 2024 at 1525 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width