Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identity 
2 Depictions 
3 Numbering 
4 Notes 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator 39 languages  Azrbaycanca   Catal etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus   Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator    Pa netjer hunu meriyetef1 Ptolemy Memphites on a relief from the Temple of Edfu Pharaoh King of Egypt Coregency Cleopatra II of Egypt Predecessor Ptolemy VI Philometor Successor Ptolemy VIII Physcon Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen p nr wnw mrjjt.f Pa netjer hunu meriyetef The divine youth beloved of his father Father Ptolemy VI Philometor or Ptolemy VIII Physcon Mother Cleopatra II of Egypt Born 
2 nd c. BC Died 
2 nd c. BC Dynasty Ptolemaic Ptolemy VII Neos Philopatornote 1 Greek    Ptolemaos Nos Philoptr Ptolemy the Fatherloving God was ostensibly a Ptolemaic king of Egypt. His identity and reign are controversial and it is likely that he did not reign at all but was only granted royal dignity posthumously. Depending on the historical reconstruction he was a son of Cleopatra II of Egypt by either Ptolemy VI Philometor or Ptolemy VIII Physcon with current scholarship leaning toward the second option.2 Identityedit The identity and role of the person usually designated Ptolemy Neos Philopator are unclear and are based primarily on inferences from the succinct and possibly distorted information provided by Justin in his Epitome of the Philippic History of Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus.3 Other relevant passages are found in Diodorus Siculus4 Josephus5 Livy6 and Orosius.7 Ptolemy second son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II According to what used to be the dominant reconstruction Ptolemy Neos Philopator was the second son of the siblings Ptolemy VI Philometor and Cleopatra II of Egypt who reigned briefly with his father in 145 BC and for a short time after his fathers death and was murdered by his uncle Ptolemy VIII Physcon when the latter married his mother Cleopatra II and became king of Egypt in 145 BC as described by Justin.8 Reassessment The identification described above had become traditional in scholarship for much of the 
20 th century before being subjected to a fundamental challenge in a series of publications by Michel Chauveau.9 Chauveau demonstrated that while a second son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II existed born perhaps before 152 BC when his older brother Ptolemy Eupator coruler in 152 BC is described as their fathers eldest son10 he was not associated on the throne with his father Ptolemy VI in 145 BC the alleged evidence for that a double dating of Year 36  Year 1 in JulyAugust 145 BC is shown to reflect a brief parallel regnal count for Ptolemy VI as king in Syria11 and did not become king on his fathers death later in 145 BC.12 Moreover Chauveau demonstrated that the surviving son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II was not murdered on the return of Ptolemy VIII and his marriage to Cleopatra II in 145 BC since he served as eponymous priest of Alexander and the dynastic cult in 143 BC.13 Chauveau concluded that this Ptolemy never king or coruler was likely eliminated at a slightly later point perhaps in relation to the birth of his halfbrother Ptolemy Memphites son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II in August 143 BC or the marriage between Ptolemy VIII and his niece Cleopatra III in 141 BC.14 An alternative date for the elimination of the surviving son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II is during the civil war of 132127 BC when Cleopatra II expelled Ptolemy VIII from Alexandria and he according to Justin summoned his eldest son assuming this was actually his stepson from Cyrene to Cyprus where he had him executed lest the Alexandrians proclaimed him king.15 This reassessment of the evidence does not contradict the ancient sources none of which explicitly states that the surviving son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II became king but it corrects Justins assertion that he was eliminated on the occasion of his mothers marriage to Ptolemy VIII likely inspired by a similar narrative about the marriage of Ptolemy Ceraunus to Arsinoe II16. Ptolemy Memphites only son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II The reassessment of the evidence about the second son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II has led to the alternative identification of Ptolemy Neos Philopator with Ptolemy Memphites the son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II who was born probably in August 143 BC owing his byname to his fathers installation as pharaoh at the traditional capital Memphis at about the same time.17 When Ptolemy VIII fled Alexandria in 132 BC he took Ptolemy Memphites with him to Cyprus. According to Diodorus and Justin here Ptolemy Memphites was murdered and dismembered on the orders of his father who sent the remains of the boy to his mother Cleopatra II as a gruesome birthday gift. Subsequently after the reconciliation between Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II in 124 BC and in connection with the amnesty decrees of 118 BC Ptolemy Memphites was integrated into the dynastic cult as Theos Neos Philopator the New Fatherloving God.18 Ptolemy Memphites become Ptolemy Neos Philopator was thus posthumously deified and added to the cult of the deified royals. But he had never been real king or coruler except just possibly in absentia if it really was the intention of his mother Cleopatra II of making him coruler. Depictionsedit There are two preserved depictions of Ptolemy Memphites on the western and eastern exteriors of the Naos of the Temple of Horus at Edfu. In these two parallel scenes the god Thoth is represented offering eternity to the enthroned Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Physcon behind whom stand the diminutive figure of a son wearing the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt and Cleopatra II wearing a headdress with horns and tall plumes. The labels on the western exterior read The living ka of the King the image of Swajba the divine seed of the Lord of the Country the Kings Eldest Son the Kings Beloved Ptolemy son of Ptolemy may he live forever the Beloved of Ptah. The labels on the eastern exterior read Heir of the King given birth by the Queen who takes over from the Sole Lord the Kings Eldest Son the Kings Beloved Ptolemy son of Ptolemy may he live forever Beloved of Ptah the God Euergetes. The heir Ptolemy Memphites is represented as king and his name is inscribed in a royal cartouche although there is no attestation of any formal coregency between him and his father. The epithet Euergetes is shared by all three royal figures and is derived from the style of the senior king Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Physcon. The reliefs representing Ptolemy Memphites are dated to 140 BC or a little earlier long before his death and subsequent deification as Neos Philopator.19 Numberingedit The now traditional numbering of the Ptolemies is based on a combination of the order of names in the Ptolemaic dynastic cult and the older historical reconstruction disproved by Chauveau. The numbering generally excludes corulers who did not become sole or senior monarchs like Ptolemy the Son coruler adopted son and biological nephew of Ptolemy II Philadelphus and Ptolemy Eupator coruler and son of Ptolemy VI Philometor. The notion that Ptolemy Neos Philopator was the surviving son of Ptolemy VI Philometor and reigned in 145 BC combined with his listing in the dynastic cult in order of death and deification not reign before Ptolemy Euergetes Physcon led to the numbering Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator and Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Physcon. This is certainly erroneous as Ptolemy Euergetes Physcon had already come to the throne as coruler in 170 BC and as sole ruler in 164163 BC long before any of his nephews or sons could have done so. However to avoid a potentially confusing renumbering of all Ptolemaic kings subsequent to Ptolemy VI although Ptolemy Euergetes Physcon ought to be counted as Ptolemy VII he is generally still labeled Ptolemy VIII.20 Occasionally the numbering is reversed and Ptolemy VIII Physcon is numbered as Ptolemy VII with the posthumously royal Ptolemy Neos Philopator Memphites numbered Ptolemy VIII keeping subsequent regnal numbers unchanged. In some older works Ptolemy Neos Philopator is omitted altogether alternatively he is counted as is Ptolemy Eupator. This results in the numbers 1 higher or 1 lower for the successors of Ptolemy VI. For these reasons it is recommended that Ptolemaic kings be referenced alongside their epithets and nicknames which provide less ambiguous identification. Notesedit  Numbering the Ptolemies is a modern convention. Older sources may give a number one higher or lower. The most reliable way of determining which Ptolemy is being referred to in any given case is by epithet e.g. Philopator. Referencesedit  p nr wnw mrjjt.f Beckerath 1999 238239. The full style is not preserved.  For both candidates see Dodson and Hilton 2004 268269 273 280281.  Justin 
38.8  translation by Yardley 1994 243244.  Diodorus 
33.6 61 
33.1 3 
33.2 0 34
35.1 4 translation by Walton 1967 1819 2627 3639 100103.  Josephus Against Apion 
2.4 953 translation by Thackeray 1926 312315  Livy Epitomes 52 and 59 translation by Schlesinger 1967 43 67.  Orosius 
5.1 
0.6  translation by Fear 2010 225226.  Gruen 1984 712714 Green 1990 537 544 Whitehorne 1994 106107 Ogden 1999 8687.  Chauveau 1990 1991 2000.  Chauveau 1990 157 2000 258.  Chauveau 1990 146153. This interpretation has gained wide acceptance e.g. by Bennett Lanciers 1995 and Hlbl 2001 193194.  Chauveau 2000 258259. In fact Chauveau 1990 and 1991 doubted the survival of any second son of Ptolemy VI or Cleopatra II apart from the possibly illegitimate or pretended son propped up as king abroad by the Athamanian mercenary general Galaistes.  Chauveau 2000 257258.  Chauveau 2000 259.  Bielman 2017 86 9598.  As noted by Ogden 1999 87.  Chauveau 1990 165 2000 259261.  Chauveau 1990 155156 Hlbl 2001 202203 Dodson and Hilton 2004 268269 273 280281 Errington 2008 298  Cauville and Devauchelle 1984 5152 arguing that both reliefs represent Ptolemy Memphites although some scholars thought only the eastern one did so hieroglyphic texts in Chassinat 1929 92 229 photographs in Chassinat 1934 pl. 439 and 446.  As recommended by Chauveau 1990 165 n. 111 compare Errington 2008 258. Bibliographyedit Primary Sources Diodorus  Walton F. R. transl. Diodorus of Sicily in Twelve Volumes 12 Fragments of Books XXXIIIXL Cambridge MA 1967. Josephus  Thackeray H. S. J. transl. Josephus in Eight Volumes 1 The Life Against Apion London 1926. Justin  Yardley J. C. transl. Justin Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus Atlanta 1994. Livy  Schlesinger A. C. transl. Livy with an English Translation in Fourteen Volumes 14 Summaries Fragments and Obsequens Cambridge MA 1967. Orosius  Fear A. T. transl. Orosius Seven Books of History against the Pagans Liverpool 2010. Secondary Literature Beckerath J. von Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Mainz 1999. Bielman A. Strotypes et ralits du pouvoir politique fminin la guerre civile en gypte entre 132 et 124 av. J.C. EuGeStA 7 2017 84114. Chassinat E. Le Temple dEdfou 4 Cairo 1929. Chassinat E. Le Temple dEdfou 13 Cairo 1934. Chauveau M. Un t 145. Postscriptum BIFAO 90 1990 135168. online Chauveau M. Un t 145. BIFAO 91 1991 129134. online Chauveau M. Encore Ptolme VII et le dieu Neos Philopatr Revue dgyptologie 51 2000 257261. Cauville S. and D. Devauchelle Le temple dEdfou tapes de la construction nouvelles donnes historiques Revue dgyptologie 35 1984 3155. Dodson A. and D. Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt London 2004. Errington R. M. A History of the Hellenistic World 32330 BC Malden MA 2008. Green P. From Alexander to Actium The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age Berkeley 1990. Gruen E. The Hellenistic World and the Coming of Rome London 1984. Hlbl G. A History of the Ptolemaic Empire London 2001. Lanciers E. Some Observations on the Events in Egypt in 145 B.C. in L. Criscuolo et al. eds. Simblos scritti di storia antica Bologna 1995 3339. Whitehorne J. Cleopatras London 1994. External linksedit Ptolemy second son of Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II entry in the online Ptolemaic Genealogy by Chris Bennett. Ptolemy Memphites son of Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II entry in the online Ptolemaic Genealogy by Chris Bennett. Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator entry in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith. Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemaic Dynasty Born  Died 144 BC Preceded by Ptolemy VI Pharaoh of Egypt 145 BC144 BC with Ptolemy VI and Cleopatra II Succeeded by Ptolemy VIII and Cleopatra II v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI pretender Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra regent Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III GrecoBactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I IndoGreeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta regent Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon regent Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V ru Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scriboniuss attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II regent Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National France BnF data Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePtolemyVIINeosPhilopatoroldid1219591628 Categories 145 BC deaths 
2 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Ptolemaic dynasty Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Greeklanguage text Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 18 April 2024 at 1736 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width