Galba - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Origins and family life 
2 Public service 
3 Emperor June 68 Toggle Emperor June 68 subsection 
3.1 Rule 
3.2 Mutiny on the frontier and assassination 
4 References Toggle References subsection 
4.1 Citations 
4.2 Bibliography 

4.2.1 Ancient sources 

4.2.2 Modern sources 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents Galba 82 languages Afrikaans   Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano    Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Lombard Magyar     Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn   Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from AD 68 to 69 This article is about the emperor. For other uses see Galba disambiguation. Galba Gold aureus of Galba. Legend imperator servius galba augustus Roman emperor Reign 8 June 68  15 January 69 Predecessor Nero Successor Otho Born 24 December 3 BC Near Terracina Italy Roman Empire Died 15 January AD 69 aged 70 Rome Italy Roman Empire Spouse Aemilia Lepida Issue Lucius Calpurnius Piso Frugi Licinianus adopted Names Servius Sulpicius Galba Lucius Livius Ocella Sulpicius Galba1 Regnal name Imperator Servius Galba Caesar Augustus2 Father Gaius Sulpicius Galba Mother Mummia Achaica Livia Ocellina adoptive Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Four Emperors Chronology Galba 6869 Otho 69 Vitellius 69 Vespasian 6979 Succession Preceded by JulioClaudian dynasty Followed by Flavian dynasty v t e Galba lb GALb born Servius Sulpicius Galba 24 December 3 BC  15 January AD 69 was Roman emperor ruling from AD 68 to 69. He was the first emperor in the Year of the Four Emperors and assumed the throne following Emperor Neros suicide. Born into a wealthy family Galba held at various times the positions of praetor consul and governor to the provinces of Gallia Aquitania Germania Superior and Africa during the first half of the first century AD. He retired from his positions during the latter part of Claudius reign with the advent of Agrippina the Younger but Nero later granted him the governorship of Hispania. Taking advantage of the defeat of Vindexs rebellion and Neros suicide he became emperor with the support of the Praetorian Guard. Galbas physical weakness and general apathy led to his rule being dominated by favorites. Unable to gain popularity with the people or maintain the support of the Praetorian Guard Galba was murdered on the orders of Otho who became emperor in his place. Origins and family lifeedit Bust in the Nationalmuseum of Sweden labelled as Galba. Probably a late Republican portrait.345 Galba was not related to any of the emperors of the JulioClaudian dynasty but he was a member of a distinguished noble family. The origin of the cognomen Galba is uncertain. Suetonius offers a number of possible explanations the first member of the gens Sulpicia to bear the name might have gotten the name from the term galba which the Romans used to describe the Gauls or after an insect called galbae.6 One of Galbas ancestors had been consul in 200 BC and another of his ancestors was consul in 144 BC the later emperors father and brother both named Gaius would hold the office in 5 BC and AD 22 respectively.78 Galbas grandfather was a historian and his son was a barrister whose first marriage was to Mummia Achaica granddaughter of Quintus Lutatius Catulus and greatgranddaughter of Lucius Mummius Achaicus7 Galba prided himself on his descent from his greatgrandfather Catulus. According to Suetonius he fabricated a genealogy of paternal descent from the god Jupiter and maternal descent from the legendary Pasipha wife of Minos.8 Reportedly Galba was distantly related to Livia9 to whom he had much respect and in turn by whom he was advanced in his career in her will she left him fifty million sesterces Emperor Tiberius however cheated Galba by reducing the amount to five hundred thousand sesterces and never even paid Galba the reduced amount.10 Servius Sulpicius Galba was born near Terracina on 24 December 3 BC.11 His elder brother Gaius fled from Rome and committed suicide because the emperor Tiberius would not allow him to control a Roman province. Livia Ocellina became the second wife of Galbas father whom she may have married because of his wealth he was short and hunchbacked. Ocellina adopted Galba and he took the name Lucius Livius Ocella Sulpicius Galba although he probably kept his original name in unofficial context as evidenced by the fact that he reverted back to it upon his accession as emperor.12 Galba preferred males over females in terms of sexual attraction7 according to Suetonius he preferred fullgrown strong men.13 Nevertheless he married a woman named Aemilia Lepida and had two sons.14 Aemilia and their sons died during the early years of the reign of Claudius r. 4154. Galba would remain a widower for the rest of his life.15 Public serviceedit Galba became praetor in about 3014 then governor of Aquitania for about a year16 then consul in 
33.1 4 In 39 the emperor Caligula learned of a plot against himself in which Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Gaetulicus the general of the legions of Germania Superior was an important figure Caligula installed Galba in the post held by Gaetulicus.17 According to one report Galba ran alongside Caligulas chariot for twenty miles.18 As commander of the legions of Germania Superior Galba gained a reputation as a disciplinarian.16 Suetonius writes that Galba was advised to take the throne following the assassination of Caligula in 41 but loyally served Caligulas uncle and successor Claudius r. 4154 this story may simply be fictional. Galba was appointed as governor of Africa in 44 or 45. He retired at an uncertain time during the reign of Claudius possibly in 49. He was recalled in 59 or 60 by the emperor Nero r. 5468 to govern Hispania.17 A rebellion against Nero was orchestrated by Gaius Julius Vindex in Gaul on the anniversary of the death of Neros mother Agrippina the Younger in 68. Shortly afterwards Galba in rebellion against Nero rejected the title General of Caesar in favor of General of The Senate and People of Rome. He was supported by the imperial official Tigellinus. At midnight on 8 June another imperial official Nymphidius Sabinus falsely announced to the Praetorian Guard that Nero had fled to Egypt and the Senate proclaimed Galba emperor. Nero then committed assisted suicide with help from his secretary.1925 Emperor June 
68 edit Ruleedit Upon becoming emperor Galba was faced by the rebellion of Nymphidius Sabinus who had his own aspirations for the imperial throne. However Sabinus was killed by the Praetorians before he could take the throne. While Galba was arriving to Rome with the Lusitanian governor Marcus Salvius Otho his army was attacked by a legion that had been organized by Nero a number of Galbas troops were killed in the fighting.26 Galba who suffered from chronic gout by the time he came to the throne7 was advised by a corrupt group which included the general Titus Vinius commander of one of the legions in Hispania the praetorian prefect Cornelius Laco and Icelus a freedman of Galba. Galba seized the property of Roman citizens disbanded the Germanian legions and did not pay the Praetorians and the soldiers who fought against Vindex. These actions caused him to become unpopular.26 Suetonius wrote the following descriptions of Galbas character and physical description Even before he reached middle life he persisted in keeping up an old and forgotten custom of his country which survived only in his own household of having his freedmen and slaves appear before him twice a day in a body greeting him in the morning and bidding him farewell at evening one by one. His double reputation for cruelty and avarice had gone before him men said that he had punished the cities of the Spanish and Gallic provinces which had hesitated about taking sides with him by heavier taxes and some even by the razing of their walls putting to death the governors and imperial deputies along with their wives and children. Further that he had melted down a golden crown of fifteen pounds weight which the people of Tarraco had taken from their ancient temple of Jupiter and presented to him with orders that the three ounces which were found lacking be exacted from them. This reputation was confirmed and even augmented immediately on his arrival in the city. For having compelled some marines whom Nero had made regular soldiers to return to their former position as rowers upon their refusing and obstinately demanding an eagle and standards he not only dispersed them by a cavalry charge but even decimated them. He also disbanded a cohort of Germans whom the previous Caesars had made their bodyguard and had found absolutely faithful in many emergencies and sent them back to their native country without any rewards alleging that they were more favourably inclined towards Gnaeus Dolabella near whose gardens they had their camp. The following tales too were told in mockery of him whether truly or falsely that when an unusually elegant dinner was set before him he groaned aloud that when his duly appointed steward presented his expense account he handed him a dish of beans in return for his industry and carefulness and that when the flute player Canus greatly pleased him he presented him with five denarii which he took from his own purse with his own hand. Accordingly his coming was not so welcome as it might have been and this was apparent at the first performance in the theatre for when the actors of an Atellan farce began the familiar lines Here comes Onesimus from his farm all the spectators at once finished the song in chorus and repeated it several times with appropriate gestures beginning with that verse. Thus his popularity and prestige were greater when he won than while he ruled the empire though he gave many proofs of being an excellent prince but he was by no means so much loved for those qualities as he was hated for his acts of the opposite character. Suetonius Particularly bad was his becoming under the influence of Vinius Laco and Icelus27 Sestertius of Galba. Obverse imp ser sulp galba caes aug tr p. Libertas standing on the reverse legend libertas publica sc meaning liberty to the people senatus consultum. ...To these brigands each with his different vice he so entrusted and handed himself over as their tool that his conduct was far from consistent for now he was more exacting and niggardly and now more extravagant and reckless than became a prince chosen by the people and of his time of life. He condemned to death distinguished men of both orders on trivial suspicions without a trial. He rarely granted Roman citizenship and the privileges of threefold paternity to hardly one or two and even to those only for a fixed and limited time. When the jurors petitioned that a sixth division be added to their number he not only refused but even deprived them of the privilege granted by Claudius of not being summoned for court duty in winter and at the beginning of the year. Suetonius In regard to his appointment of Vitellius to Germania Inferior28 Galba surprised everyone by sending him to Lower Germany. Some think that it was due to Titus Vinius who had great influence at the time and whose friendship Vitellius had long since won through their common support of the Blues. But since Galba openly declared that no men were less to be feared than those who thought of nothing but eating and that Vitelliuss bottomless gullet might be filled from the resources of the province it is clear to anyone that he was chosen rather through contempt than favour. Suetonius Further on his physical appearance and end of reign29 He was of average height very bald with blue eyes and a hooked nose. His hands and feet were so distorted by gout that he could not endure a shoe for long unroll a book or even hold one. The flesh on his right side too had grown out and hung down to such an extent that it could with difficulty be held in place by a bandage. It is said that he was a heavy eater and in winter time was in the habit of taking food even before daylight while at dinner he helped himself so lavishly that he would have the leavings which remained in a heap before him passed along and distributed among the attendants who waited on him..... He met his end in the seventythird year of his age and the seventh month of his reign. The senate as soon as it was allowed to do so voted him a statue standing upon a column adorned with the beaks of ships in the part of the Forum where he was slain but Vespasian annulled this decree believing that Galba had sent assassins from Spain to Judaea to take his life. Suetonius Tacitus comments on the character of Galba He seemed too great to be a subject so long as he was subject and all would have agreed that he was equal to the imperial office if he had never held it.30 Suetonius went on to say that Galba was visited by the Roman Goddess Fortuna in his dreams twice on the latter occasion she withdrew her support. This happened right before his later downfall.31 Mutiny on the frontier and assassinationedit Damaged head of a crowned Galba in the J. Paul Getty Museum one of the only two confirmed portraits of Galba.32333436 On 1 January 69 the day Galba and Vinius took the office of consul37 the fourth and twentysecond legions of Germania Superior refused to swear loyalty to Galba. They toppled his statues demanding that a new emperor be chosen. On the following day the soldiers of Germania Inferior also refused to swear their loyalty and proclaimed the governor of the province Aulus Vitellius as emperor. Galba tried to ensure his authority as emperor was recognised by adopting the nobleman Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus as his successor. Nevertheless Galba was killed by the Praetorians on 15 January.3839 Otho was angry that he had been passed over for adoption and organised a conspiracy with a small number of Praetorian Guards to murder the aged emperor and elevate himself. The soldiery in the capital composed not just of Praetorians but of Galbas legion from Hispania and several detachments of men from the Roman fleet Illyria Britannia and Germania were angered at not having received a donative.40 They also resented Galbas purges of their officers and fellow soldiers this was especially true of the men from the fleet. Many in the Praetorian Guard were shaken by the recent murder of their Prefect Nymphidius Sabinus  some of the waverers were convinced to come over to Othos side out of fear Galba might yet take revenge on them for their connection to Sabinus.41 According to Suetonius Galba put on a linen corset although remarking it was little protection against so many swords when a soldier claimed to have killed Otho Galba snapped On what authority. He was lured out to the scene of his assassination in the Forum by a false report of the conspirators. Galba either tried to buy his life with a promise of the withheld bounty or asked that he be beheaded. The only help for him was a centurion in the Praetorian Guard named Sempronius Densus who was killed trying to defend Galba with a pugio one hundred and twenty persons later petitioned Otho that they had killed Galba they would be executed by Vitellius.42 A company of Germanic soldiers to whom he had once done a kindness rushed to help him however they took a wrong turn and arrived too late. He was killed near the Lacus Curtius.43 Vinius tried to run away calling out that Otho had not ordered him killed but was run through with a spear.44 Laco was banished to an island where he was later murdered by soldiers of Otho. Icelus was publicly executed.45 Piso was also killed his head along with Galbas and Vinius were placed on poles and Otho was then acclaimed as emperor.39 Galbas head was brought by a soldier to Othos camp where camp boys mocked it on a lance  Galba had angered them previously by remarking his vigor was still unimpeded. Vinius head was sold to his daughter for 2500 drachmas Pisos head was given to his wife.46 Galbas head was bought for 100 gold pieces by a freeman who threw it at Sessorium where his master Patrobius Neronianus had been killed by Galba. The body of Galba was taken up by Priscus Helvidius with the permission of Otho at night 46 Galbas steward Argivus took both the head and body to a tomb in Galbas private gardens on the Aurelian Way.47 Referencesedit Citationsedit  Fasti Ostienses AE 1978 295  Sometimes Servius Galba Imperator Caesar Augustus or Imperator Servius Sulpicius Galba Caesar Augustus. Hammond Mason 1957. Imperial Elements in the Formula of the Roman Emperors during the First Two and a Half Centuries of the Empire. Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. 25 1964 24. doi
10.2 3074238646. JSTOR 4238646.  Gammal man kallad Galba. Portrtthuvud frn sen republikansk tid Old man called Galba. Portrait head from the late republican era. Nationalmuseum.se.  Slive Seymour 2019. Rembrandt Drawings. Getty Publications. pp. 160164. ISBN 9781606066362.  Benesch Otto 1955. The Drawings of Rembrandt. Phaidon Press. The shape of the cranium of the Stockholm bust is so different from that of the drawing  bulging and protruding in the Stockholm bust receding and flattened in the Rembrandt drawing  that the identification in spite of the similarity of the features may be questioned.  Suetonius 
3.1 .  a b c d Greenhalgh 1975 p. 11.  a b Morgan 2006 pp. 3132.  Suetonius Life of Galba Chapter 23  Suetonius Life of Galba Chapter 3  Suetonius 
4.1 . in the year of the consulship of Cornelius Lentulus and Messalla Messallinus. This information is later contradicted by the statement that he died in the seventythird year of his age which would place his birth in 5 BC. This number is repeated by Tacitus in Histories 
1.4 9..  Morgan 2006 pp. 3233.  Suetonius 22.  a b c Lendering 2006.  Morgan 2006 p. 32.  a b Greenhalgh 1975 p. 15.  a b Morgan 2006 pp. 3334.  Suentonius Life of Galba Chapter 6  Greenhalgh 1975 pp. 711.  To Autolycus III.27. 7 months 6 days.  Wilson William trans. 1867. The Writings of Clement of Alexandria. p. 444. Seven months and six days.  The Jewish War IV.491. Reigned seven months and as many days.  Epitome de Caesaribus 6. Ruled seven months and an equal number of days.  Cassius Dio Historia Romana LXIII 26.  Theophilus of Antioch and Clement of Alexandria 
2 nd century give 9 June as the beginning of Galbas rule.2021 Josephus 
1 st century and Aurelius Victor 
4 th century give 8 June.2223 Cassius Dio states that Galba was proclaimed emperor by the Senate the night before Neros suicide i.e. 8 June.24  a b Donahue 1999.  Suetonius Life of Galba Chapters 4 1214  Suetonius Life of Vitellius Chapter 7  Suetonius Life of Galba Chapters 2123  Histories 
1.4 9  Hekster Olivier March 2009. Reversed Epiphanies Roman Emperors Deserted by Gods. Mnemosyne. 63 4 601615. doi
10.1 1631568525
10 X456228. hdl206661695. JSTOR 25801887. S
2 CID 162876998.  Over LifeSize Relief Head of Emperor Galba. J. Paul Getty Museum Collection.  a b Frel Ji 1994. Studia Varia. LErma di Bretschneider. p. 124. ISBN 9788870628142.  a b Varner Eric 2004. Mutilation and Transformation Damnatio Memoriae and Roman Imperial Portraiture. Brill. pp. 106107. ISBN 9789047404705.  House of Galba Casa di Galba Herculaneum. ermakvagus.com.  The other one is a damaged silver bust in the socalled House of Galba in Herculaneum.333435  Wellesley 1989 p. 1.  Plutarch 
24.1  the eighteenth before the Calends of February also in Tacitus Histories 2749.  a b Greenhalgh 1975 pp. 30 37 45 4754.  Tacitus Histories Book I. 58  Tacitus Histories Book I. 2528  Plutarch Life of Galba Chapters 2627  Suetonius Life of Galba Chapters 1920  Cornelius Tacitus 1770. The Works of Tacitus. J. and F. Rivington. p. 12.  Tacitus p. 46  a b Plutarch Life of Galba Chapter 28  Suetonius Galba 20 21. Bibliographyedit Ancient sourcesedit Cassius Dio Roman History fragments of Book 63 English translation by Earnest Cary on LacusCurtius. Plutarch Life of Galba English translation by A.H. Clough on Wikisource. Suetonius The Twelve Caesars Galba English translation by John Carew Rolfe on Wikisource. Modern sourcesedit Donahue John 7 August 1999. Galba. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2019. Galba. The Royal Titulary of Ancient Egypt. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Greenhalgh P. A. L. 1975. The Year of the Four Emperors. London Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 9780297768760. Morgan Gwyn 2006. 69 A.D. The Year of the Four Emperors. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195124682. Lendering Jona 2006. Galba. Livius. Retrieved 30 June 2019. Tranquillus C. Suetonius 2018 121. De Vita Caesarum The Lives of the Twelve Caesars in Latin. Translated by Rolfe J. C. DOVER PUBNS. ISBN 9780486822198. Wellesley Kenneth 1989. The Long Year A.D. 69. Bristol Bristol Classical Press. ISBN 9781853990496. External linksedit Wikiquote has quotations related to Galba. Wikisource has the text of a 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article about Galba Servius Sulpicius. Media related to Galba at Wikimedia Commons Political offices Preceded by Nero Roman emperor 6869 Succeeded by Otho Preceded by Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus Aulus Vitellius Roman consul 33 With L. Cornelius Sulla Felix Succeeded by L. Salvius Otho C. Octavius Laenas Preceded by C. Bellicius Natalis P. Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus as suffect consuls Roman consul II 69 With Titus Vinius Succeeded by Otho L. Salvius Otho Titianus II v t e Works of Plutarch Works Parallel Lives Moralia De genio Socratis On the Malice of Herodotus PseudoPlutarch Lives Alcibiades and Coriolanus1 Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar life Aratus of Sicyon  Artaxerxes and Galba  Otho2 Aristides and Cato the Elder1 Crassus and Nicias1 Demetrius and Antony1 Demosthenes and Cicero1 Dion and Brutus1 Fabius and Pericles1 Lucullus and Cimon1 Lysander and Sulla1 Numa and Lycurgus1 Pelopidas and Marcellus1 Philopoemen and Flamininus1 Phocion and Cato the Younger Pompey and Agesilaus1 Poplicola and Solon1 Pyrrhus and Gaius Marius Romulus and Theseus1 Sertorius and Eumenes1 Agis  Cleomenes1 and Tiberius Gracchus  Gaius Gracchus Timoleon and Aemilius Paulus1 Themistocles and Camillus Translators and editors Jacques Amyot Arthur Hugh Clough John Dryden Philemon Holland Thomas North 1 Comparison extant 2 Four unpaired Lives v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Belgium United States Sweden Czech Republic Australia Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleGalbaoldid1221858625 Categories Galba 3 BC births 69 deaths 
1 stcentury BC Romans 
1 stcentury murdered monarchs 
1 stcentury Roman emperors Ancient Roman adoptees Ancient Roman military personnel Imperial Roman consuls Imperial Roman praetors Leaders who took power by coup Livii Murdered Roman emperors People from the Province of Latina People of the Year of the Four Emperors Roman consuls who died in office Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard Roman governors of Hispania Tarraconensis Roman legates Roman pharaohs Sulpicii Galbae Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images CS1 Latinlanguage sources la Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with HDS identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 2 May 2024 at 1216 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width