Vitellius - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Public service Toggle Public service subsection 
2.1 Political and military career 
2.2 Bid for power 
3 Emperor Toggle Emperor subsection 
3.1 Administration 
3.2 Reputation 
3.3 Challenges 
3.4 Abdication and death 
4 Personal life 
5 Portrayals Toggle Portrayals subsection 
5.1 In coinage 
5.2 In art 
5.3 In literature 
6 References 
7 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 
7.1 Primary sources 
7.2 Secondary sources Toggle the table of contents Vitellius 77 languages Afrikaans   Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar      Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn   Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in AD 69 Vitellius Marble bust of Vitellius Bardo National Museum Tunisia123 Roman emperor Reign 19 April  20 December 69 Predecessor Otho Successor Vespasian Born 24 September 155 Nuceria Alfaterna Italy Roman Empire Died 20 December 69691220 aged 546 Rome Italy Roman Empire Spouses Petronia Galeria Fundana Issue Detail Aulus Vitellius Petronianus Aulus Vitellius Germanicus Vitellia Names Aulus Vitellius Regnal name Aulus Vitellius Germanicus Imperator Augustus Father Lucius Vitellius Mother Sextilia Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Four Emperors Chronology Galba 6869 Otho 69 Vitellius 69 Vespasian 6979 Succession Preceded by JulioClaudian dynasty Followed by Flavian dynasty v t e Aulus Vitellius vtlis vihTELLees Latin auls wtlijs 24 September 15  20 December 69 was Roman emperor for eight months from 19 April to 20 December AD 69. Vitellius was proclaimed emperor following the quick succession of the previous emperors Galba and Otho in a year of civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors. Vitellius was the first to add the honorific cognomen Germanicus to his name instead of Caesar upon his accession. Like his predecessor Otho Vitellius attempted to rally public support to his cause by honoring and imitating Nero who remained popular in the empire. Originally from Campania likely from Nuceria Alfaterna7 he was born to the Vitellia gens a relatively obscure family in ancient Rome. He was a noble companion of Tiberius retirement on Capri and there befriended Caligula. He was elected consul in 48 and served as proconsular governor of Africa in either 60 or 61. In 68 he was chosen to command the army of Germania Inferior by emperor Galba. He was later proclaimed emperor by the armies of Germania Inferior and Superior beginning a revolt against Galba.4 Galba was assassinated by Otho and Vitellius then faced Otho in battle. He defeated Otho at the Battle of Bedriacum and was recognized emperor by the Roman Senate. His claim to the throne was soon challenged by legions stationed in the eastern provinces who proclaimed their commander Vespasian emperor instead. War ensued leading to a crushing defeat for Vitellius at the Second Battle of Bedriacum in northern Italy. Once he realised his support was wavering Vitellius prepared to abdicate in favor of Vespasian. He was not allowed to do so by his supporters resulting in a brutal battle for Rome between Vitellius forces and the armies of Vespasian. He was executed in Rome by Vespasians soldiers on 20 December 69. Early lifeedit Denarii of Vitellius with a portrait of his father Lucius Vitellius top and his son and daughter bottom.8 Aulus Vitellius was born on 24 September 15 in Nuceria Alfaterna Campania. He was the son of Lucius Vitellius and his wife Sextilia and had one brother who was also named Lucius Vitellius. Suetonius recorded two different accounts of the origins of the gens Vitellia one making them descendants of past rulers of Latium the other describing their origins as lowly. Suetonius makes the sensible remark that both accounts might have been made by either flatterers or enemies of Vitelliusexcept that both were in circulation before Vitellius became emperor.9 Since his father was a member of the equestrian class and achieved the senatorial rank only later in his lifetime Vitellius became the first emperor not to be born in the senatorial family. Suetonius also recorded that when Vitellius was born his horoscope so horrified his parents that his father tried to prevent Aulus from becoming a consul.10 In his youth he was one of the noble companions of Tiberius retirement on Capri.7 Shortly thereafter Vitellius was able to befriend the young Caligula due to their common passion for chariots and games of dice.11 Public serviceedit Political and military careeredit He was consul in 48 and proconsular governor of Africa in either 60 or 61 in which capacity he is said to have acquitted himself with credit. In 62 he apparently supported the death penalty against Antistius Sosanius and was notedly flattering to Nero 12 At the end of 68 Galba to the general astonishment selected him to command the army of Germania Inferior and here Vitellius made himself popular with his subalterns and with the soldiers by outrageous prodigality and excessive good nature which soon proved fatal to order and discipline.4 Bid for poweredit He owed his elevation to the throne to Caecina and Fabius Valens commanders of two legions on the Rhine. Through these two men a military revolution was speedily accomplished they refused to renew their vows of allegiance to Emperor Galba on 1 January 69. Vitellius was proclaimed emperor at Cologne on the following day and then again on the day after.13 More accurately he was proclaimed emperor of the armies of Germania Inferior and Superior.4 The armies of Gaul Britannia and Raetia sided with them shortly afterwards. By the time that they marched on Rome however it was Otho and not Galba whom they had to confront. In fact he was never acknowledged as emperor by the entire Roman world though at Rome the Senate accepted him and decreed to him the usual Imperial honours on 19 April.14 He advanced into Italy at the head of a licentious and rough soldiery and Rome became the scene of riot and massacre gladiatorial shows and extravagant feasting.4 To reward his victorious legionaries Vitellius expanded the existing Praetorian Guard and installed his own men from his Rhine army.15 Emperoredit Administrationedit Two aureus of Vitellius Suetonius whose father had fought for Otho at Bedriacum gives an unfavourable account of Vitellius brief administration he describes him as unambitious and notes that Vitellius showed indications of a desire to govern wisely but that Valens and Caecina encouraged him in a course of vicious excesses which threw his better qualities into the background.4 He is even reported to have starved his own mother to deathto fulfill a prophecy by a Chattian seeress that he would rule longer if his mother died first alternatively there is a report that his mother asked for poison to commit suicidea request he granted.16 Suetonius additionally remarks that Vitellius besetting sins were luxury and cruelty.17 Other writers namely Tacitus and Cassius Dio disagree with some of Suetonius assertions even though their own accounts are scarcely positive ones. Despite his short reign he made two important government contributions which outlasted him. Tacitus describes them both in his Histories Vitellius ended the practice of centurions selling furloughs and exemptions of duty to their men a change Tacitus describes as being adopted by all good emperors. He also expanded the offices of the Imperial administration beyond the imperial pool of freedmen allowing those of the Equites to take up positions in the Imperial civil service. Vitellius also banned astrologers from Rome and Italy on 1 October 69. Some astrologers responded to his decree by anonymously publishing a decree of their own Decreed by all astrologers in blessing on our State Vitellius will be no more on the appointed date. In response Vitellius executed any astrologers he came across.18 Furthermore Vitellius continued Othos policies in regard to Neros memory in that he honored the dead emperor and sacrificed to his spirit. He also had Neros songs performed in public and attempted to imitate Nero who remained extremely popular among the lower classes of the Roman Empire.19 Reputationedit Suetonius is particularly responsible for giving Vitellius the reputation of being an obese glutton using emetics so as to be able to indulge in banquets four times a day and often having himself invited over to a different nobles house for each one. One of the most famous of these feasts was offered Vitellius by his brother Lucius at which it is said there were served up no less than two thousand choice fishes and seven thousand birds. Yet even this supper he himself outdid at a feast which he gave upon the first use of a dish which had been made for him and which for its extraordinary size he called The Shield of Minerva. In this dish there were tossed up together the livers of pike the brains of pheasants and peacocks with the tongues of flamingos and the entrails of lampreys which had been brought in ships of war as far as from Parthia and the Spanish Straits.20 A noted gourmet of that time Marcus Gavius Apicius named after the emperor a less exotic dish of peas or broad beans mashed with sweet and sour ingredients.21 Edward Gibbon in The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire refers to the beastly Vitellius among the unworthy successors of Augustus adding in a footnote Vitellius consumed in mere eating at least six millions of our money in about seven months. It is not easy to express his vices with dignity or even decency. Tacitus fairly calls him a hog but it is by substituting for a coarse word a very fine image.22 Challengesedit In July 69 Vitellius learned that the armies of the eastern provinces had proclaimed a rival emperor their commander Titus Flavius Vespasianus. As soon as it was known that the armies of the East Dalmatia and Illyricum had declared for Vespasianus Vitellius sent several legions under Caecina to prevent the Eastern armies from entering Italy but Caecina dissatisfied with Vitelliuss poor administration attempted without success to defect to Vespasian. This undermined the morale of the Vitellian legions and they were decisively defeated at the Second Battle of Bedriacum. Fabius Valens was then sent by Vitellius to rally supporting armies in Gaul but forces loyal to Vespasian captured and executed him soon after. Vitellius now deserted by many of his adherents prepared to abdicate the title of emperor.4 Abdication and deathedit Vitellius dragged through the streets of Rome Georges Rochegrosse 1883 Tacitus Histories state that Vitellius awaited Vespasians army at Mevania. The terms of abdication had actually been agreed upon with Marcus Antonius Primus the commander of the sixth legion serving in Pannonia and one of Vespasians chief supporters. However as he was on his way to deposit the insignia of empire in the Temple of Concord the Praetorian Guard refused to allow him to carry out the agreement and forced him to return to the palace.4 On the entrance of Vespasians troops into Rome Vitellius supporters mostly civilians organized heavy resistance resulting in a brutal battle. Entrenched on the citys buildings they threw stones javelins and tiles on Vespasians soldiers who consequently suffered heavy casualties in the urban fighting. Cassius Dio claims that 50000 people died in the battle for Rome.23 Large parts of the city were destroyed including the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus.24 Vitellius was eventually dragged out of a hidingplace according to Tacitus a doorkeepers lodge driven to the fatal Gemonian stairs and there struck down by Vespasians supporters. Yet I was once your emperor were his last words. His body was thrown into the Tiber according to Suetonius Cassius Dios account is that Vitellius was beheaded and his head paraded around Rome and his wife attended to his burial. His brother and son were also killed. Suetonius in writing of Vitellius execution offers his physical description ...He was in fact abnormally tall with a face usually flushed from hard drinking a huge belly and one thigh crippled from being struck once by a fourhorse chariot when he was in attendance on Gaius as he was driving...25 Years before there was a prediction that he would fall into the power of a man from Gaul the man who slew him was Antonius Primus of Tolosa and whose nickname was Becco which means roosters beak Gallus means both a cock and a Gaul.26 Personal lifeedit He married firstly before the year 40 a woman named Petronia the daughter of Publius Petronius or Gaius Petronius Pontius Nigrinus with whom he had a son Aulus Vitellius Petronianus the universal heir of his mother and grandfather27 whom Vitellius had killed in 69 in order to inherit his fortune. He married secondly around the year 50 a woman named Galeria Fundana perhaps the granddaughter of Gaius Galerius Prefect of Egypt in 
23.2 8 They had two children a son called Aulus Vitellius Germanicus or Novis the Younger and a daughter Vitellia who married Decimus Valerius Asiaticus.29 Portrayalsedit In coinageedit Denarius of Vitellius with the goddess Victory erecting a trophy on the reverse alluding to the incoming confrontation with Vespasian.30 As Vitellius was not recognised emperor by the Senate until 19 April 
69 soon after Othos suicidehe had to rely on other mints for his coin supply until his arrival at Rome.31 He first used the Spanish mint of Tarraco now Tarragona from January 69 then the mint of Lugdunum now Lyon France a bit later. Taracco produced much more coins than Lugdunum which might have not even struck bronze coinage.32 These two mints closed at the beginning of summer 69 by which time the mint of Rome had taken over.33 Every coin of Vitellius features the title Germanicus referring to the legions of the Rhine that supported his bid for power. Regardless of the mint this title was progressively shortened to Germ on the coins. Numismatist C. H. V. Sutherland notes that the prevalence of the title indicates that Vitellius used it almost like a cognomen.34 The coins Vitellius minted before his official proclamation as Emperor on 19 April do not bear the title Augustus while the title Pontifex Maximus appears on coins minted after his election at this title on 18 July.35 The last type of coin minted by Vitellius were aurei and denarii with the goddess Victory building a trophy likely alluding to his hopeful victory against the incoming armies of Vespasian.30 In artedit Bust of Vitellius in the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek Denmark.36123 Busts from the time of Vitellius particularly the one in the Capitoline Museums37 represent him as broadfaced with several double chins and it is this type which informs paintings of the emperor from the Renaissance on. There were once other ancient busts claimed to be of Vitellius which later scholarship has proved to be of someone else. The features of the Grimani Vitellius particularly according to Mary Beard were once used by painters to suggest that the character who bears them is destined to come to a bleak end.38 Another such bust figures in Michiel Sweerts Baroque genre piece of a young art student drawing a copy.39 The Grimani portrait bust also served as the model for one by Giovanni Battista and Nicola Bonanome ca.1565 one of a series of The Twelve Caesars that were once fashionable in large households.40 The series was also a popular subject for paintings of which there have been examples by Titian41 Peter Paul Rubens42 Otto van Veen43 and many others. Several 
19 thcentury French artists pictured the violent end of Vitellius. That by Georges Rochegrosse 1883 depicts him being dragged by the populace down the steep Gemonian stairs stretching from high on the canvas to its foot see above. There he appears bound and surrounded by a gesticulating mob with hooting ragamuffins at their head. The stairs are covered with the rubbish with which the deposed emperor has been pelted and as Suetonius describes the scene a long blade is held at his throat so that he cannot look down.44 Others paintings show the moment of his execution of which there are examples by frCharlesGustave Housez45 PaulJacquesAim Baudry 184746 JulesEugne Lenepveu 184747 and an engraving by Edouard Vimont 187619
30.4 8 Much as the appearance of Vitellius prefigured approaching doom in earlier centuries Thomas Couture pictures him in shadow to the left of centre in the painting The Romans in their Decadence 1847. This was shown prophetically at the Paris Salon in the year before the French Revolution of 1848 toppled the July Monarchy. In literatureedit The Romans in their Decadence by Thomas Couture The earliest fictional appearance of a Vitellius was of the Roman Consul in Syria Lucius Vitellius the father of Aulus who intervened in Judaean affairs in the time of Pontius Pilate.49 It is he who figures in Gustave Flauberts novella Hrodias 1877 and in Hrodiade the 1881 opera based on it by Jules Massenet.50 The same character also makes an appearance in the 1930 novel by Iwan Naschiwin 18741940 A Certain Jesus the Gospel According to Thomas  an Historical Novel of the First Century.51 The son of Lucius Aulus Vitellius played a minor part in Henryk Sienkiewiczs novel Quo Vadis set at the end of Neros reign. Although he survived as a character in the 1900 Broadway production52 and in the Italian films based on it of 1913 and 1924 he disappeared from later adaptations. But some later novels deal with incidents in the military career of this Vitellius. In Simon Scarrows Eagles of the Empire series he is introduced as a rival to Vespasian during the Roman invasion of Britain. And in later chapters of Henry VenmoreRowlands novel The Last Caesar 2012 he figures as the newly appointed Governor of Lower Germania and something of a glutton.53 Naturally Vitellius is a character in the rash of recent novels dealing with the Year of the Four Emperors. He is in the background in Kate Quinns novel Daughters of Rome 201154 and shares a section of Steven Saylors Empire The Novel of Imperial Rome 20
10.5 5 His fall features in M C Scotts Rome The Art of War 201356 and he also appears in James Maces twopart series The Year of the Four Emperors.57 Referencesedit  a b Rodrguez Oliva P. 2013. Un busto en bronce del PseudoVitelio de la antigua coleccin de El Retiro de Churriana Mlaga. BAETICA. Estudios de Historia Moderna y Contempornea in Spanish. 35 35 194. doi
10.2 43
10 BAETICA.2013.v
0 i
35.6 3. hdl106307812. S
2 CID 187481480.  a b Frel Ji 1994. Studia Varia. LErma di Bretschneider. p. 125. ISBN 9788870628142.  a b Polloni John 1994. A Flavian relief portrait in the J. Paul Getty Museum. In Frel Ji ed.. The J. Paul Getty Museum Journal. Vol. 5. Getty Publications. p. 66. ISBN 9780892360116.  a b c d e f g h Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Vitellius Aulus . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 28 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 147.  Suetonius Vitellius 3 was born on the eighth day before the Kalends of October 24 September or according to some on the seventh day before the Ides of September 7 September. 24 September is generally the most accepted date.4  Tacitus III records the defection of his troops on 18 December and the taking of the capitol the following day. Cassius Dio 
64.2 2 indicates that he died a day later although his calculations indicate that he died on the 
22 nd not 20.  a b Suetonius Vitellius 4.  Sutherland  Carson Roman Imperial Coinage pp. 272 273 n79 99.  Suetonius. Life of Vitellius. 1.  Suetonius. Life of Vitellius. 3 2.  Suetonius Vitellius 
3.2  
4.1 .  Tacitus Histories 
14.4 9  Tacitus Histories 
1.5 657. In the course of the night of the 
1 st of January ... the 
4 th and 
18 th legions had thrown down the images of Galba... Fabius Valens in the course of the following day entered the Colonia Agrippinensis with the cavalry of the legion and of the auxiliaries and together with them saluted Vitellius as emperor. All the legions belonging to the same province followed his example with prodigious zeal and the army of Upper Germany abandoned the specious names of the Senate and people of Rome and on the 
3 rd of January declared for Vitellius.  CIL 2051 XIII K. Maias  Praetorian Guard. World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 19 February 2019.  Suetonius Vitellius Chapter 14  Suetonius Vitellius Chapters 1314  Tamsyn Barton Ancient Astrology pp. 4748.  Varner 2017 p. 238.  Suetonius Vitellius chapter 13  Ken Albala Beans A History Berg 2007 p. 44  Gibbon Edward 1932. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 
1 st ed.. New York The Modern Library. p. 79.  Kelly 2007 pp. 169 171.  Varner 2017 p. 250.  Suetonius Vitellius Chapter 17  Suetonius Vitellius Chapter 18  Suetonius Vitellius 6  Suetonius Vitellius 6  G. Morgan 69 AD The Year of Four Emperors Oxford University Press 2005 p. 149  a b Sutherland  Carson Roman Imperial Coinage pp. 267 273.  Sutherland  Carson Roman Imperial Coinage pp. 262 263.  Sutherland  Carson Roman Imperial Coinage pp. 263265.  Sutherland  Carson Roman Imperial Coinage pp. 268271.  Sutherland  Carson Roman Imperial Coinage p. 264.  Sutherland  Carson Roman Imperial Coinage pp. 264 267.  Varner Eric R. 2004. Mutilation and transformation damnatio memoriae and Roman imperial portraiture. Monumenta Graeca et Romana. 10. Brill 109. ISBN 9789004135772.  Wikimedia Commons  Sandra Alvarez Emperor Spotting with Mary Beard Ancient History Magazine 2 November 2017  Boy Drawing before the Bust of a Roman Emperor Minneapolis Institute of Arts  Prado Museum  Now destroyed but known from the engraving by Aegidius Sadeler  Rubens at Home  Mutual Art  Suetonius Vitellius 17  Art Renewal Centre  Wikimedia Commons  Wikimedia Commons  Flickr  Lucius Vitellius Liviusorg  Opera Scotland  Google Books  Broadway World  VenmoreRowland Henry 2012. The Last Caesar. Bantam Press an imprint of Transworld Publishers. ISBN 9780593068519.  Quinn Kate 2011. Daughters of Rome. Headline Review.  Google Books  Foreword to the novel  Fantastic Fiction Bibliographyedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vitellius. Primary sourcesedit Cassius Dio Roman History fragments of Book 64 English translation by Earnest Cary on LacusCurtius. Plutarch Life of Galba English translation by A.H. Clough on Wikisource. Suetonius The Twelve Caesars Vitellius English translation by John Carew Rolfe on Wikisource. Tacitus Annales Tacitus English translation by Alfred John Church and William Jackson Brodribb 1876 on Wikisource. Secondary sourcesedit Kelly Benjamin 2007. Riot Control and Imperial Ideology in the Roman Empire. Phoenix. 61 12. Toronto University of Toronto Press Classical Association of Canada 150176. JSTOR 20304642. Varner Eric 2017. Neros Memory in Flavian Rome. In Bartsch Shadi Freudenberg Kirik Littlewood Cedric eds.. The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Nero. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. pp. 238258. ISBN 9781107669239. Biography at Livius Biography at De Imperatoribus Romanis C. H. V. Sutherland  R. A. G. Carson The Roman Imperial Coinage volume I revised edition London Spink 1984 originally published in 1923. Political offices Preceded by Gnaeus Hosidius Geta and Gaius Volasenna Severus as Suffect consuls Roman consul 48 with L. Vipstanus Publicola Messalla Succeeded by Quintus Veranius Nepos and Gaius Pompeius Longus Gallus as Suffect consuls Preceded by Otho Roman emperor 69 Succeeded by Vespasian v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National France BnF data Germany Israel Belgium United States Sweden Czech Republic Croatia Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists Te Papa New Zealand ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleVitelliusoldid1221978887 Categories 15 births 69 deaths 
1 stcentury executions 
1 stcentury murdered monarchs 
1 stcentury Roman emperors Executed Roman emperors Filicides 
1 stcentury Roman consuls People executed by the Roman Empire People of the Year of the Four Emperors Roman governors of Africa Roman governors of Germania Inferior Vitellii Hidden categories CS1 Spanishlanguage sources es Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2021 Pages with Latin IPA Commons link from Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with HDS identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 3 May 2024 at 0359 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width