Otho - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Reign decline and fall Toggle Reign decline and fall subsection 
2.1 Overthrow of Galba 
2.2 War with Vitellius 
2.3 Death 
3 Cultural references Toggle Cultural references subsection 
3.1 In opera 
3.2 In literature 
3.3 In film 
4 Notes 
5 References 
6 Sources 
7 External links Toggle External links subsection 
7.1 Primary sources 
7.2 Secondary material Toggle the table of contents Otho 81 languages Afrikaans   Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar      Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn   Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in AD 69 For other uses see Otho disambiguation. Otho Detail of a statue of Otho at the Louvre12 Roman emperor Reign 15 January  16 April 69 Predecessor Galba Successor Vitellius Born Marcus Salvius Otho 28 April 32 Ferentium Italy Died 16 April 69 aged 36 Brescello Spouse Poppaea Sabina forced by Nero to divorce her Regnal name Imperator Marcus Otho Caesar Augustus3 Father Lucius Salvius Otho Mother Albia Terentia Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Four Emperors Chronology Galba 6869 Otho 69 Vitellius 69 Vespasian 6979 Succession Preceded by JulioClaudian dynasty Followed by Flavian dynasty v t e Otho oo OHtho born Marcus Salvius Otho 28 April 32  16 April 69 was Roman emperor ruling for three months from 15 January to 16 April 69. He was the second emperor of the Year of the Four Emperors. A member of a noble Etruscan family Otho was initially a friend and courtier of the young emperor Nero until he was effectively banished to the governorship of the remote province of Lusitania in 58 following his wife Poppaea Sabinas affair with Nero. After a period of moderate rule in the province he allied himself with Galba the governor of neighbouring Hispania Tarraconensis during the revolts of 68. He accompanied Galba on his march to Rome but revolted and murdered Galba at the start of the next year. Inheriting the problem of the rebellion of Vitellius commander of the army in Germania Inferior Otho led a sizeable force which met Vitellius army at the Battle of Bedriacum. After initial fighting resulted in 40000 casualties and a retreat of his forces Otho committed suicide rather than fight on and Vitellius was proclaimed emperor. Early lifeedit Otho was born on 28 April AD 32. His grandfather Marcus had been a senator and Claudius granted patrician status to Othos father Lucius Salvius Otho.45 Suetonius in The Lives of the Caesars comments on Othos appearance and personal hygiene. He is said to have been of moderate height splayfooted and bandylegged but almost feminine in his care of his person. He had the hair of his body plucked out and because of the thinness of his locks wore a wig so carefully fashioned and fitted to his head that no one suspected it. Moreover they say that he used to shave every day and smear his face with moist bread beginning the practice with the appearance of the first down so as never to have a beard. Juvenal in a passage in the Satire II ridiculing male homosexuality specifically mentions Otho as being vain and effeminate looking at himself in the mirror before going into battle and plastering his face with dough in order to look good.6 Greenhalgh writes that he was addicted to luxury and pleasure to a degree remarkable even in a Roman. An aged freedwoman brought him into the company of the emperor Nero. Otho married the emperors mistress Poppaea Sabina Nero forced Otho to divorce Poppaea so that he himself could marry her. He exiled Otho to the province of Lusitania5 in 58 or 59 by appointing him to be its governor.4 Otho proved to be capable as governor of Lusitania yet he never forgave Nero for marrying Poppaea. He allied himself with Galba governor of neighboring Hispania Tarraconensis in the latters rebellion against Nero in 
68.5  Nero committed suicide later that year and Galba was proclaimed emperor by the Senate. Otho accompanied the new emperor to Rome in October 68. Before they entered the city Galbas army fought against a legion that Nero had organized.7 Reign decline and falledit Overthrow of Galbaedit Bust labelled as Otho in the National Archaeological Museum Florence. On 1 January 69 the day Galba took the office of consul alongside Titus Vinius the fourth and eighteenth legions of Germania Superior refused to swear loyalty to the emperor. They toppled the statues of Galba and demanded that a new emperor be chosen. On the following day the soldiers of Germania inferior also refused to swear their loyalty and proclaimed the governor of the province Aulus Vitellius as emperor.8 Galba tried to ensure his authority as emperor was recognized by adopting the nobleman Piso Licinianus as his successor9 an action that gained resentment from Otho.4 Galba was killed by the praetorians on 15 January followed shortly by Vinius and Piso. Their heads were placed on poles and Otho was proclaimed emperor.9 Neros statues were again set up his freedmen and household officers reinstalled including the young castrated boy Sporus whom Nero had taken in marriage and Otho also would live intimately with.1011 The populace acclaimed him as Nero Otho although Otho did not appear to like the title.12 At the same time the fears of the more sober and respectable citizens were relieved by Othos liberal professions of his intention to govern equitably and by his judicious clemency towards Aulus Marius Celsus a consuldesignate and devoted adherent of Galba. He assumed the consulate of the year alongside his brother Titianus but only until the 
1 st of March.13 War with Vitelliusedit This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Otho  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR January 2022 Learn how and when to remove this message Otho soon realized that it was much easier to overthrow an Emperor than rule as one according to Suetonius14 Otho once remarked that Playing the Long Pipes is hardly my trade i.e. undertaking something beyond ones ability to do so. Any further development of Othos policy was checked once he had read through Galbas private correspondence and realized the extent of the revolution in Germania where several legions had declared for Vitellius the commander of the legions on the lower Rhine River and were already advancing upon Italy. After a vain attempt to conciliate Vitellius by the offer of a share in the Empire Otho with unexpected vigor prepared for war. From the much more remote provinces which had quietly accepted his accession little help was to be expected but the legions of Dalmatia Pannonia and Moesia were eager in his cause the Praetorian cohorts were a formidable force and an efficient fleet gave him the mastery of the Italian seas. The fleet was at once dispatched to secure Liguria and on 14 March Otho undismayed by omens and prophecies started northwards at the head of his troops in the hopes of preventing the entry of Vitellius troops into Italy. But for this he was too late and all that could be done was to throw troops into Placentia and hold the line of the Po. Othos advanced guard successfully defended Placentia against Aulus Caecina Alienus and compelled that general to fall back on Cremona but the arrival of Fabius Valens altered the aspect of affairs. Vitellius commanders now resolved to bring on a decisive battle the Battle of Bedriacum and their designs were assisted by the divided and irresolute counsels which prevailed in Othos camp. The more experienced officers urged the importance of avoiding a battle until at least the legions from Dalmatia had arrived. However the rashness of the emperors brother Titianus and of Proculus prefect of the Praetorian Guards added to Othos feverish impatience overruled all opposition and an immediate advance was decided upon. Otho remained behind with a considerable reserve force at Brixellum on the southern bank of the Po. When this decision was taken Othos army had already crossed the Po and were encamped at Bedriacum or Betriacum a small village on the Via Postumia on the route by which the legions from Dalmatia would naturally arrive. Leaving a strong detachment to hold the camp at Bedriacum the Othonian forces advanced along the Via Postumia in the direction of Cremona. At a short distance from Cremona they unexpectedly encountered the Vitellian troops. The Othonians though at a disadvantage fought desperately but were eventually forced to fall back in disorder upon their camp at Bedriacum. There on the next day the victorious Vitellians followed them but only to come to terms at once with their disheartened enemy and to be welcomed into the camp as friends. Deathedit Otho was still in command of a formidable force as the Dalmatian legions had reached Aquileia and the spirit of his soldiers and their officers was unbroken. He was resolved to accept the verdict of the battle that his own impatience had hastened. In a speech he bade farewell to those about him declaring It is far more just to perish one for all than many for one15 and then retiring to rest soundly for some hours. Early in the morning he stabbed himself in the heart with a dagger which he had concealed under his pillow and died as his attendants entered the tent. Othos ashes were placed within a modest monument. He had reigned three months. His funeral was celebrated at once as he had wished. A plain tomb was erected in his honour at Brixellum with the inscription Diis Manibus Marci Othonis. His 
91 day reign20 would be the shortest until that of Pertinax whose reign lasted 87 days in 193 during the Year of the Five Emperors. Aureus of Otho. Legend imp m otho caes aug tr p It has been thought that Othos suicide was committed in order to steer his country away from the path to civil war and to avoid casualties in his legions. Just as he had come to power many Romans learned to respect Otho in his death. Few could believe that a renowned former companion of Nero had chosen such an honourable end. Tacitus wrote that some of the soldiers committed suicide beside his funeral pyre because they loved their emperor and wished to share his glory.21 Writing during the reign of the Emperor Domitian AD 8196 the Roman poet Martial expressed his admiration for Othos choice to spare the empire from civil war through sacrificing himself Although the goddess of civil warfare was still in doubt And soft Otho had perhaps still a chance of winning He renounced fighting that would have cost much blood And with sure hand pierced right through his breast. By all means let Cato in his life be greater than Caesar himself In his death was he greater than Otho22 Cultural referencesedit In operaedit Otho or Ottone is a character in Lincoronazione di Poppea The Coronation of Poppaea an Italian opera from 1643 by Claudio Monteverdi. Otho is in love with Poppaea but she spurns him. After learning Nero plans to leave her and marry Poppaea Empress Ottavia orders Otho to kill Poppaea which he attempts but finds he cannot carry out. He ends the opera in exile with Drusilla a lady of the court who loves him. Otho is a principal character also in Handels opera Agrippina of 1709. Agrippina Neros mother is intent on promoting her sons claim to the throne. Poppaea the ingenue is portrayed as the object of desire of Claudius Nero and Otho whose rivalries Agrippina attempts to leverage to her advantage. Once Poppaea sees through Agrippinas deceit she responds in kind but only in order to be united with Otho portrayed as her one true love. Otho or Ottone is the title character in Vivaldis opera Ottone in villa of 1713. Ottone is in love with Cleonilla who cant resist flirting with two young Romans Ostilio and Caio. Ostilio is in reality a woman Tullia who disguised herself because shes in love with Caio. In literatureedit Otho is a secondary character in the historical fiction novel Daughters of Rome by Kate Quinn. The book depicts the Year of the Four Emperors. Otho is portrayed as scheming but also charming. His suicide at the end of the portion of the book dedicated to his reign is depicted as a noble sacrifice. In filmedit There have been multiple recorded versions of Lincoronazione di Poppea. The first was in 1979 a version with the Zurich Opera and Otho was played by Paul Esswood.23 In the 2008 production Glyndebourne production Otho is portrayed by Iestyn Davies.24 In the 2010 production at the Teatro Real in Madrid released on DVD in 2012 Max Emanuel Cencic plays Otho.25 In the 2013 Polish film Imperator done entirely in Latin Otho is a main character and is portrayed by Robert Wrzosek.26 Notesedit  According to Dio Augustus died after a rule of fortyfour years lacking thirteen days. If we subtract 13 days to 2 September we have 20 August. The very same chapter precisely dates Augustus death on the nineteenth day of August. Caligula ascended to the throne at twentyfive years of age lacking five months and four days. This gives us 27 March Dio wrongly dates Tiberius death on 26 March. Therefore Otho died on 16 April not 17 as the calculation may suggest. Referencesedit  Empereur Othon. Runion des Muses Nationaux.  LEmpereurs Othon. Louvre  Cooley p. 490.  a b c Grant 2002 p. 188.  a b c Greenhalgh 1975 pp. 3335.  Juvenal  Roman poet. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2 December 2019.  Donahue 1999.  Tacitus Histories 
1.2 757.  a b Greenhalgh 1975 pp. 30 37 45 4754.  Smith 1849 pp. 897 2012.  Champlin 2005 pp. 147148.  Tacitus Histories 
1.7 8.  Tacitus Histories 
1.7 
1 ff 77.  Chapter 7  Cassius Dio  Epitome of Book 63. penelope.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 29 September 2017.  Josephus The Jewish War IV 9 Three months and two days. 92 days including the end date just as he did for Claudius and Neros dates.  Clement of Alexandria Stromata Otho five three months one day. 91 days  Suetonius Otho 11 On the ninetyfifth day of his reign. Suetonius probably assumed Otho died on 19 April the day in which Vitellius was formally installed as emperor.  Theophilus of Antioch To Autolycus III.27. Otho 3 months 5 days 95 days.  Cassius Dio 
63.1 5 He had lived thirtyseven years lacking eleven days and had reigned ninety days. This seems to give 15 April as Othos date of death. However thirtyseven years lacking eleven days actually gives 16 April.n. 1 This can be explained by placing Othos ascension on 16 January. Other historians give similar dates.16171819  Tacitus Cornelius. Othos Suicide  The Histories of Ancient Rome by Tacitus. www.ourcivilisation.com. Retrieved 29 September 2017.  Martial Epigrams VI.32 translated by D. R. Shackleton Bailey  Lincoronazione di Poppea. IMDB. Retrieved 29 September 2021.  Lincoronazione di Poppea 07 June 2008. Glyndebourne. Retrieved 29 September 2021.  Mandel Mark. MONTEVERDI LIncoronazione di Poppea. Opera News. Archived from the original on 29 September 2021. Retrieved 29 September 2021.  Emperor  Polish movie about ancient Rome. Imperium Romanum. 22 February 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2021. Sourcesedit This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Otho Marcus Salvius. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 20 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 365366. Champlin Edward 2005. Nero. Harvard University Press. pp. 147148. ISBN 9780674018228. Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521840262. Donahue John 7 August 1999. Galba. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2019. Otho 69 A.D. in De Imperatoribus Romanis. Grant Michael 2002. The twelve Caesars. London Phoenix Press. ISBN 9781842126370. Greenhalgh P. A. L. 1975. The Year of the Four Emperors. London Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 9780297768760. Smith William 1849. Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology. Vol. 3. C. C. Little and J. Brown etc. etc. . pp. 897 2012. LCCN 07038839. External linksedit Wikisource has original text related to this article Life of Otho by Plutarch Wikimedia Commons has media related to Otho. Primary sourcesedit Life of Otho Suetonius English translation and Latin original Life of Otho Plutarch English translation Cassius Dio Book 63 Tacitus Histories esp. 
1.1 2 
1.2 190 Secondary materialedit Biography on De Imperatoribus Romanis Otho by Plutarch Archived 23 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine Juvenal Satire II Political offices Preceded by Galba Roman emperor 69 Succeeded by Vitellius Preceded by Galba Titus Vinius Roman consul 69 suffect With L. Salvius Otho Titianus Succeeded by L. Verginius Rufus L. Pompeius Vopiscus as suffect consuls v t e Works of Plutarch Works Parallel Lives Moralia De genio Socratis On the Malice of Herodotus PseudoPlutarch Lives Alcibiades and Coriolanus1 Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar life Aratus of Sicyon  Artaxerxes and Galba  Otho2 Aristides and Cato the Elder1 Crassus and Nicias1 Demetrius and Antony1 Demosthenes and Cicero1 Dion and Brutus1 Fabius and Pericles1 Lucullus and Cimon1 Lysander and Sulla1 Numa and Lycurgus1 Pelopidas and Marcellus1 Philopoemen and Flamininus1 Phocion and Cato the Younger Pompey and Agesilaus1 Poplicola and Solon1 Pyrrhus and Gaius Marius Romulus and Theseus1 Sertorius and Eumenes1 Agis  Cleomenes1 and Tiberius Gracchus  Gaius Gracchus Timoleon and Aemilius Paulus1 Themistocles and Camillus Translators and editors Jacques Amyot Arthur Hugh Clough John Dryden Philemon Holland Thomas North 1 Comparison extant 2 Four unpaired Lives v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 WorldCat 2 National Norway France BnF data Germany Israel Belgium United States Sweden Czech Republic Croatia Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists Te Papa New Zealand People Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleOthooldid1220549112 Categories Otho 
1 stcentury Roman emperors 32 births 69 deaths Suicides in Ancient Rome Heads of state who died by suicide Imperial Roman consuls Leaders who took power by coup People from the Province of Viterbo People of the Year of the Four Emperors Poppaea Sabina Roman consuls who died in office Roman governors of Lusitania Roman pharaohs Salvii Suffect consuls of Imperial Rome Suicides by sharp instrument in Italy Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Articles needing additional references from January 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SNACID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 24 April 2024 at 1407 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width