Caligula - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Emperor 
3 Public reactions 
4 Public profile 
5 Conflict with the Senate Toggle Conflict with the Senate subsection 
5.1 Incitatus 
5.2 Public reform and finance 
5.3 Bridge at Baiae 
5.4 Coinage 
5.5 Construction 

5.5.1 Ships at Nemi 
5.6 Germany and the Rhine frontier 
5.7 Caligulas auctions 
5.8 Western expansion 
5.9 Britannia and the North 
5.1 
0 Judaea and Egypt 
5.1 
1 Religion 
5.1 
2 Assassination and aftermath 
5.1 
3 Private life 
5.1 
4 Source opinions 
5.1 
5 Contemporary historiography 
6 Modern depictions Toggle Modern depictions subsection 
6.1 In film and series 
6.2 In literature and theatre 
6.3 In opera 
7 See also 
8 Notes 
9 References 
10 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 
10.1 Modern sources 
10.2 Ancient sources 
11 Further reading 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Caligula 111 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch   Aragons  Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg    Bikol Central  Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Estremeu Euskara  Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano   Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kurd  Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Ligure Lombard Magyar   Malagasy      Bahasa Melayu   Nederlands  Nordfriisk Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha       Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn  Gagana Samoa  Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    tatara   Trke   Ting Vit WestVlams Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki Zeuws  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from AD 37 to 41 For other uses see Caligula disambiguation. Caligula Marble bust 3741 AD Roman emperor Reign 16 March 37  24 January 41 Predecessor Tiberius Successor Claudius Born Gaius Julius Caesar 31 August AD 12 Antium Italy Died 24 January AD 41 aged 28 Palatine Hill Rome Italy Spouses Junia Claudilla Livia Orestilla Lollia Paulina Milonia Caesonia Issue Julia Drusilla Tiberius Gemellus adoptive Regnal name Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus1 Dynasty JulioClaudian Father Germanicus Mother Agrippina Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus 31 August 12  24 January 41 better known by his nickname Caligula kljl was Roman emperor from AD 37 until his assassination in AD 41. He was the son of the Roman general Germanicus and Augustus granddaughter Agrippina the Elder members of the first ruling family of the Roman Empire. He was born two years before Tiberius was made emperor. Gaius accompanied his father mother and siblings on campaign in Germania at little more than four or five years old. He had been named after Gaius Julius Caesar but his fathers soldiers affectionately nicknamed him Caligula little boot.a Germanicus died at Antioch in 19 and Agrippina returned with her six children to Rome where she became entangled in a bitter feud with Emperor Tiberius who was Germanicus biological uncle and adoptive father. The conflict eventually led to the destruction of her family with Caligula as the sole male survivor. In 26 Tiberius withdrew from public life to the island of Capri and in 31 Caligula joined him there. Tiberius died in 37 and Caligula succeeded him as emperor at the age of 24. Of the few surviving sources about Caligula and his fouryear reign most were written by members of the nobility and senate long after the events they purport to describe. They portray Caligula as a noble and moderate emperor during the first six months of his rule but increasingly selfindulgent cruel sadistic extravagant and sexually perverted thereafter an insane tyrant who demanded and received worship as a living god and planned to make his horse a consul. Most modern commentaries seek to explain Caligulas position personality and historical context. Many of the allegations against him are dismissed as misunderstandings exaggeration mockery or malicious fantasy. During his brief reign Caligula worked to increase the unconstrained personal power of the emperor as opposed to countervailing powers within the principate. He directed much of his attention to ambitious construction projects and luxurious dwellings for himself. He began the construction of two aqueducts in Rome the Aqua Claudia and the Anio Novus. During his reign the empire annexed the client kingdom of Mauretania as a province. He had to abandon an attempted invasion of Britain and the installation of his statue in the Temple of Jerusalem. In early 41 Caligula was assassinated as a result of a conspiracy by officers of the Praetorian Guard senators and courtiers. At least some of the conspirators might have planned this as an opportunity to restore the Roman Republic and aristocratic privileges but if so their plan was thwarted by the Praetorians who seem to have spontaneously chosen Caligulas uncle Claudius as the next emperor. Caligulas death marked the official end of the Julii Caesares in the male line though the JulioClaudian dynasty continued to rule until the demise of Caligulas nephew the Emperor Nero. Early lifeedit See also JulioClaudian family tree Left Marble portrait of Agrippina Caligulas mother Right Marble portrait of Germanicus Caligulas father Caligula was born in Antium on 31 August AD 12 the third of six surviving children of Germanicus and his wife and second cousin Agrippina the Elder. Germanicus was a grandson of Mark Antony and Agrippina was the daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa and Julia the Elder making her the granddaughter of Augustus.2 The future emperor Claudius was Caligulas paternal uncle.3 Caligula had two older brothers Nero and Drusus and three younger sisters Agrippina the Younger Julia Drusilla and Julia Livilla.24 At the age of two or three he accompanied his father Germanicus on campaigns in the north of Germania.5 He wore a miniature soldiers outfit devised by his mother to please the troops including army boots caligae and armour.5 The soldiers nicknamed him Caligula little boot. Winterling believes he would have enjoyed the attention of the soldiers to whom he was something of a mascot though he later grew to dislike the nickname.67 Germanicus was a respected immensely popular figure among his troops and Roman civilians of every class. He died after a lingering illness at Antioch Syria in AD 19 aged only 33 convinced that he had been poisoned by an enemy.
8 b Many believed that he had been killed at the behest of his uncle the reigning emperor Tiberius who saw him as a potential rival.910 After the death of his father Caligula lived with his mother Agrippina. She made no secret of her imperial ambitions for herself and her sons and in consequence her relations with Tiberius rapidly deteriorated.11 Tiberius believed himself under constant threat from treason conspiracy and political rivalry. He forbade Agrippina to remarry for fear that a remarriage would serve her personal ambition and introduce yet another threat to himself.1213 Agrippina and Caligulas brother Nero were banished in the year 29 on charges of treason.1415 The adolescent Caligula was sent to live with his greatgrandmother Tiberius mother Livia. After her death two years later he was sent to live with his grandmother Antonia Minor.11 In the year 30 Tiberius had Caligulas brothers Drusus and Nero declared public enemies by the Senate. Drusus was imprisoned and Nero was exiled.1516 Caligula and his three sisters remained in Italy as hostages of Tiberius kept under close watch.17 In the year 31 at the age of 19 Caligula was remanded to the personal care of Tiberius at Villa Jovis on Capri. He lived there for six years.11 Roman historians describe Caligula at this time as a firstrate orator wellinformed cultured and intelligent an excellent natural actor who recognized the danger he was in and hid his resentment of Tiberius maltreatment of himself and his family behind such an obsequious manner that it was said of him that there had never been a better slave or a worse master.111819 A Roman caliga after which the name Caligula derived. This piece was excavated near Xanten where Caligula was stationed with his parents during military campaigns in Germania Reconstruction drawing of the Villa Jovis on Capri where Caligula grew up at the court of Tiberius Caligula was befriended by Tiberius Praetorian prefect Naevius Sutorius Macro. Macro had been active in the downfall of Sejanus his ambitious and manipulative predecessor in office and was a trusted communicant between the emperor and his senate in Rome.1320 Macro spoke well of Caligula to Tiberius attempting to quell any ill will or suspicion the Emperor held towards the youth Macro also saved Caligulas life on several occasions.21 In 33 Tiberius gave the 
20 yearold Caligula an honorary quaestorship the lowestranking office in the cursus honorum course of offices Caligula held this very junior post as a member of the Senate until his rise to emperor.22 Meanwhile both Caligulas mother and his brother Drusus died in prison Nero died in exile.23 In the same year Tiberius arranged Caligulas marriage to Junia Claudilla daughter of one of Tiberius most influential allies in the Senate Marcus Junius Silanus. Claudilla died in childbirth the following year along with her baby.20 In the year 35 Caligula was named joint heir to Tiberius estate along with Tiberius Gemellus Tiberius grandson.24 Gemellus was Caligulas junior by seven years not yet an adult but was otherwise a viable candidate for the throne Tiberius seemed in good health and likely to survive to Gemellus majority. In Philos account Tiberius was genuinely fond of Gemellus and feared for his safety should Caligula come to power. He also doubted Gemellus personal capacity to rule. Suetonius claims that Tiberius ever mistrustful but still shrewd in his mid
70 s saw through Caligulas apparent selfpossession to an underlying erratic and unreliable temperament not one to be trusted in government. Suetonius claims that Caligula was by this time already cruel and vicious and that Tiberius deliberately indulged the young mans taste for theatre dance and singing in the hope that this would help soften his otherwise savage nature he used to say now and then that to allow Gaius to live would prove the ruin of himself and of all men and that he was rearing a viper for the Roman people and a Phaethon for the world.25 Winterling points out that this judgment draws on later not particularly accurate accounts of Caligulas rule and credits Tiberius with a knowledge of human nature which in reality was not only foreign to him but famously unsound. At Capri Caligula learned to dissimulate. He probably owed his life to that and as all the ancient sources agree to Macro.
26 c Many believed that given a little more time Tiberius would have eliminated Caligula as a possible successor but died before this could be done.2728 Emperoredit Caligula Depositing the Ashes of his Mother and Brother in the Tomb of his Ancestors by Eustache Le Sueur 1647. Tiberius died hated by his subjects on 16 March AD 37 a day before the Liberalia festival. Suetonius and Tacitus repeat rumours that Caligula possibly assisted by Macro smothered Tiberius with a pillow.202930 Philo leading JewishGreek philosopher and diplomat who wrote during Tiberius reign and Josephus Romanised writer who served Nero a generation later describe Tiberius death as natural.3132 On the same day Caligula was hailed as emperor by members of the Praetorian guard at Misenum. His leadership of the domus Caesaris Caesars household as its sole heir and pater familias was ratified by the senate who acclaimed him imperator two days later. When he arrived in Rome on 28 or 29 March the Senate conferred on him the right and power to decide on all affairs3334 in a single day the 
25 yearold Caligula untrained and virtually unknown to most Romans was granted the same trappings and powers that Augustus had accumulated over a lifetime. Until his first formal meeting with the Senate Caligula desisted from using the titles they had granted him. His studied deference must have gone some way to reassure the more astute of their number some of whom must have resented the political manipulations that led to this extraordinary settlement. Caligula was now entitled to make break or ignore any laws he chose. 35 To legalise Caligulas succession the Senate was compelled to constitutionally describe and define his role but the rites and sacrifices to the living genius of the emperor already acknowledged his constitutionally unlimited powers over his friends and opponents alike. Beginning with Augustus each princeps was a monarch who must play the challenging role of primus inter pares first among equals not through the exercise of policy but through selfrestraint decorum persuasion and above all tact personal qualities in increasingly short supply to Caligula during his brief reign36 Caligulas father Germanicus had been a superb diplomat and a skilled orator. Caligula showed the beginnings of a considerable talent for oratory and diplomacy but once he became emperor he tended to speak his mind something Barrett describes as being of little value in politics.373839 Caligula dutifully asked the Senate to approve the deification of his predecessor but was turned down in line with senatorial and popular opinion regarding the dead emperors worth. Caligula did not push the issue he had made the necessary gesture of filial respect. He gave Tiberius a magnificent funeral at public expense and a tearful eulogy.40 Tiberius will naming two heirs was annulled with the standard justification that he had been insane incapable of good judgment.2941 Caligula continued to benefit from Macros knowledge and advice concerning the behaviour and manners appropriate to a princeps at banquets games law courts debates and receptions of foreign dignitaries. Caligula took up a first consulship on 1 July two months after succession. He refused the title pater patriae father of the fatherland on the grounds of his youth until 21 September 37. A short time after he fell seriously ill through unknown causes and hovered between life and death. He was still a very popular emperor and Romes public places were filled with citizens who implored the gods for his recovery some even offering their own lives in exchange. By late October Caligula had recovered and embarked on what seems to have been a purge of suspected opponents.42 Gemellus having been happily adopted into the Imperial dynasty as Caligulas son and given the adult toga virilis was charged with having taken an antidote implicitly accusing Caligula of wanting to poison him he was forced to kill himself. Tiberius political associate Silanus senior senator exconsul formerly Caligulas fatherinlaw and criticised by the historian Tacitus for his servile attitude was executed as a supporter of Gemellus in early 38 Caligula forced suicide on his Praetorian Prefect Macro without whose help and protection he would not have survived let alone gained the throne as sole ruler.4344 These purges suggest to Weidemann that the new emperor had learnt a great deal from Tiberius and that attempts to divide his reign into a good beginning followed by unremitting atrocities... are misplaced.45 This division of Caligulas rule into good and bad phases has variously been attributed to the death of Antonia in summer 37 Caligulas illness in autumn that year or the death of Caligulas beloved sister Drusilla on 10 June AD 
38.4 6 During his illness in AD 37 and after Gemellus death Caligula named his brotherinlaw Marcus Aemilius Lepidus as heir marrying him to his sister Drusilla. Ancient sources allege that he and Lepidus were homosexual lovers. Drusilla died in June AD 38 and was deified in September the same year.47 Public reactionsedit Philo describes Caligula as the first emperor admired by all the world from the rising to the setting sun.48 Suetonius writes that Caligula was loved by many for being the beloved son of the popular Germanicus49 and for not being Tiberius.50 Three months of public rejoicing ushered in the new reign.51 Philo describes the first seven months of Caligulas reign as a Golden Age of happiness and prosperity.52 Although Tiberius will had been legally set aside Caligula honoured many of its terms. Tiberius had provided each praetorian guardsman with a generous gratitude payment of 500 sesterces. Caligula doubled this and took credit for its payment as an act of personal generosity4153 he also paid bonuses to the city troops and the army outside Italy.
41 d Every citizen in Rome was given 150 sesterces and heads of households twice that amount. Building projects on the Palatine hill and elsewhere were also announced which would have been the largest of these expenditures.53 Caligula made a public show of burning Tiberius secret papers which outlined many of the senates various acts of villainy betrayal and treason against Tiberius. Caligula claimed  falsely as it later turned out  that he had read none of these documents before burning them. He used coinage issues to advertise his restoration of the rule of law and reduced a backlog of court cases in Rome by adding more jurors and suspending the requirement that sentences be confirmed by imperial office.54 Stressing his descent from Augustus he went in person to retrieve the remains of his mother and brothers for interment in the Mausoleum of Augustus.4555 He granted his sisters and other family members including Claudius  who had not been recognised as a member of the imperial household during Tiberius reign  political and priestly honours. He began work on a temple to Livia widow of Augustus she held the honorific title of Augusta while still living and when she died was eventually made a diva goddess of the Roman state under Claudius. The temple had been vowed in her lifetime but not constructed.45 Claudius was made Caligulas consular colleague in the new emperors first consulship. Public profileedit Caligula shared many of the popular passions and enthusiasms of the lower classes and young aristocrats public spectacles particularly gladiator contests chariot and horse racing the theatre and gambling. He trained with professional gladiators and staged exceptionally lavish gladiator games being granted exemption by the senate from the sumptuary laws that limited the number of gladiators to be kept in Rome. He largely ignored Macros advice concerning imperial etiquette. Unlike his imperial predecessors he was openly and vocally partisan in his uninhibited support or disapproval of particular charioteers racing teams gladiators and actors shouting encouragement or scorn sometimes singing along with paid performers or declaiming the actors lines and generally behaving as one of the crowd. In chariot races he supported the Greens and raced as a member of the Green faction. Most of Romes upper class would have thought this an unacceptable indignity for any of the elite let alone their emperor.5657 In these public appearances Caligula seems to have shown little respect for distinctions of rank status or privilege least of all to the senate whose members Tiberius had once described as men ready to be slaves. Among those Caligula recalled from exile were actors and other public performers who had somehow caused Tiberius offence.5358 On the whole Caligula seems to have been most comfortable in the undemanding company of infames disreputable public performers and the lower nobility equestrians rather than with the senators and nobles whom he clearly and openly despised and humiliated for their insincere simulations of loyalty.39 Roman sources claim that Caligula forced equestrians and senators to fight in the arena as gladiators.596061 Condemnation to the gladiator arena as a combatant was a standard punishment doubling as public entertainment for noncitizens found guilty of certain offences such appearances were not exclusively punitive nor reserved for the lowest classes. Laws of AD 19 by Augustus and Tiberius banned voluntary elite participation in any public spectacles. The ban which was never particularly effective was broadly ignored in Caligulas reign. To reverse declining membership of the equestrian order Caligula recruited new wealthy members empirewide and scrupulously vetted the orders membership lists for signs of dishonesty or scandal. He seems to have ignored trivial misdemeanours and would have anticipated the creation of new men novi homines in the senate house who owed him a debt of gratitude for their advancement.62 During Caligulas illness two citizens one of whom was an equestrian offered to fight as gladiators if only the gods would spare the emperors life. When Caligula recovered he seems to have called in the debt in what Winterling 2011 describes as insincere offers taken at face value cynical but not without wit of a kind.63 Conflict with the Senateedit In the course of 39 Caligulas increasingly tense relationship with his Senate deteriorated into outright hostility and confrontation.6465 Dio notes with approval that Caligula allowed some equestrians senatorial honours anticipating their later promotion to senator based on their personal merits66 he goes on to write of denunciations and trials for treason following Caligulas launch of invective at the entire senate reviewing their current and past behaviour. He accused them of servility treachery and hypocrisy in voting honours to Tiberius and Sejanus while they lived and rescinding those honours once they were safely dead. Caligulas diatribes exposed the idealised princeps or First Senator as illusion and imposture. When the senate returned next day they voted a thanksgiving to Caligula as to a monarch expressing gratitude for allowing them to live when others had died. Winterling suggests that Caligulas three subsequent consulships sworn at the Rostra were vain attempts to make amends public statements of respect for the senators as his equals.67 Barrett perceives these later consulships as symbolic of Caligulas continued intention to dominate the senate and the state.
68 e Barrett describes the change in Caligulas rule as a gradual unravelling a descent into serious mismanagement and impenetrable mistrust  and latterly into arbitrary terror.69 Caligula had not after all destroyed Tiberius records of treason trials. He reviewed them and decided that numerous senators discharged from Tiberius court hearings seemed to have been guilty of conspiracy all along against emperor and State  the worst form of maiestas treason. Tiberius treason trials had encouraged professional delatores informers who were loathed by the populace. Many of the accused had testified against each other and against Caligulas own family. If they had acted against Caligulas family then why not against Caligula himself New investigations were launched five senators including the ruling consul were found guilty and executed.706571 Others were publicly shamed and degraded.72 In early September Caligula dismissed the two suffect consuls citing their inadequate low key celebration of his birthday August 31 and excessive attention to the anniversary of Actium September 2 the last battle in a damaging civil war which he found no cause for celebration. In response to the dismissal one of the discharged consuls killed himself Caligula may have suspected him of conspiracy.73 Incitatusedit Dios outlines Caligulas supposed proposal to promote his favourite racehorse Incitatus Swift to consul and later a priest of his own cult.7475 In fact this was an extended joke created by Caligula in mockery of the senate described by Barrett as a byword for the promotion of incompetents 76 one of Caligulas many oblique malicious or darkly humorous insults mostly directed at the senatorial class but also against himself and his family. Winterling sees it as an insult to the consulars themselves not only is their position a gift from the emperor but the ability of most consular candidates is equal to that of a horse. Woods believes it unlikely that Caligula meant to insult the post of consul as he held it himself several times. Suetonius fails to get the joke but repeats it as proof of Caligulas insanity adding circumstantial details of excess and indulgence more usually expected of the senatorial class including palaces servants and golden goblets and invitations to banquets.7477 Public reform and financeedit Quadrans celebrating the abolition of a tax in AD 38 by Caligula. The obverse of the coin contains a picture of a Pileus which symbolizes the liberation of the people from the tax burden. Caption c caesar divi avg pron avg  pon m pp cos des rcc. The adlocutio cohortium of Caligula on a coin giving a speech to the army Caligula was quite capable of recognising decisions as flawed including his own or reversing them when faced with implacable opposition.78 He restored the right of the popular assembly comitia to elect magistrates on behalf of the common citizenry a right that had been taken over by the Senate under Tiberius and Augustus. The aediles elected officials who managed public games and festivals and maintained the fabric of roads and shrines would now have incentive to spend their own money on lavish spectacles to win the popular vote.53 When the Senate outright refused to accept this Caligula restored control of elections to them. Dio writes that restoring control of elections to common citizens though delighting the rabble grieved the sensible who stopped to reflect that if the offices should fall once more into the hands of the many... many disasters would result.66 In 38 Caligula lifted censorship and published accounts of public funds and expenditure. Suetonius congratulated this as the first such act by any emperor.
79 f Caligula abandoned his plan to convert the Temple of Jerusalem to a temple of the Imperial cult with a statue of himself as Zeus when told that the plan would arouse extreme protests and injure the local economy.
80 g He helped those who lost property in fires abolished certain taxes lavished gifts of money on his favourites especially charioteers and gave out prizes to the public at gymnastic events. Personal generosity and magnanimity coupled with discretion and responsibility were expected of the ruling elite and the emperor in particular.6681 Bridge at Baiaeedit In 39 or 40 according to Suetonius Caligula ordered a temporary floating bridge to be built using a double line of ships as pontoons earthsurfaced and stretching for over two miles from the resort of Baiae near Naples to the neighbouring port of Puteoli with resting places between.8283 Some ships were built on site but grain ships were requisitioned brought to site secured and temporarily resurfaced. Any practical purpose for the bridge is unclear Winterling believes that it might have been intended as a ceremonial replacement for triumphal ceremony to mark Caligulas attempted invasion of Britain.8485 A twoday ceremony was performed with offerings to the seagod Neptune and Invidia Envy and a satisfactory result in that the sea remained completely calm. The bridge was said to rival the Persian king Xerxes pontoon bridge across the Hellespont.828386 On the first day Caligula donned the supposed breastplate of Alexander the Great and rode his favourite horse Incitatus across the bridge82 perhaps defying a prediction attributed by Suetonius to Tiberius soothsayer Thrasyllus of Mendes that Caligula had no more chance of becoming emperor than of riding a horse across the Bay of Baiae.82 On the second day he rode the bridge from end to end several times at full tilt accompanied by the soldiery famous nobles and hostages. Seneca and Dio believed that grain imports were dangerously depleted by Caligulas repurposing of Romes grain ships as pontoons for how long is unknown.87 Barrett finds these accusations absurd if the bridge was finished in 39 that was far too early to have had any effect on the annual grain supply and a genuine grain crisis was simply blamed on the most outlandish episode at hand. Dio places this episode soon after Caligulas furious denunciation of the Senate Barrett speculates that Caligula may have intended the whole event as an object lesson on how completely he was in charge.88 Dio remarks the beginnings of a financial crisis in 39 and connects it to the cost of Caligulas bridgebuilding project at Baiae.43 Suetonius has presumably the same financial crisis starting in 38 he does not mention the bridge but lists a broad range of Caligulas extravagances said to have exhausted the state treasury.89 Suetonius claims that Caligula squandered 
2.7  billion sesterces in his first year.89 and addressed the consequent treasury deficit by confiscating the estates of wealthy individuals after false accusations fines or outright seizure even the death penalty. The particular circumstances of each case are not known and the victims are unnamed.90 Suetonius ignores or overlooks Caligulas inheritance of various debts and liabilities from the somewhat miserly Tiberius. They included the deceased empress Livias vast bequest which was dispersed among public private and religious beneficiaries. Barrett 2015 asserts that this massive cash injection would have given the Roman economy a tremendous boost.91 To Wilkinson Caligulas uninterrupted use of precious metals in coin issues does not suggest a bankrupt treasury though there must have been a blurring of boundaries between Caligulas personal wealth and his income as head of state.92 Caligulas immediate successor Claudius abolished taxes embarked on various costly building projects and donated 15000 sesterces to each Praetorian Guard in 413093 as his own reign began which suggests that Caligula had left him a solvent treasury.9495 In the long term the occasional windfall aside Caligulas spending exceeded his income. Fundraising through taxation became a major preoccupation. Caligula abolished some taxes but introduced an unprecedented range of new ones and made their collection a duty of the notoriously forceful Praetorian Guard. Dio and Suetonius describe these taxes as shameful if their accounts are accurate some of these taxes were remarkably petty and proved deeply unpopular. Caligula taxed taverns artisans slaves and the hiring of slaves edibles sold in the city litigation anywhere in the Empire weddings or marriages the wages of porters or perhaps couriers and most infamously a tax on prostitutes active retired or married or their pimps liable for a sum equivalent to a single transaction. Individual liabilities for all these were fairly small but Josephus claims that towards the end of Caligulas reign taxes were doubled overall and even then the revenue was nowhere near enough.209697 Much larger sums were yielded through wills or in settlement of legal conflicts. Property or money left to Tiberius but not collected on his death would have passed to Caligula as the emperors heir. Roman inheritance law recognised a legators obligation to provide for his family Caligula seems to have considered his fatherly duties to the state entitled him to a share of every will from pious subjects. The army was not exempt centurions who left nothing or too little to the emperor could be judged guilty of ingratitude and have their wills set aside. Centurions who had acquired property by plunder were forced to turn over their spoils to the state.9899 Coinageedit Caligula did not change the structure of the monetary system established by Augustus and continued by Tiberius but the contents of his coinage differed from theirs.100 The location of the imperial mint for the coins of precious metals gold and silver is a matter of debate among ancient numismatists. It seems that Caligula initially produced his precious coins from Lugdunum now Lyon France like his predecessors then moved the mint to Rome in 3738 although it is possible that this move occurred later under Nero.101 His base metal coinage was struck in Rome.102 Unlike Tiberius whose coins remained almost unchanged throughout his reign Caligula used a variety of types mostly featuring Divus Augustus as well as his parents Germanicus and Agrippina his dead brothers Nero and Drusus and his three sisters Agrippina Drusilla and Livilla. The reason for the extensive emphasis on his relatives was to highlight Caligulas double claim to the Principate from both the Julian and Claudian sides of the dynasty and to call for the unity of the family.103 The sesterce with his three sisters was discontinued after 39 due to Caligulas suspicion regarding their loyalty. He also made a sesterce celebrating the Praetorian cohorts as a mean to give them the bequest of Tiberius at the beginning of his reign. Caligula minted a quadrans a small bronze coin to mark the abolition of the ducentesima a 
0.5  tax on sales.104 The output of the precious metal mints was small and his sesterces were mostly made in limited quantities which make his coins now very rare. This rarity cannot be attributed to Caligulas damnatio memoriae reported by Dio as removing his coins from circulation would have been impossible besides Mark Antonys coins continued to circulate for two centuries after his death.105 Caligulas common coins are base metal types with Vesta Germanicus and Agrippina the Elder and the most common is an as with his grandfather Agrippa.104 Finally Caligula kept open the mint at Caesarea in Cappadocia which had been created by Tiberius in order to pay military expenses in the province with silver drachmae.106 Numismatists Harold Mattingly and Edward Sydenham consider that the artistic style of Caligulas coins is below those of Tiberius and Claudius they especially criticize the portraits which are too hard and lack details.106 Constructionedit In the city of Rome Caligula completed the temple of Augustus and the theatre of Pompey began an amphitheatre beside the Saepta and enlarged the imperial palace.107108 Later he began the construction of aqueducts Aqua Claudia and Anio Novus which Pliny the Elder considered to be engineering marvels.107109110 Caligula then built a large racetrack now known as the circus of Gaius and Nero and had an Egyptian obelisk now known as the Vatican obelisk transported by sea and erected in the middle of Rome.111 Construction of the aqueduct Porta Maggiore started under his rule. At Syracuse he repaired the city walls and temples.107 He had new roads built and pushed to keep roads in good condition throughout the empire to this end Caligula investigated the financial affairs of current and past highway commissioners. Those guilty of negligence embezzlement or misuse of funds were forced to repay what they had dishonestly used or fulfil their commissions at their own expense.8998112 Caligula had planned to rebuild the palace of Polycrates at Samos to finish the temple of Didymaean Apollo at Ephesus and to found a city high up in the Alps. He also intended to dig a canal through the Isthmus of Corinth in Greece and sent a chief centurion to survey the work.107 Among Caligulas various public works Josephus mentions only the largescale harbour extension at Rhegium and Sicily as being of benefit.113 It was probably intended to manage increased grain imports from Egypt. It was too far south to supply the city of Rome so it might have been meant to supply Southern Italy. It was not finished.114 Ships at Nemiedit See also Caligulas Giant Ship Reconstruction drawing of a palatial Nemi Ship of Caligula by CM KnightSmith c. 1906115 Caligula had two very large ships constructed at Lake Nemi. One was a floating palace with plumbing and marble floors and the other slightly smaller was a floating temple to Diana.116117 Germany and the Rhine frontieredit In late 39 or early 40 Caligula ordered the concentration of military forces and supplies in upper Germany and made his way there with a baggage train that supposedly included actors gladiators women and a detachment of Praetorians. He might have meant to follow the paths of his father and grandfather and attack the Germanic tribes along the upper Rhine but he was illprepared and retreated in a panic. According to Dio his achievement was negligible. Caligula used the opportunity to seize the wealth of rich allies whom he conveniently suspected of treason putting some to death on the grounds that they were plotting or rebelling.118 Caligula accused the Imperial legate Gaetulicus of nefarious plots conspiracy and had him executed  according to Dio he was killed for being popular with his troops.119 Lepidus along with Caligulas two sisters Agrippina and Livilla was accused of being part of this conspiracy he too was executed and Caligulas two sisters were exiled after being condemned pro forma of adultery.120121 A senatorial embassy was sent from Rome headed by Caligulas uncle Claudius congratulating the emperor for escaping this latest conspiracy. It met with a hostile reception in which Claudius was ducked in the Rhine. Very late in his reign possibly in its last few days Caligula sent a communique in preparation for his imminent ovation in Rome following his military activities in the North and his suppression of Lepidus. He announced that he would only be returning to those who wanted him back to the Equestrians and the People he did not mention the Senate or senators of whom he had grown increasingly mistrustful.122 Caligulas auctionsedit In late 39 Caligula wintered at Lugdunum modern Lyon in Gaul where he auctioned off his sisters portable property including their jewellery slaves and freedmen. Lugdunum was a wealthy provincial capital and elite bidders were seemingly prepared to pay far more than items were worth to show their loyalty. Caligula is said to have auctioned off gladiators to wealthy spectators after matches using intimidation and various auctioneers tricks and tactics to boost prices.123 Caligulas auctions of his surviving gladiators after arena matches are said to have been extremely profitable but the context and locations are confused. In an event that Suetonius describes as well known a Praetorian gentleman nodding off after a match woke to find that he had bought 13 gladiators for the vastly overinflated sum of 9 million sesterces.124 Caligulas first Lugdunum auction proved such a successful fundraiser that he had many of the furnishings of his palace in Rome carted to Lugdunum and auctioned off they included many precious family heirlooms. Caligula recited their provenance during the auction in an attempt to help ensure a fair return on objects intrinsically valuable and seemingly much sought after by the wealthy for their Imperial associations.123 Income from this second auction was relatively lower. Kleijwegt 1996 describes Caligulas performance as vendor and auctioneer at this second auction as completely out of character with the image of a tyrant. Auctions of Imperial property were acceptable ways to balance the books practiced by Augustus and later by Trajan they were expected to benefit the bidders as well as the vendor Roman auctioneers were held in very low esteem but Kleijwegt claims that Caligula seems to have behaved more like a benevolent princeps in this second auction without malice greed or intimidation.90123125126 Western expansionedit Map of the Roman Empire and neighboring states during the reign of Gaius Caligula AD 3741 Italy and Roman provinces Independent countries Client states Roman puppets Mauretania seized by Caligula Former Roman provinces Thrace and Commagena made client states by Caligula In 40 Caligula expanded the Roman Empire into Mauretania2 a client kingdom of Rome ruled by Ptolemy of Mauretania. Caligula invited Ptolemy to Rome and then suddenly had him executed.127 Mauretania was annexed by Caligula and subsequently divided into two provinces Mauretania Tingitana and Mauretania Caesariensis separated by the river Malua.128 Pliny claims that division was the work of Caligula but Dio states that in 42 an uprising took place which was subdued by Gaius Suetonius Paulinus and Gnaeus Hosidius Geta and the division only took place after this.129 This confusion might mean that Caligula decided to divide the province but the division was postponed because of the rebellion. The first known equestrian governor of the two provinces was Marcus Fadius Celer Flavianus in office in 
44.1 30 Details on the Mauretanian events of 3944 are unclear. Cassius Dio wrote an entire chapter on the annexation of Mauretania by Caligula but it is now lost.131 Caligulas move seemingly had a strictly personal political motive  fear and jealousy of his cousin Ptolemy  and thus the expansion may not have been prompted by pressing military or economic needs.132 The rebellion of Tacfarinas had shown how exposed Africa Proconsularis was to its west and how the Mauretanian client kings were unable to provide protection to the province and it is thus possible that Caligulas expansion was a prudent response to potential future threats.130 Britannia and the Northedit In the spring of 40 Caligula tried to extend Roman rule into Britannia.2 Two legions had been raised for this purpose both likely named Primigeniae in honour of Caligulas newborn daughter. Ancient sources depict Caligula as being too cowardly to have attacked or as mad but stories of his threatening a decimation of his troops indicate mutinies. Broadly it is impossible to judge why the army never embarked on the invasion. Beyond mutinies it may have simply been that British chieftains acceded to Romes demands removing any justification for war.131133 Alternatively it could have been merely a training and scouting mission134 or a short expedition to accept the surrender of the British chieftain Adminius.135136 Suetonius reports that Caligula ordered his men to collect seashells as spoils of the sea this may also be a mistranslation of musculi meaning siege engines.133137 The conquest of Britannia was later achieved during the reign of his successor Claudius. Judaea and Egyptedit Caligulas reign saw an increase of tensions between Jews native to their homeland of Judea Jews of the diaspora and ethnic Greeks. Greeks and Jews had settled throughout the Roman Empire and Judaea was ruled as a Roman client kingdom. Jews and Greeks had settled in Egypt following its conquest by Macedonian Greeks and remained there after its conquest by Rome. 138 The causes of tensions between these communities were complex involving the spread of Greek culture Roman law and the rights of Jews in the empire and differences in religious practices and prohibitions. While the Alexandrian Greeks held citizen status Alexandrian Jews were classified as mere settlers with no citizen rights. The Greeks feared that official recognition of Jews as citizens would undermine their own status and privilege.139 When Caligula became emperor he appointed his good friend Herod Agrippa as governor of Batanaea and Trachonitis.140141 Caligula did not trust the prefect of Egypt Aulus Avilius Flaccus. Flaccus had been loyal to Tiberius had conspired against Caligulas mother and had connections with Egyptian separatists.142 In 38 Caligula sent Agrippa to Alexandria unannounced to check on Flaccus.143 According to Philo the visit was met with jeers from the Greek population who saw Agrippa as the king of the Jews.144 In Philos account a mob of Greeks broke into synagogues to erect statues of Caligula against Jewish religious law. Flaccus responded by declaring the Jews foreigners and aliens and expelled them from all but one of Alexandrias five districts where they lived under dreadful conditions. Philo gives an account of various atrocities inflicted on Alexandrias Jews within and around this ghetto by the citys Greek population.145 Caligula held Flaccus responsible for the disturbances exiled him and eventually executed him.146147 In 39 Agrippa accused his uncle Herod Antipas the tetrarch of Galilee and Perea of planning a rebellion against Roman rule with the help of Parthia. Herod Antipas confessed and Caligula exiled him. Agrippa was rewarded with his territories.148 Riots again erupted in Alexandria in 40 between Jews and Greeks when Jews who refused to worship the emperor as a god were accused of not honouring him.149 In the Judaean city of Jamnia resident Greeks built an insultingly shoddy altar to the Imperial cult using the cheapest possible materials. Jews immediately tore it down.150 In response Caligula ordered the erection of a statue of himself in the Jewish Temple of Jerusalem151152 a political rather than a religious act for Rome but deeply irreligious for the Jews and in conflict with Jewish monotheism. In this context Philo wrote that Caligula regarded the Jews with most especial suspicion as if they were the only persons who cherished wishes opposed to his.153 The Governor of Syria Publius Petronius fearing civil war if the order were carried out delayed implementing it for nearly a year.154 Agrippa eventually helped persuade Caligula to cancel the order.149 Then Caligula changed his mind again issued a second order to have his statue erected in the Temple of Jerusalem and threatened Petronius with forced suicide if he failed. In Rome another colossal statue of himself was cast gilded and despatched. According to Josephus the ship carrying the second statue was still underway when news of Caligulas death reached Petronius so that Caligulas plan was abandoned and the statue was never installed.155 Philo reports a rumour that in the year 40 Caligula announced to the Senate that he planned to leave Rome permanently move to Alexandria and rule from there as a divine monarch a Roman pharaoh. Philo is the only source for this but very similar rumours attended Julius Caesars last days up to his assassination and much to his discredit. Caligulas ancestor Mark Antony took refuge there with Cleopatra. Augustus had made Egypt a socalled Imperial province under his direct control rather than that of the Senate. It was the main source of Italys grain supply and was administered by members of the equestrian order who were directly responsible to the ruling emperor. Senators had very little control of its affairs despite their higher status Egypt was more or less Caligulas property to dispose of as he wished. It was a source of fascination to Romans strange and exotic a hotbed of immorality and corruption. Roman knowledge of pharaonic brothersister marriages would have shored up the many flimsy scandalised allegations of adolescent incest between Caligula and Drusilla supposedly discovered by Antonia but reported as rumour and only by Suetonius. Barrett advises a skeptical approach.156157158 Religionedit Cameo depicting Caligula and Roma a personification of Rome For the first six months of his reign Caligula made a good impression on his senatorial colleagues in government refusing costly honours such as statuary of himself and apparently promising to share power with his senate as primus inter pares first among equals but at some time early in his short reign possibly following a nearmortal illness of late 37 AD this changed. Philo Caligulas contemporary claims that Caligula costumed himself as various heroes and deities starting with demigods such as Dionysos Herakles and the Dioscuri and working up to major deities such as Mercury Venus and Apollo. Philo describes these impersonations in a context of private pantomime or theatrical performances as evidence that Caligula wanted to be a god himself and be venerated as such while living. To Philo as a Jew and a monotheist this was proof of the emperors insanity159160 however early in his imperial career Augustus had thrown a party in which he and his guests dressed up as the Olympian gods Augustus was made up and dressed as Apollo. Noone was thought insane in consequence and none claimed to be the god they impersonated but the event proved a public relations nightmare in scandalously bad taste. Augustus did not repeat it.161162163 Dio claims that Caligula impersonated Jupiter to seduce various women that he sometimes referred to himself as a divinity in public meetings and that he was sometimes referred to as Jupiter in public documents. Caligulas special interest in Jupiter as Romes chief deity is confirmed by all surviving sources. Simpson believes that Caligula may have considered Jupiter an equal perhaps a rival.164165166 To Gradel Caligulas performances as various deities prove no more than a penchant for theatrical fancydress and a mischievous desire to shock as emperor Caligula was also pontifex maximus one of Romes most powerful and influential state priests.167 The promotion of mortals to godlike status based on their superior standing and perceived merits was also a well established feature of Roman culture a client could flatter their living patron as Jupiter on Earth without reprimand.168 Cicero could protest at the implications of Caesars divine honours but address Publius Lentulus as parens ac deus parent and god to thank him for his help as aedile against the conspirator Catiline. Daily reverence was offered as a matter of course to patrons heads of household and the powerful by their clients families and social inferiors. In 30 BC libationofferings to the genius of Octavian later Augustus became a duty at public and private banquets and from 12 BC state oaths were sworn by the genius of Augustus as the living emperor.169170 Notwithstanding Dios claims that cult to living emperors was excluded from Rome itself there is abundant evidence of municipal cult to Augustus in Italy and elsewhere localy organised and financed. As Gradel observes no Roman was ever prosecuted for sacrificing to his emperor.171 Caligula seems to have taken his own religious duties very seriously. He found a replacement for the aged priest of Diana at Lake Nemi reorganised the Salii priests of Mars and pedantically insisted that as it was nefas religiously improper for Jupiters leading priest the Flamen Dialis to swear any oath he could not swear the imperial oath of loyalty.1
72 h Caligula wished to take over or share the halffinished but splendid Temple of Apollo for his own cult. Seemingly his statue was prepared but when Pausanias visited the stillunfinished temple its cult statue was of Apollo.173 Contemporary statue portraying Caligula in his capacity as pontifex maximus Suetonius and Dio mention a temple to Caligula in the city of Rome. Most modern scholarship agrees that if such a temple existed it was probably on the Palatine.174 Augustus had already linked the Temple of Castor and Pollux directly to his imperial residence on the Palatine and established an official priesthood of lesser magistrates to serve its cults the seviri Augustales usually promoted from his own freedmen to serve the genius Augusti his family spirit and Lares the twin ancestral spirits of his household.175 Dio claims that Caligula stationed himself to receive veneration dressed as Jupiter Latiaris between the images of Castor and Pollux the twin Dioscuri to whom he humorously referred as his doorkeepers.75176177 Dios claim that two temples were built for Caligula in Rome75 is unconfirmed. Simpson believes it likely that Caligula voted a temple on the Palatine by the Senate funded it himself.178 An embassy from Greek states to Rome greeted Caligula as the new god Augustus. In the Greek city of Cyzicus a public inscription from the beginning of Caligulas reign gives thanks to him as a New Sungod.179 Egyptian provincial coinage and some state dupondii show Caligula enthroned the first reigning Roman princeps to be described as the New Sun Neos Helios with the radiate crown of the Sungod or of Caligulas divine antecedent the divus Augustus. Caligulas image on other state coinage carries no such trappings of divinity.180 Compared to the fullblown cults to major deities of state genius cults were quite modest in scope. Augustus once deceased was officially worshipped as a divus  immortal but somewhat less than a fullblown deity Tiberius his successor forbade his own personal cult outright in Rome itself probably in consideration of Julius Caesars assassination following his hubristic promotion as a living divinity.181 Caligula sold priesthoods for his unofficial genius cult to the wealthiest nobles for a per capita fee of 10 million sesterces. His priests supposedly included his wife Caesonia and his uncle Claudius whom Dio claims was bankrupted by the cost.182 The circumstances mark this out as private cult and personal humiliation among the wealthy elite not subsidised by the Roman state. Throughout his reign Caligula seems to have remained popular with the masses in Rome and the empire. There is no sound evidence that he caused the removal replacement or imposition of Roman or other deities or even that he threatened to do so outside the hostile anecdotes of his biographers. Barrett 2015 asserts that the emphatic and unequivocal message of the material evidence is that Caligula had no desire for the world to identify him as a god even if like most people he enjoyed being treated like one.183 He seems to have taken his own genius cult very seriously. Caligulas fatal offense was to willfully insult or offend everyone who mattered including the military officers who assassinated him.184185 Assassination and aftermathedit The Assassination of the Emperor Caligula by Lazzaro Baldi between 1624 and 1703 On 24 January 41187 the day before his due departure for Alexandria Caligula was assassinated by the Praetorian tribunes Cassius Chaerea and Cornelius Sabinus and a number of centurions. Josephus names many of Caligulas inner circle as conspirators and Dio seems to have had access to a senatorial version which purported to name many others. More likely very few conspirators would have been involved and not all need have been directly in touch with each other. The fewer who knew the greater the chance of success. Previous attempts had foundered or faded out when faced with the rewards and risks of betrayal by colleagues whether through torture fear of torture or promised reward. The Senate was a disunited body of selfinterested wealthy and mistrustful aristocrats unwilling to risk their own prospects and determined to present a virtuous selfless front.188189 In Josephus account of Caligulas assassination Chaerea was a noble idealist deeply committed to Republican liberties he was also motivated by resentment of Caligulas routine personal insults and mockery.190191 Suetonius and all other sources confirm that Caligula had insulted Chaerea giving him watchwords like the ribald Priapus or Venus the latter said to refer to Chaereas weak high voice and either his softhearted attitude when collecting taxes or his collection of the tax on prostitutes. He was also known to do Caligulas dirty work for him including torture.59192193194195 Chaerea Sabinus and others accosted Caligula as he addressed an acting troupe of young men beneath the palace during a series of games and dramatics being held for the Divus Augustus.196 The source details vary but all agree that Chaerea was first to stab Caligula.192196197 The narrow space available offered little room for escape or rescue and by the time Caligulas loyal Germanic guard could come to his defence their Emperor was already dead. They killed several of Caligulas party including some innocent senators and bystanders. The killing only stopped when the Praetorians took control.1961981
99 i Josephus reports that the Senate tried to use Caligulas death as an opportunity to restore the Republic. This would have meant the abolition of the office of emperor the end of dynastic rule and restoration of the former social stature and privilege of nobles and senators.200 At least one senator Lucius Annius Vinicianus seems to have thought it an opportunity for a takeover. Some modern scholars believe he was the conspiracys main instigator.189 Most ordinary citizens were taken aback by Caligulas murder and found no cause to celebrate in losing the benefits of his rule. Almost all the named conspirators were from the elite. When Caligulas death was confirmed the nobles and senators who had prospered through hypocrisy and sycophancy during his reign dared to claim prior knowledge of the plot and therefore shared the credit for its success with their peers. Others sought to distance themselves from anything to do with the assassination.201 The assassins fearing continued support for Caligulas family and allies sought out and murdered Caligulas wife Caesonia and their young daughter Julia Drusilla202 but were unable to reach Caligulas uncle Claudius. In the traditional account a soldier Gratus found Claudius hiding behind a palace curtain. A sympathetic faction of the Praetorian Guard smuggled him out to their nearby camp203 and nominated him as emperor. The Senate faced with what now seemed inevitable made Claudius emperor. Caligulas most powerful and universally feared adviser the freedman Callistus may have engineered this succession having discreetly shifted his loyalty from Caligula to Claudius while Caligula lived.204 The killing of Caligula had been extralegal without due process of law and those who carried it out had broken their oaths of loyalty. It was tantamount to regicide. Claudius as a prospective replacement for Caligula could acknowledge his predecessors failings but could not be seen to condone his murder or find fault with the principate as an institution. Caligula had been popular with a clear majority of Romes lesser citizenry and the Senate could not afford to ignore the fact. Claudius appointed a new Praetorian prefect and executed Chaerea a tribune named Lupus and the centurions involved. He allowed Sabinus to commit suicide.205206 Claudius refused the Senates requests to formally declare Caligula hostis a public enemy or condemn his memory see damnatio memoriae. He also turned down a proposal to officially condemn all the Caesars and destroy their temples. Caligulas name was removed from the official lists of oaths and dedications certain of Caligulas statues and inscriptions were discreetly removed but most of his statues had the heads recut to resemble Augustus or Claudius or in one case Nero who would suffer a similar fate.207208209210 According to Suetonius Caligulas body was placed under turf until it was burned and entombed by his sisters.211212 Private lifeedit Caligulas first wife was Junia Claudia daughter of exconsul Marcus Junius Silanus. Like most marriages in Romes upper echelons this was a political alliance. Junia died in childbirth along with her baby less than a year later.213 Soon after Macro seems to have persuaded his wife Ennia Thrasylla to take up a sexual affair with Caligula perhaps to help him through the loss. The sources are somewhat contradictory on the matter of Caligulas sex life. He is said to have had enormous appetites several mistresses and male lovers but in relation to the alleged perversions practised at Corfu by Tiberius and in some sources by himself he appears remarkably prudish in expelling the spintriae from the island on his accession.214215216 He was briefly married to Livia Orestilla. His marriage to the Beautiful... very wealthy and extravagant Lollia Paulina was quickly followed by divorce. His fourth and last marriage to Caesonia seems to have been a lovematch in which he was both uxorious and monogamous and fathered a daughter whom Caligula named Julia Drusilla in commemoration of his late sister.217 Caligulas contemporaries could not understand Caesonias appeal to Caligula. Against the tales of his sexual dynamism some believed that Caesonia had to arouse his interest with a love potion which turned his mind and brought on his madness.218219 Allegations of incest between Caligula and his sisters or just he and his favourite Drusilla go back no further than Suetonius who admits that in his own time they were hearsay. Seneca and Philo moralistic contemporaries of Caligula do not mention these stories even when after Caligulas death it would have been safe to do so. Then and now allegations of incest fit the amoral mad Emperor stereotype promiscuous with money sex and the lives of his subjects. Dio repeats as fact the allegation that Caligula had improper relations with his two older sisters Agrippina and Livilla.220221 Marble bust of Caligula with traces of original paint beside a plaster replica trying to recreate the polychrome traditions of ancient sculpture Socalled little bust of Caligula found in the River Tiber in Rome Source opinionsedit Roman sesterce depicting Caligula AD 38. The reverse shows Caligulas three sisters Agrippina Drusilla and Livilla with whom Caligula was rumoured to have carried on incestuous relationships. Caption C. CAESAR AVG. GERMANICVS PON. M. TR. POT.  AGRIPPINA DRVSILLA IVLIA S. C. There is no real or reliable evidence of Caligulas mental state at any time in his life. In the course of their narratives all the primary and contemporary sources give reasons to discredit and ultimately condemn him for offences against proprieties of class or religion or both. They are unreliable guides to Caligula himself or his motives. Thus his acts should be seen from other angles and the search for mad Caligula abandoned.222223 Philo and Seneca the Younger contemporaries of Caligula describe him as insane selfabsorbed and shorttempered murderous profligate and sexually voracious.224225226 He is accused of sleeping with other mens wives and bragging about it227 and killing for mere amusement.151224225 Once at some games at which he was presiding he was said to have ordered his guards to throw an entire section of the audience into the arena during the intermission to be eaten by the wild beasts because there were no prisoners to be used and he was bored.43 Barrett considered Dios report to be a garbled version of Suetonius account that Caligula resorted to feeding criminals to wild beasts when the cost of using cattle became too excessive.228 While repeating these earlier stories the later sources of Suetonius and Cassius Dio accuse Caligula of incest with his sisters Agrippina the Younger Drusilla and Livilla and say that he prostituted them to other men.121229230 They also mention sexual affairs with various men including his brotherinlaw Marcus Lepidus.231232 They say he sent troops on illogical military exercises131233 and turned the palace into a brothel.234 Philo Josephus and Seneca see Caligulas apparent insanity as a personality trait accentuated through selfindulgence and the unlimited exercise of power.148235236 Seneca states that Caligula became arrogant angry and insulting once he became emperor.237 Philo claims that Caligula became more ruthless after nearly dying of an illness in the eighth month of his reign in 
37.2 38 Several modern sources offer medical diagnoses including encephalitis epilepsy and meningitis.239 Suetonius claims that Caligula had falling sickness epilepsy in his youth Benediktson refines this to a diagnosis of interictal temporal lobe epilepsy and a consequent fear of seizures that prevented his learning to swim.240241242 In RomanoGreek medical theory severe epilepsy attacks were associated with the full moon and the moon goddess Selene with whom Caligula was claimed to converse and enjoy sexual congress.243 Suetonius descriptions of Caligulas appearance as repulsive are unreliable and unlikely considering his ecstatic and enthusiastic reception by the populace. Barret declares that in the ancient world a persons outward appearance was firmly believed to be a reliable guide to their inner character and outward behaviour.244245 Contemporary historiographyedit Fanciful Renaissance depiction of Caligula The facts and circumstances of Caligulas reign are mostly lost to history. Two major literary sources contemporary with Caligula have survived  the works of Philo and Seneca the Younger. Philos works On the Embassy to Gaius and Flaccus give some details on Caligulas early reign but mostly focus on events surrounding the Jewish population in Judea and Egypt with whom he sympathizes. Senecas various works give mostly scattered anecdotes on Caligulas personality. Seneca was almost put to death by Caligula in AD 39 probably due to his associations with conspirators.246 At one time there were detailed contemporaneous histories on Caligula but they are now lost. Tacitus describes them as biased either overly critical or praising Caligula.247 Nonetheless these lost primary sources along with the works of Seneca and Philo were the basis of subsequent histories. Fabius Rusticus and Cluvius Rufus both wrote histories condemning Caligula. They are now lost but Tacitus describes Fabius Rusticus as a friend of Seneca and prone to embellishments and misrepresentations.248 Cluvius Rufus was a senator involved in Caligulas assassination.249 Caligulas sister Agrippina the Younger wrote an autobiography that included a detailed account of Caligulas reign but it too is lost. Agrippina was banished by Caligula for her connection to Marcus Lepidus who conspired against him.121 The inheritance of Nero Agrippinas son and the future emperor was seized by Caligula. Gaetulicus a poet produced a number of flattering writings about Caligula but they are lost. Suetonius wrote his biography of Caligula 80 years after his assassination and Cassius Dio over 180 years after. Dios work offers a loose chronology. Josephus gives a detailed description of Caligulas assassination. Tacitus provides some information on Caligulas life under Tiberius. In a nowlost portion of his Annals Tacitus gave a detailed history of Caligula. Pliny the Elders Natural History has a few brief references to Caligula. None of the few surviving sources paints Caligula in a favourable light. Little has survived on the first two years of his reign and only limited details on later significant events such as the annexation of Mauretania Caligulas military actions in Britannia and his feud with the Roman Senate whose class provides almost without exception blatantly hostile accounts of Caligula the man his reign and his various infamies.250 Modern depictionsedit In film and seriesedit Welsh actor Emlyn Williams was cast as Caligula in the nevercompleted 1937 film I Claudius.251 He was played by Ralph Bates in the 1968 ITV historical drama series The Caesars.252 American actor Jay Robinson famously portrayed a sinister and scenestealing Caligula in two epic films of the 19
50 s The Robe 1953 and its sequel Demetrius and the Gladiators 19
54.2 53 He was played by John Hurt in the 1976 BBC miniseries I Claudius.254 A featurelength historical film Caligula was completed in 1979 with Malcolm McDowell in the lead role. His reign is depicted across the second and third episodes of the miniseries A.D. Anno Domini which adapted the Acts of the Apostles in parallel with the history of the Caesars from Tiberus through Nero. He was portrayed by John McEnery. Many of Caligulas connections to the other plotlines are via the fictional brother and sister Caleb and Sarah. However it is also notable that Cornelius the Centurion is depicted as the man in charge of overseeing the installation of the Emperors statue in the Temple. He was portrayed by David Brandon in the 1982 historical exploitation film Caligula... The Untold Story.255 He was played by Alexis Arquette in two episodes of Xena Warrior Princess The God You Know aired on January 29 2001 and You Are There aired February 5 20
01.2 56257 Caligula is a character in the 2015 NBC series A.D. The Bible Continues and is played by British actor Andrew Gower. His portrayal emphasises Caligulas debauched and dangerous persona258 as well as his sexual appetite quick temper and violent nature. The third season of the Roman Empire series released on Netflix in 2019 is named Caligula The Mad Emperor with South African actor Ido Drent in the leading role.259 In the awardwinning BBC show Horrible Histories he is portrayed by Simon Farnaby. In literature and theatreedit Kajus Cezar Caligula by Polish author Karol Hubert Rostworowski is a play premiered in Juliusz Sowacki City Theater Krakw 31 March 1917. The title character is presented as a weak and unhappy man who became a victim of circumstances that brought him to power that surpassed him. Caligula by French author Albert Camus is a play in which Caligula returns after deserting the palace for three days and three nights following the death of his beloved sister Drusilla. The young emperor then uses his unfettered power to bring the impossible into the realm of the likely.260 In the 1934 novel I Claudius by English writer Robert Graves Caligula is presented as a murderous sociopath who became clinically insane early in his reign. In the novel at the age of only ten Caligula drove his father Germanicus to a state of despair and death by secretly terrorizing him. Graves Caligula commits incest with all three of his sisters and is implied to have murdered Drusilla. The novel was adapted for television in the 1976 BBC miniseries of the same name. The life of Incitatus Caesars favourite horse is the subject of Polish poet Zbigniew Herberts poem Kaligula in Pan Cogito 1974 and his political career.261 A deified Caligula is the antagonist of the 2018 The Trials of Apollo novel The Burning Maze by Rick Riordan. He is presented as an insane tyrant who has returned from the dead  along with Commodus and Emperor Nero  to try to take over the modern world. His horse Incitatus also appears. In the song Heaven Knows Im Miserable Now by The Smiths he is mentioned in the line What you asked of me at the end of the day Caligula would have blushed. In operaedit A young Caligula appears as one of the characters in Heinrich Ignaz Franz Bibers opera Arminio. Caligula is the main character in Detlev Glanerts opera Caligula based on the Albert Camus play. Different composers from the Baroque era appear to have composed operatic works about Caligula but most of these have been lost. See alsoedit List of Roman emperors Notesedit  Caligula is the diminutive form of caliga a military boot.  Barrett believes his death was probably natural Syria was a notoriously unhealthy spot and almost a century later the emperor Trajan would die from a disease contracted there.  Suetonius and others provide what may be an accurate depiction of Tiberius total and utterly mistaken trust in Sejanus and his mistrust of all others until Sejanus conspiracy was discovered.  Various coin issues suggest the payment of regular donations to the praetorians throughout Caligulas reign.  Caligula stepped down soon after each award of consulship to allow a suffect consul to replace him. In effect this made consulships a gift of the emperor.  In fact Tiberius had published the imperial accounts once and Augustus had done so twice. Caligulas publication was thought a highly creditable act but he did not repeat it.  Jewish grain producers had threatened to fire their fields if Caligulas plan went ahead. This would have caused a local grain famine during Caligulas planned visit to Alexandria.  Jupiter was the highest divine witness to oaths. The Flamen Dialis was sworn to his service and was hedged about with an exhaustive range of prohibitions.  The cryptoporticus underground corridor beneath the imperial palaces on the Palatine Hill where this event took place was discovered by archaeologists in 2008. Referencesedit  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 489. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b c d Suetonius Caligula 7.  Cassius Dio Book LIX.6.  Wood Susan 1995. Diva Drusilla Panthea and the Sisters of Caligula. American Journal of Archaeology. 99 3 457482. doi
10.2 307506945. JSTOR 506945. S
2 CID 191386576.  a b Suetonius Caligula 9.  Winterling 2011 p. 20.  Seneca the Younger On the Firmness of the Wise Man XVIII 25. See also Malloch 2009 Gaius and the nobiles Athenaeum.  Barrett 2015 p. 30.  Suetonius Caligula 2.  Winterling 2011 pp. 2223.  a b c d Suetonius Caligula 10.  Tacitus IV.52.  a b Barrett 2015 pp. 3740.  Tacitus V.3.  a b Suetonius Caligula 54.  Tacitus V.10.  Suetonius Caligula 64.  Tacitus VI.20.  Winterling 2011 pp. 3843.  a b c d Suetonius Caligula 12.  Philo On the Embassy VI.35.  Cassius Dio LVII.23.  Tacitus VI.2325.  Suetonius Caligula 76.  Suetonius Caligula 11.  Winterling 2011 p. 48.  Winterling 2011 pp. 4951.  Barrett 2015 pp. 5052.  a b Wiedemann 1996 p. 221.  a b Tacitus XII.53.  Philo On the Embassy IV.25.  Josephus XIII.
6.9 .  Winterling 2011 pp. 5051.  Henzen Wilhelm ed. 1874. Acta Fratrum Arvalium. p. 63.  Barrett 2015 pp. 7982.  Barrett 2015 pp. 7678.  Gradel 142158  Winterling 2011 pp. 913 51.  a b Barrett 2015 pp. 130132.  Barrett 2015 p. 82.  a b c Cassius Dio LIX.1.  Barrett 2015 p. 334.  a b c Cassius Dio LIX.10.  Barrett 2015 pp. 4748 93.  a b c Wiedemann 1996 p. 223.  Wiedemann 1996 p. 223. It is useless to date the turningpoint to before the death of Antonia two months after his accession an illness in the autumn... which is supposed to have affected his brain or the death of his sister Drusilla.  Wiedemann 1996 pp. 22425.  Philo On the Embassy II.10.  Suetonius Caligula 13.  Suetonius Tiberius 75.  Suetonius Caligula 14.  Philo On the Embassy II.1213.  a b c d Wiedemann 1996 p. 222.  Wiedemann 1996 pp. 22223.  Cassius Dio LIX.3.  Winterling 2011 pp. 8081.  Cassius Dio LIX.
5.4 .  Suetonius Caligula 15.  a b Suetonius Caligula 56.  Tacitus 
16.1 7.  Josephus XIX.
1.2 .  Barrett 2015 p. 304305.  Winterling 2011 p. 7072.  Cassius Dio LIX.16.  a b Suetonius Caligula 30.  a b c Cassius Dio LIX.910.  Winterling 2011 pp. 90103.  Barrett 2015 p. 304.  Barrett 2015 p. 131.  Cassius Dio LIX.16 24.  Winterling 2011 pp. 9095 96101.  Suetonius Caligula 26.  Barrett 2015 p. 135.  a b Winterling 2011 pp. 103104.  a b c Cassius Dio LIX.28.  Barrett 2015 pp. 288289.  Woods David 2014. Caligula Incitatus and the Consulship. The Classical Quarterly. 64 2 772777. doi
10.1 0
17 S0009838814000470. ISSN 00098388. S
2 CID 170216093.  Barrett 2015 p. 312.  Barrett 2015 p. 297.  Barrett 2015 p. 215.  Suetonius Caligula 162.  a b c d Suetonius Caligula 19.  a b Cassius Dio LIX.17.  Wardle David 2007. Caligulas Bridge of Boats  AD 39 or 40. Historia Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte. 56 1 118120. JSTOR 25598379.  Winterling 2011 pp. 1261
29 ff 169.  Barrett 2015 pp. 240242.  Seneca the Younger On the Shortness of Life XVIII.5.  Barrett 2015 pp. 240242 132.  a b c Suetonius Caligula 37.  a b Suetonius Caligula 38.  Barrett 2015 p. 298.  Wilkinson 2004 p. 10.  Suetonius Claudius 10.  Alston 1998 p. 82.  Salmon 1987 p. 153.  Barrett 2015 p. 301.  Josephus 
19.2 8.  a b Cassius Dio LIX.15.  Barrett 2015 pp. 224 301.  Mattingly Sydenham  Sutherland 19231984 p. 102.  Mattingly Sydenham  Sutherland 19231984 pp. 102 103.  Mattingly Sydenham  Sutherland 19231984 p. 103106.  Mattingly Sydenham  Sutherland 19231984 pp. 104 105.  a b Mattingly Sydenham  Sutherland 19231984 p. 105.  Mattingly Sydenham  Sutherland 19231984 pp. 106 107.  a b Mattingly Sydenham  Sutherland 19231984 p. 107.  a b c d Suetonius Caligula 21.  Suetonius Caligula 22.  Suetonius Claudius 20.  Pliny the Elder XXXVI122.  Pliny the Elder XVI.76.  Barrett 2015 p. 224.  Josephus XIX.
2.5 .  Barrett 2015 pp. 225226.  The Galleys of Lake Nemi. Scientific American Volume 95 Number 02 July 1906. 14 July 1906. pp. 2526.  Kroos Kenneth A. 2011. Central Heating for Caligulas Pleasure Ship. The International Journal for the History of Engineering  Technology. 81 2 291299. doi
10.1 1791758121
11 X13033852943471. ISSN 17581206. S
2 CID 110624972.  Carlson Deborah N. May 2002. Caligulas Floating Palaces PDF. Archaeology. 55 3 2631. JSTOR 41779576.  Barrett 2015 pp. 19 141142.  Barrett 2015 pp. 171176.  Wiedemann 1996 pp. 226227.  a b c Cassius Dio LIX.22.  Barrett 2015 pp. 142144 247248.  a b c Barrett 2015 pp. 299 319 note 76.  Barrett 2015 pp. 282 298300 citing Suetonius Caligula 
38.4 .  Kleijwegt M. CALIGULA AS AUCTIONEER. Acta Classica 39 1996 pp. 5566. 1  Cassius Dio LIX.14.  Suetonius Caligula 35.  Pliny the Elder V.2.  Cassius Dio LX.8.  a b Barrett 1989 p. 118.  a b c Cassius Dio LIX.25.  Sigman Marlene C. 1977. The Romans and the Indigenous Tribes of Mauritania Tingitana. Historia Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte. 26 4 415439. JSTOR 4435574.  a b Wiedemann 1996 p. 228.  Bicknell Peter 1968. The emperor Gaius military activities in AD 40. Historia Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte. 17 4 496505. ISSN 00182311. JSTOR 4435047.  Davies R 1966. The abortive invasion of Britain by Gaius. Historia Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte. 15 1 124128. ISSN 00182311. JSTOR 4434915.  Malloch SJV 2001. Gaius on the Channel coast. Classical Quarterly. 51 2 551556. doi
10.1 0
93 cq

51.2.5 51. ISSN 14716844.  Suetonius Caligula 4547.  Barrett 2015 p. 207.  Barrett 2015 p. 207209.  Josephus XVIII.
6.1 0.  Philo Flaccus V.25.  Philo Flaccus III.8 IV.21.  Philo Flaccus V.2628.  Philo Flaccus VI.43.  Philo Flaccus VII.45.  Philo Flaccus XXI.185.  Barrett 2015 pp. 2072012.  a b Josephus XVIII.
7.2 .  a b Josephus XVIII.
8.1 .  Philo On the Embassy XXX.201.  a b Philo On the Embassy XXX.203.  Millar Fergus 1995. The Roman Near East 31 BCAD 337. Cambridge Massachusetts Harvard University Press. p. 58. ISBN 9780674778863.  Philo On the Embassy XVI.115.  Philo On the Embassy XXXI.213.  Josephus XVIII.8.  Winterling 2011 pp. 166170.  Tacitus II.59.  Barrett 2015 p. 290293.  Philo On the Embassy XIXV.  Pollini 2012 p. 377  Barrett 2015 pp. 196 291292.  Suetonius Augustus 70 Caligula 52. Dio 
59.2 6.  Wiedemann 2006 pp. 840841  Cassius Dio LIX.2628.  Pollini pp. 378379  Simpson C. J. The Cult of the Emperor Gaius. Latomus vol. 40 no. 3 1981 pp. 495496. JSTOR 2 Accessed 18 Sept. 2023.  Gradel Ittai Emperor Worship and Roman Religion Oxford Oxford University Press 2002 pp. 142158 ISBN 0198152752  Gradel p.46 citing Plautus  Brent A. The imperial cult and the development of church order concepts and images of authority in paganism and early Christianity before the Age of Cyprian illustrated Brill Publishers 1999 p. 61. ISBN 9004114203  Dio Cassius 
51.1 
9.7 .  Gradel pp. 263268  Barrett 2015 p. 195.  Barrett 2015 pp. 193194.  Barrett 2015 p. 197199.  Lott John. B. The Neighborhoods of Augustan Rome Cambridge Cambridge University Press 2004 pp. 107117 172. ISBN 0521828279  Barrett 2015 p. 196197.  Beard M. Price S. North J. Religions of Rome Volume 1 a History illustrated Cambridge University Press 1998 pp.209210. ISBN 0521316820  Simpson pp.506507  Barrett 2015 p. 192.  Pollini John 2012. From Republic to Empire. University of Oklahoma Press. pp. 150151. ISBN 9780806188164.  Cassius Dio LI.20.  Cassius Dio LIX.2628.  Barrett 2015 p. 198.  Gradel pp. 142158  Simpson C. J. The Cult of the Emperor Gaius. Latomus vol. 40 no. 3 1981 p. 503. JSTOR httpwww.jstor.orgstable41532141. Accessed 18 Sept. 2023.  Wardle David 1991. When did Gaius Caligula die Acta Classica 34 1991 158165.  Suetonius 58 On the ninth day before the Kalends of February... Ruled three years ten months and eight days Cassius Dio LIX.30 Thus Gaius after doing in three years nine months and twentyeight days that has been related learned by actual experience that he was not a god. this seems to give 23 January but Dio is probably using exclusive reckoning which does give 
24.1 86  Cassius Dio LIX.29.I.  a b Winterling 2011 pp. 171174.  Josephus XIX.
1.6 .  Barrett 2015 p. 253.  a b Seneca the Younger On Firmness xviii.2.  Josephus XIX.
1.5 .  Barrett 2015 p. 266 note 44.  Winterling 2011 pp. 176178.  a b c Suetonius Caligula 58.  Josephus XIX.
1.1 4.  Josephus XIX.
1.1 5.  Owen Richard 17 October 2008. Archaeologists unearth place where Emperor Caligula met his end. The Times. The Times London. Retrieved 31 August 2018.  Josephus XIX.2.  Winterling 2011 pp. 171177.  Suetonius Caligula 59.  Josephus XIX.
2.1 .  Winterling 2011 pp. 176177.  Barrett 2015 pp. 274275.  Winterling 2011 pp. 176180.  Barrett 2015 pp. 275277 281 note 4.  Suetonius Claudius 11.  Josephus XIX 268269.  Cassius Dio LX.34.  Barrett 2015 p.269 Mary Smallwood states as a fact without explanation that he was buried in the Augustan mausoleum. See Smallwood E.M. 1970 Philonis Alexandrini. Legatio ad Gaium 
2 nd edn Leiden Brill p. 317. Barrett finds the interment of Caligulas remains in the Augustan mausoleum unlikely but not impossible. See Barrett 2015 p.167  Cicero Laws 
2.2 
2.5 7 The ritualistic casting of earth or placing of turf on cremated bones might have been the minimum requirement to make a grave a locus religiosus a religious place therefore protected by the gods... through this simple omission the power of the state could extend to the perpetual condemnation of souls. See Graham EmmaJayne in Carol Maureen and Rempel Jane Editors Living through the dead Burial and commemoration in the Classical world Oxbow Books 2014 pp. 9495.  Barrett 2015 p. 47.  Barrett 2015 pp. 6465.  Suetonius Caligula 16.  Suetonius Caligula 27.  Barrett 2015 pp. 4648 6465.  Suetonius Caligula 25.  Barrett 2015 p. 65.  Barrett 2015 p. 118.  Winterling 2011 pp. 6 189 191.  Sidwell 2010 p. 183.  Sidwell Barbara. Gaius Caligulas Mental Illness. The Classical World 103 no. 2 2010 183206. httpwww.jstor.orgstable40599927.  a b Seneca the Younger On Anger III.xviii.1.  a b Seneca the Younger On the shortness of life XVIII.5.  Philo On the Embassy XXIX.  Seneca the Younger On Firmness xviii.1.  Barrett 1989 p. n23.  Cassius Dio LIX.11.  Suetonius Caligula 24.  Suetonius Caligula 36.  Cassius Dio  Book 59. penelope.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 15 September 2021.  Suetonius Caligula 4647.  Suetonius Caligula 41.  Philo On the Embassy XIII.  Seneca the Younger On Firmness xviii.1 On Anger I.xx.8.  Seneca the Younger On Firmness XVIIXVIII On Anger I.xx.8.  Philo On the Embassy IIIV.  Sidwell Barbara 2010. Gaius Caligulas Mental Illness. Classical World. 103 2 183206. doi
10.1 3
53 clw.
0.0 165. ISSN 15589234. PMID 20213971. S
2 CID 39205847.  Benediktson D. Thomas 1989. Caligulas Madness Madness or Interictal Temporal Lobe Epilepsy. The Classical World. 82 5 370375. doi
10.2 3074350416. JSTOR 4350416.  Suetonius Caligula 50.  Benediktson D. Thomas 1991. Caligulas Phobias and Philias Fear of Seizure. The Classical Journal. 87 2 159163. ISSN 00098353. JSTOR 3297970.  Benediktson D. Thomas. Caligulas Phobias and Philias Fear of Seizure The Classical Journal 87 no. 2 1991 159161 httpwww.jstor.orgstable3297970  Barrett 2015 p. 6063.  Katz Robert S. 1972. The Illness of Caligula. The Classical World. 65 7 2232258. doi
10.2 3074347670. JSTOR 4347670. PMID 11619647. refuted in Morgan M. Gwyn 1973. Caligulas Illness Again. The Classical World. 66 6 327329. doi
10.2 3074347839. JSTOR 4347839.  Cassius Dio LIX.19.  Tacitus I.1.  Tacitus Life of Julius Agricola X Annals XIII.20.  Josephus XIX.
1.1 3.  Winterling 2011 p. 60.  Yablonsky Linda 26 February 2006. Caligula Gives a Toga Party but No Ones Really Invited. The New York Times. Retrieved 30 June 2011.  The Caesars at IMDb  Robinson Jay 1979. The Comeback. Word Books. ISBN 9780912376455  I Claudius at IMDb  Palmerini Luca M. Mistretta Gaetano 1996. Spaghetti Nightmares. Fantasma Books. p. 111. ISBN 0963498274.  Maxwell Garth 29 January 2001 The God You Know Xena Warrior Princess Lucy Lawless Rene OConnor Adrienne Wilkinson retrieved 1 December 2023  Laing John 5 February 2001 You Are There Xena Warrior Princess Lucy Lawless Rene OConnor Michael Hurst retrieved 1 December 2023  Watch A.D. The Bible Continues Episodes at NBC.com retrieved 9 May 2020  Nolan Emma 26 March 2019. Roman Empire Caligula The Mad Emperor Netflix release date cast trailer plot. Express.co.uk. Retrieved 2 August 2020.  SheafferJones Caroline 2012. A Deconstructive Reading of Albert Camus Caligula. Australian Journal of French Studies. 49 1 3142. doi
10.3 8
28 AJFS.20
12.3 . ISSN 00049468.  English translation of Caligula Speaks Archived 20161101 at the Wayback Machine by Zbigniew Herbert translated by Oriana Ivy Bibliographyedit Modern sourcesedit Alston Richard 1998. Aspects of Roman history AD 14117. London Routledge. ISBN 9780203011874  via Archive.org. Barrett Anthony A 1989. Caligula the corruption of power. London Batsford. ISBN 9780713454871. Barrett Anthony A 2015. Caligula the abuse of power 
2 nd ed.. London Routledge. ISBN 9781315725413. Mattingly Harold Sydenham Edward A. Sutherland C. H. V. 19231984. Roman Imperial Coinage 31 BC to AD 69. Vol. 1. London Spink  Son. Salmon Edward T 1987. A History of the Roman World from 30 BC to AD 138. London Methuen. ISBN 0416107109  via Archive.org. Wiedemann T E J 1996. Tiberius to Nero. In Bowman Alan K et al. eds.. The Augustan Empire 43 BCAD 69. Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. 10 
2 nd ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 198255. ISBN 0521264308. Wilkinson Sam 2004. Caligula. Routledge. ISBN 9781134246939. Winterling Aloys 2011. Caligula a biography. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520943148. Ancient sourcesedit Philo 1855 c. 38 AD. Various works. Translated by Charles Duke Yonge. Loeb Classical Library. On the Embassy to Gaius Flaccus On Firmness On Anger On Tranquility of Mind On the Shortness of Life Lucius Annaeus Seneca the Younger 1932 
1 st century. Essays. Translated by Aubrey Stewart. Loeb Classical Library. Gaius Plinius Secundus 1961 c. 77 AD. Natural History. Translated by H. Rackham W.H.S. Jones D.E. Eichholz. Harvard University Press. Josephus 1737 c. 96 AD. Chapters XVIIIXIX. Antiquities of the Jews. Translated by William Whiston. Harvard University Press. Publius Cornelius Tacitus 1924 c. 110 AD. The Annals. Translated by Frederick W. Shipley. Loeb Classical Library. Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus 1914 c. 121 AD. Life of Caligula. The Twelve Caesars. Translated by John Carew Rolfe. Loeb Classical Library. Lucius Cassius Dio 1927 c. 230. Book 59. Roman History. Translated by Earnest Cary. Loeb Classical Library. Further readingedit Balsdon J P V D 1934. The Emperor Gaius. Oxford Clarendon Press. Balsdon J P V D et al. 2012. Gaius 1 Caligula Roman emperor 1241 CE. In Hornblower Simon et al. eds.. The Oxford classical dictionary 
4 th ed.. Oxford University Press. doi
10.1 0
93 acrefore97801993811
35.0 
13.2 772. ISBN 9780199545568. OCLC 959667246. Barrett Anthony A Yardley John C 2023. The emperor Caligula in the ancient sources. Oxford Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198854579. Hurley Donna W 1993. An Historical and Historiographical Commentary on Suetonius Life of C Caligula. Atlanta Scholars Press. Sandison A T 1958. The Madness of the Emperor Caligula. Medical History. 2 3 202209. doi
10.1 0
17 s0025727300023759. PMC 1034394. PMID 13577116. Wilcox Amanda 2008. Natures monster Caligula as exemplum in Senecas dialogues. In Sluiter Ineke Rosen Ralph M eds.. Kakos badness and antivalue in classical antiquity. Mnemosyne Supplements. Vol. 307. Leiden Brill. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Caligula. Wikiquote has quotations related to Caligula. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Gaius Caesar. The portrait of Caligula in the Digital Sculpture Project Biography from De Imperatoribus Romanis Franz Lidz Caligulas Garden of Delights Unearthed and Restored New York Times Jan. 12 2021 Caligula JulioClaudian dynasty Born 31 August AD 12 Died 24 January AD 41 Preceded by Tiberius Roman emperor 3741 Succeeded by Claudius Political offices Preceded by Gn. Acerronius Proculus G. Petronius Pontius Nigrinus Roman consul JulyAugust 37 With Claudius Succeeded by A. Caecina Paetus G. Caninius Rebilus Preceded by Ser. Asinius Celer Sex. Nonius Quinctilianus Roman consul January 39 With L. Apronius Caesianus Succeeded by Q. Sanquinius Maximus Preceded by A. Didius Gallus Gn. Domitius Afer Roman consul January 40 sine collega Succeeded by G. Laecanius Bassus Q. Terentius Culleo Preceded by G. Laecanius Bassus Q. Terentius Culleo Roman consul January 41 With Gn. Sentius Saturninus Succeeded by Q. Pomponius Secundus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Belgium United States Sweden Czech Republic Greece Croatia Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCaligulaoldid1223058475 Categories Caligula 12 births 41 deaths 
1 stcentury murdered monarchs 
1 stcentury Roman emperors Capri Campania Children of Germanicus Deaths by stabbing in ancient Rome Incest Julii Caesares JulioClaudian dynasty Murdered Roman emperors People from Anzio Royalty and nobility with epilepsy Politicide perpetrators Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard Roman quaestors Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae Roman pharaohs Ancient assassinated people Assassinated heads of state in Europe Damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Pages using IMDb title with no id set Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Latinlanguage text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 1639 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width