Claudius - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family and youth Toggle Family and youth subsection 
1.1 Early life 
1.2 Public life 
1.3 Assassination of Caligula AD 41 
2 As Emperor Toggle As Emperor subsection 
2.1 Expansion of the Empire 
2.2 Judicial and legislative affairs 
2.3 Public works 
2.4 Senate 

2.4.1 Plots and coup attempts 
2.5 Secretariat and centralization of powers 
2.6 Religious reforms 
2.7 Public games and entertainments 
3 Marriages and personal life Toggle Marriages and personal life subsection 
3.1 Plautia Urgulanilla 
3.2 Aelia Paetina 
3.3 Valeria Messalina 
3.4 Agrippina the Younger 
4 Affliction and personality 
5 Scholarly works and their impact 
6 Death 
7 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 
7.1 Divine honours 
7.2 Views of the new regime 
7.3 Flavian and later perspectives 
7.4 Views of ancient historians 
8 In modern media 
9 See also 
10 Notes 
11 References 
12 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 
12.1 Ancient sources 
12.2 Modern sources 
13 External links Toggle the table of contents Claudius 93 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca     Bnlmg     Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano   Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar      Bahasa Melayu  Nederlands  Nordfriisk Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha    Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn   Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from AD 41 to 54 For other people named Claudius see Claudius disambiguation. Not to be confused with Claudias. Claudius Bust Naples National Archaeological Museum Roman emperor Reign 24 January 41  13 October 54 Predecessor Caligula Successor Nero Born 1 August 10 BC Lugdunum Gaul Died 13 October AD 54 aged 63 Rome Italy Burial Mausoleum of Augustus Spouses Plautia Urgulanilla Aelia Paetina Valeria Messalina Julia Agrippina Issue among others Claudius Drusus Claudia Antonia Claudia Octavia Britannicus Nero adopted Names Tiberius Claudius Drusus birth Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicusa Regnal name Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus Dynasty JulioClaudian Father Nero Claudius Drusus Mother Antonia the Younger Roman imperial dynasties Great Cameo of France JulioClaudian dynasty Chronology Augustus 27 BC  AD 14 Tiberius AD 1437 Caligula AD 3741 Claudius AD 4154 Nero AD 5468 Preceded by Roman Republic Followed by Year of the Four Emperors v t e Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicusb kldis Latin tbris klaudis kaesar austs grmanks 1 August 10 BC  13 October AD 54 was a Roman emperor ruling from AD 41 to 54. A member of the JulioClaudian dynasty Claudius was born to Drusus and Antonia Minor at Lugdunum in Roman Gaul where his father was stationed as a military legate. He was the first Roman emperor to be born outside Italy. As he had a limp and slight deafness due to sickness at a young age he was ostracized by his family and was excluded from public office until his consulship which was shared with his nephew Caligula in 37. Claudiuss infirmity probably saved him from the fate of many other nobles during the purges throughout the reigns of Tiberius and Caligula as potential enemies did not see him as a serious threat. His survival led to his being declared emperor by the Praetorian Guard after Caligulas assassination at which point he was the last adult male of his family. Despite his lack of experience Claudius was an able and efficient administrator. He expanded the imperial bureaucracy to include freedmen and helped restore the empires finances after the excesses of Caligulas reign. He was also an ambitious builder constructing new roads aqueducts and canals across the Empire. During his reign the Empire started its successful conquest of Britain. Having a personal interest in law he presided at public trials and issued edicts daily. He was seen as vulnerable throughout his reign particularly by elements of the nobility. Claudius was constantly forced to shore up his position which resulted in the deaths of many senators. Those events damaged his reputation among the ancient writers though more recent historians have revised that opinion. Many authors contend that he was murdered by his own wife Agrippina the Younger. After his death at the age of 63 his grandnephew and legally adopted stepson Nero succeeded him as emperor. Family and youthedit Early lifeedit See also JulioClaudian dynasty Bust of Claudiuss mother Antonia Minor Claudius was born on 1 August 10 BC at Lugdunum modern Lyon France. He had two older siblings Germanicus and Livilla. His mother Antonia Minor may have had two other children who died young. Claudiuss maternal grandparents were Mark Antony and Octavia Minor Augustuss sister and he was therefore the greatgreatgrandnephew of Gaius Julius Caesar. His paternal grandparents were Livia Augustuss third wife and Tiberius Claudius Nero. During his reign Claudius revived the rumor that his father Nero Claudius Drusus was actually the illegitimate son of Augustus to give the appearance that Augustus was Claudiuss paternal grandfather. In 9 BC Claudiuss father Drusus died on campaign in Germania from a fall from a horse. Claudius was then raised by his mother who never remarried. When his disability became evident the relationship with his family turned sour. Antonia referred to him as a monster and used him as a standard for stupidity. She seems to have passed her son off to his grandmother Livia for a number of years.6 Livia was a little kinder but nevertheless sent Claudius short angry letters of reproof. He was put under the care of a former muledriver7 to keep him disciplined under the logic that his condition was due to laziness and a lack of willpower. However by the time he reached his teenage years his symptoms apparently waned and his family began to take some notice of his scholarly interests. In AD 7 Livy was hired to tutor Claudius in history with the assistance of Sulpicius Flavus. He spent a lot of his time with the latter as well as the philosopher Athenodorus. Augustus according to a letter was surprised at the clarity of Claudiuss oratory.8 Public lifeedit Claudius work as an historian damaged his prospects for advancement in public life. According to Vincent Scramuzza and others he began work on a history of the Civil Wars that was either too truthful or too critical of Octavian9 then reigning as Caesar Augustus. In either case it was far too early for such an account and may have only served to remind Augustus that Claudius was Antonys descendant. His mother and grandmother quickly put a stop to it and this may have convinced them that Claudius was not fit for public office since he could not be trusted to toe the existing party line.10 When Claudius returned to the narrative later in life he skipped over the wars of the Second Triumvirate altogether but the damage was done and his family pushed him into the background. When the Arch of Pavia was erected to honor the Imperial clan in AD 8 Claudiuss name now Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus after his elevation to pater familias of the Claudii Nerones on the adoption of his brother was inscribed on the edge past the deceased princes Gaius and Lucius and Germanicuss children. There is some speculation that the inscription was added by Claudius himself decades later and that he originally did not appear at all.10 When Augustus died in AD 14 Claudius  then aged 23  appealed to his uncle Tiberius to allow him to begin the cursus honorum. Tiberius the new Emperor responded by granting Claudius consular ornaments. Claudius requested office once more and was snubbed. Since the new emperor was no more generous than the old Claudius gave up hope of public office and retired to a scholarly private life. Despite the disdain of the Imperial family it seems that from very early on the general public respected Claudius. At Augustuss death the equites or knights chose Claudius to head their delegation. When his house burned down the Senate demanded it be rebuilt at public expense. They also requested that Claudius be allowed to debate in the Senate. Tiberius turned down both motions but the sentiment remained. During the period immediately after the death of Tiberiuss son Drusus Claudius was pushed by some quarters as a potential heir to the throne. This again suggests the political nature of his exclusion from public life. However as this was also the period during which the power and terror of the commander of the Praetorian Guard Sejanus was at its peak Claudius chose to downplay this possibility. After the death of Tiberius the new emperor Caligula the son of Claudiuss brother Germanicus recognized Claudius to be of some use. He appointed Claudius his coconsul in 37 to emphasize the memory of Caligulas deceased father Germanicus. Despite this Caligula tormented his uncle playing practical jokes charging him enormous sums of money humiliating him before the Senate and the like. According to Cassius Dio Claudius became sickly and thin by the end of Caligulas reign most likely due to stress.11 A possible surviving portrait of Claudius from this period may support this. Assassination of Caligula AD 
41 edit A coin of Herod of Chalcis showing him with his brother Agrippa of Judaea crowning Claudius AD 43. On 24 January 41 Caligula was assassinated in a conspiracy involving Cassius Chaerea  a military tribune in the Praetorian Guard  and several senators. There is no evidence that Claudius had a direct hand in the assassination although it has been argued that he knew about the plot  particularly since he left the scene of the crime shortly before his nephew was murdered.12 However after the deaths of Caligulas wife and daughter it became apparent that Cassius intended to go beyond the terms of the conspiracy and wipe out the Imperial family.13 Proclaiming Claudius Emperor 1867. Detail from A Roman Emperor 41 AD c.1871. Two drastically different oil paintings by Lawrence AlmaTadema of Claudius being proclaimed emperor by Gratus. In the chaos following the murder Claudius witnessed the German guard cut down several uninvolved noblemen including many of his friends. He fled to the palace to hide. According to tradition a Praetorian named Gratus found him hiding behind a curtain and suddenly declared him princeps.13 Claudius was spirited away to the Praetorian camp and put under their protection. The Senate met and debated a change of government but this devolved into an argument over which of them would be the new princeps. When they heard of the Praetorians claim they demanded that Claudius be delivered to them for approval but he refused sensing the danger that would come with complying. Some historians particularly Josephus14 claim that Claudius was directed in his actions by the Judaean King Herod Agrippa. However an earlier version of events by the same ancient author downplays Agrippas role15 so it remains uncertain. Eventually the Senate was forced to give in. In return Claudius granted a general amnesty although he executed a few junior officers involved in the conspiracy.16 The actual assassins including Cassius Chaerea and Julius Lupus the murderer of Caligulas wife and daughter were put to death to ensure Claudiuss own safety and as a future deterrent.1718 As Emperoredit Aureus struck at the Lugdunum Lyon mint AD 41. The reverse commemorates the reception of the emperor imperator receptus at the Praetorian Camp and the protection the Praetorian Guard afforded him in the days following the assassination of Caligula. Issued over a number of years in both gold and silver these type of coins were struck to serve as part of the annual military payments Claudius had promised the Guard in return for their role in raising him to the throne. Caption TI. CLAVD. CAESAR AVG. P. M. TR. P.  IMPER. RECEPT. This denarius emphasizes Claudius clemency after Caligulas murder. The depiction of the goddess PaxNemesis representing subdued vengeance would be used by many later emperors she is depicted holding a Caduceus over a serpent. Caption TI. CLAVDIVS CAESAR AVG. P. M. TR. P. IMP. P. P.  CONSTANTIAE AVGVSTI. The letters S C mean senatus consultum decree of the senate. Claudius took several steps to legitimize his rule against potential usurpers most of them emphasizing his place within the JulioClaudian family. He adopted the name Caesar as a cognomen as the name still carried great weight with the populace. To do so he dropped the cognomen Nero which he had adopted as pater familias of the Claudii Nerones when his brother Germanicus was adopted. As Pharaoh of Egypt Claudius adopted the royal titulary Tiberios Klaudios Autokrator Heqaheqau Meryasetptah Kanakht Djediakhshuemakhet Tiberius Claudius Emperor and ruler of rulers beloved of Isis and Ptah the strong bull of the stable moon on the horizon.19 While Claudius had never been formally adopted either by Augustus or his successors he was nevertheless the grandson of Augustuss sister Octavia and so he felt that he had the right of family. He also adopted the name Augustus as the two previous emperors had done at their accessions. He kept the honorific Germanicus to display the connection with his heroic brother. He deified his paternal grandmother Livia to highlight her position as wife of the divine Augustus. Claudius frequently used the term filius Drusi son of Drusus in his titles to remind the people of his legendary father and lay claim to his reputation.20 Since Claudius was the first emperor proclaimed on the initiative of the Praetorian Guard instead of the Senate his repute suffered at the hands of commentators such as Seneca. Moreover he was the first emperor who resorted to bribery as a means to secure army loyalty and rewarded the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard that had elevated him with 15000 sesterces.21 Tiberius and Augustus had both left gifts to the army and guard in their wills and upon Caligulas death the same would have been expected even if no will existed. Claudius remained grateful to the guard issuing coins with tributes to the Praetorians in the early part of his reign.22 Pliny the Elder noted according to the 1938 Loeb Classical Library translation by Harris Rackham ... many people do not allow any gems in a signetring and seal with the gold itself this was a fashion invented when Claudius Csar was emperor.23 Claudius restored the status of the peaceful Imperial Roman provinces of Macedonia and Achaea as senatorial provinces.2425 Expansion of the Empireedit Bronze head of Claudius found in the River Alde at Rendham near Saxmundham Suffolk British Museum. Potentially taken from the Temple of Claudius in Colonia Victricensis now Colchester during the Boudican revolt.26 Under Claudius the Empire underwent its first major expansion since the reign of Augustus. The provinces of Thrace Noricum Lycia and Judea were annexed or put under direct rule under various circumstances during his term. The annexation of Mauretania begun under Caligula was completed after the defeat of rebel forces as well as the official division of the former client kingdom into two Imperial provinces.2728 The most farreaching conquest was that of Britannia.29 In 43 Claudius sent Aulus Plautius with four legions to Britain Britannia after an appeal from an ousted tribal ally. Britain was an attractive target for Rome because of its material wealth mines and the potential of slave labor as well as being a haven for Gallic rebels. Claudius himself traveled to the island after the completion of initial offensives bringing with him reinforcements and elephants. The Roman colonia of Colonia Claudia Victricensis was established as the provincial capital of the newly established province of Britannia at Camulodunum where a large temple was dedicated in his honour. He left Britain after 16 days but remained in the provinces for some time. The Senate granted him a triumph for his efforts. Only members of the Imperial family were allowed such honours but Claudius subsequently lifted this restriction for some of his conquering generals. He was granted the honorific Britannicus but only accepted it on behalf of his son never using the title himself. When the British general Caractacus was captured in 50 Claudius granted him clemency. Caractacus lived out his days on land provided by the Roman state an unusual end for an enemy commander. Claudius conducted a census in 48 that found 5984072 adult male Roman citizens30 women children slaves and free adult males without Roman citizenship were not counted an increase of around a million since the census conducted at Augustuss death. He had helped increase this number through the foundation of Roman colonies that were granted blanket citizenship. These colonies were often made out of existing communities especially those with elites who could rally the populace to the Roman cause. Several colonies were placed in new provinces or on the border of the Empire to secure Roman holdings as quickly as possible. Judicial and legislative affairsedit Claudius personally judged many of the legal cases tried during his reign. Ancient historians have many complaints about this stating that his judgments were variable and sometimes did not follow the law.3132 He was also easily swayed. Nevertheless Claudius paid detailed attention to the operation of the judicial system. He extended the summer court session as well as the winter term by shortening the traditional breaks. Claudius also made a law requiring plaintiffs to remain in the city while their cases were pending as defendants had previously been required to do. These measures had the effect of clearing out the docket. The minimum age for jurors was also raised to 25 to ensure a more experienced jury pool.33 Claudius also settled disputes in the provinces. He freed the island of Rhodes from Roman rule for their good faith and exempted Ilium Troy from taxes. Early in his reign the Greeks and Jews of Alexandria each sent him embassies after riots broke out between the two communities. This resulted in the famous Letter to the Alexandrians which reaffirmed Jewish rights in the city but forbade them to move in more families en masse. According to Josephus he then reaffirmed the rights and freedoms of all the Jews in the Empire.34 One of Claudiuss investigators discovered that many old Roman citizens based in the city of Tridentum modern Trento were not in fact citizens.35 The Emperor issued a declaration contained in the Tabula clesiana that they would be allowed to hold citizenship from then on since to strip them of their status would cause major problems. However in individual cases Claudius punished the false assumption of citizenship harshly making it a capital offense. Similarly any freedmen found to be laying false claim to membership of the Roman equestrian order were sold back into slavery.36 Numerous edicts were issued throughout Claudiuss reign. These were on a number of topics everything from medical advice to moral judgments. A famous medical example is one promoting yew juice as a cure for snakebite.37 Suetonius wrote that he is even said to have thought of an edict allowing public flatulence for good health.38 One of the more famous edicts concerned the status of sick slaves. Masters had been abandoning ailing slaves at the temple of Aesculapius on Tiber Island to die instead of providing them with medical assistance and care and then reclaiming them if they lived. Claudius ruled that slaves who were thus abandoned and recovered after such treatment would be free. Furthermore masters who chose to kill slaves rather than take care of them were liable to be charged with murder.39 Public worksedit The Porta Maggiore in Rome remains of aqueducts Aqua Claudia and Aqua Anio Novus Claudius embarked on many public works throughout his reign both in the capital and in the provinces. He built or finished two aqueducts the Aqua Claudia begun by Caligula and the Aqua Anio Novus. These entered the city in 52 and met at the Porta Maggiore. He also restored a third the Aqua Virgo. He paid special attention to transportation. Throughout Italy and the provinces he built roads and canals. Among these was a large canal leading from the Rhine to the sea as well as a road from Italy to Germany  both begun by his father Drusus. Closer to Rome he built a navigable canal on the Tiber leading to Portus his new port just north of Ostia. This port was constructed in a semicircle with two moles and a lighthouse at its mouth reducing flooding in Rome. The port at Ostia was part of Claudiuss solution to the constant grain shortages that occurred in winter after the Roman shipping season. The other part of his solution was to insure the ships of grain merchants who were willing to risk travelling to Egypt in the offseason. He also granted their sailors special privileges including citizenship and exemption from the Lex Papia Poppaea a law that regulated marriage. In addition he repealed the taxes that Caligula had instituted on food and further reduced taxes on communities suffering drought or famine. The last part of Claudiuss plan to avoid famine was to increase the amount of arable land in Italy. This was to be achieved by draining the Fucine lake also making the nearby river navigable yearround.40 A serious famine is mentioned in the book of Acts as taking place during Claudius reign and had been prophecied by a Christian called Agabus while visiting Antioch.41 A tunnel was dug through the lake bed but the plan was a failure. The tunnel was crooked and not large enough to carry the water which caused it to back up when opened. The resultant flood washed out a large gladiatorial exhibition held to commemorate the opening causing Claudius to run for his life along with the other spectators. The draining of the lake continued to present a problem well into the Middle Ages. It was finally achieved by the Prince Torlonia in the 
19 th century producing over 160000 acres 650 km2 of new arable land.42 He expanded the Claudian tunnel to three times its original size. Senateedit Because of the circumstances of his accession Claudius took great pains to please the Senate. During regular sessions the Emperor sat among the Senate body speaking in turn. When introducing a law he sat on a bench between the consuls in his position as holder of the power of Tribune the Emperor could not officially serve as a Tribune of the Plebes since he was a patrician but this was a power taken by previous rulers which he continued. He refused to accept all his predecessors titles including Imperator at the beginning of his reign preferring to earn them in due course. He allowed the Senate to issue its own bronze coinage for the first time since Augustus. He also put the Imperial provinces of Macedonia and Achaea back under Senate control. Claudius set about remodeling the Senate into a more efficient representative body. He chided the senators about their reluctance to debate bills introduced by himself as noted in the fragments of a surviving speech If you accept these proposals Conscript Fathers say so at once and simply in accordance with your convictions. If you do not accept them find alternatives but do so here and now or if you wish to take time for consideration take it provided you do not forget that you must be ready to pronounce your opinion whenever you may be summoned to meet. It ill befits the dignity of the Senate that the consul designate should repeat the phrases of the consuls word for word as his opinion and that every one else should merely say I approve and that then after leaving the assembly should announce We debated.43 In 47 he assumed the office of censor with Lucius Vitellius which had been allowed to lapse for some time. He struck out the names of many senators and equites who no longer met qualifications but showed respect by allowing them to resign in advance. At the same time he sought to admit to the senate eligible men from the provinces. The Lyon Tablet preserves his speech on the admittance of Gallic senators in which he addresses the Senate with reverence but also with criticism for their disdain of these men. He even joked about how the Senate had admitted members from beyond Gallia Narbonensis Lyons i.e. himself. He also increased the number of patricians by adding new families to the dwindling number of noble lines. Here he followed the precedent of Lucius Junius Brutus and Julius Caesar. Nevertheless many in the Senate remained hostile to Claudius and many plots were made on his life. This hostility carried over into the historical accounts. As a result Claudius reduced the Senates power for the sake of efficiency. The administration of Ostia was turned over to an Imperial procurator after construction of the port. Administration of many of the empires financial concerns was turned over to Imperial appointees and freedmen. This led to further resentment and suggestions that these same freedmen were ruling the Emperor. Plots and coup attemptsedit Several coup attempts were made during Claudiuss reign resulting in the deaths of many senators. Appius Silanus was executed early in Claudiuss reign under questionable circumstances.39 Shortly after this a large rebellion was undertaken by the Senator Vinicianus and Scribonianus  governor of Dalmatia  and gained quite a few senatorial supporters. It ultimately failed because of the reluctance of Scribonianus troops which led to the suicide of the main conspirators. Many other senators tried different conspiracies and were condemned. Claudiuss soninlaw Pompeius Magnus was executed for his part in a conspiracy with his father Crassus Frugi. Another plot involved the consulars Lusius Saturninus Cornelius Lupus and Pompeius Pedo. In 46 Asinius Gallus grandson of Asinius Pollio and Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus were exiled for a plot hatched with several of Claudiuss own freedmen. Valerius Asiaticus was executed without public trial for unknown reasons. Ancient sources say the charge was adultery and that Claudius was tricked into issuing the punishment. However Claudius singles out Asiaticus for special damnation in his speech on the Gauls which dates over a year later suggesting that the charge must have been much more serious. Asiaticus had been a claimant to the throne in the chaos following Caligulas death and a coconsul with Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus. Most of these conspiracies took place before Claudiuss term as Censor and may have induced him to review the Senatorial rolls. The conspiracy of Gaius Silius in the year after his Censorship 48 is detailed in book 11 of Tacitus Annal. This section of Tacitus history narrates the alleged conspiracy of Claudiuss third wife Messalina. Suetonius states that a total of 35 senators and 300 knights were executed for offenses during Claudiuss reign.39 Needless to say the responses to these conspiracies could not have helped Senateemperor relations. Secretariat and centralization of powersedit Claudius was hardly the first emperor to use freedmen to help with the daytoday running of the Empire. He was however forced to increase their role as the powers of the princeps became more centralized and the burden of running the government became larger. Claudius did not want freeborn magistrates to serve under him as if they were not peers. The secretariat was divided into bureaus with each being placed under the leadership of one freedman. Narcissus was the secretary of correspondence. Pallas became the secretary of the treasury. Callistus became secretary of justice. There was a fourth bureau for miscellaneous issues which was put under Polybius until his execution for treason. The freedmen could also officially speak for the Emperor as when Narcissus addressed the troops in Claudiuss stead before the conquest of Britain.44 Since these were important positions the senators were aghast at their being placed in the hands of former slaves and wellknown eunuchs.45 If freedmen had total control of money letters and law it seemed it would not be hard for them to manipulate the Emperor. This is exactly the accusation put forth by ancient sources. However these same sources admit that the freedmen were loyal to Claudius.44 He was similarly appreciative of them and gave them due credit for policies where he had used their advice. However if they showed treasonous inclinations the Emperor punished them with just force as in the case of Polybius and Pallass brother Felix. There is no evidence that the character of Claudiuss policies and edicts changed with the rise and fall of the various freedmen suggesting that he was firmly in control throughout. Regardless of the extent of their political power the freedmen did manage to amass wealth through their positions. Pliny the Elder notes that several of them were richer than Crassus the richest man of the Republican era.46 Religious reformsedit Portrait of Claudius Altes Museum Berlin Claudius as the author of a treatise on Augustuss religious reforms felt himself in a good position to institute some of his own. He had strong opinions about the proper form for state religion. He refused the request of Alexandrian Greeks to dedicate a temple to his divinity saying that only gods may choose new gods. He restored lost days to festivals and got rid of many extraneous celebrations added by Caligula. He reinstituted old observances and archaic language. Claudius was concerned with the spread of eastern mysteries within the city and searched for more Roman replacements. He emphasized the Eleusinian Mysteries which had been practiced by so many during the Republic. He expelled foreign astrologers and at the same time rehabilitated the old Roman soothsayers known as haruspices as a replacement. He was especially hard on Druidism because of its incompatibility with the Roman state religion and its proselytizing activities.47 Public games and entertainmentsedit According to Suetonius Claudius was extraordinarily fond of games. He is said to have risen with the crowd after gladiatorial matches and given unrestrained praise to the fighters.48 Claudius also presided over many new and original events. Soon after coming into power Claudius instituted games to be held in honor of his father on the latters birthday.16 Annual games were also held in honour of his accession and took place at the Praetorian camp where Claudius had first been proclaimed Emperor.49 Claudius organised a performance of the Secular Games marking the 8
00 th anniversary of the founding of Rome. Augustus had performed the same games less than a century prior. Augustuss excuse was that the interval for the games was 110 years not 100 but his date actually did not qualify under either reasoning.49 Claudius also presented staged naval battles to mark the attempted draining of the Fucine Lake as well as many other public games and shows. At Ostia in front of a crowd of spectators Claudius fought an orca which was trapped in the harbour. The event was witnessed by Pliny the Elder A killer whale was actually seen in the harbour of Ostia in battle with the Emperor Claudius it had come at the time when he was engaged in completing the structure of the harbour being tempted by the wreck of a cargo of hides imported from Gaul and in glutting itself for a number of days had furrowed a hollow in the shallow bottom and had been banked up with sand by the waves so high that it was quite unable to turn round and while it was pursuing its food which was driven forward to the shore by the waves its back projected far above the water like a capsized boat. Caesar gave orders for a barrier of nets to be stretched between the mouths of the harbour and setting out in person with the praetorian cohorts afforded a show to the Roman public the soldiery hurling lances from the vessels against the creatures when they leapt up alongside and we saw one of the boats sunk from being filled with water owing to a beasts snorting.50 Claudius also restored and adorned many public venues in Rome. At the Circus Maximus the turning posts and starting stalls were replaced in marble and embellished and an embankment was probably added to prevent flooding of the track.51 Claudius also reinforced or extended the seating rules that reserved front seating at the Circus for senators. He rebuilt Pompeys Theatre after it had been destroyed by fire organising special fights at the rededication which he observed from a special platform in the orchestra box.49 Marriages and personal lifeedit Suetonius and the other ancient authors accused Claudius of being dominated by women and wives and of being a womanizer.5253 Claudius married four times after two failed betrothals. The first betrothal was to his distant cousin Aemilia Lepida but was broken for political reasons. The second was to Livia Medullina Camilla which ended with Medullinas sudden death on their wedding day. Plautia Urgulanillaedit Plautia Urgulanilla was the granddaughter of Livias confidant Urgulania. During their marriage she gave birth to a son Claudius Drusus. Drusus died of asphyxiation in his early teens shortly after becoming engaged to Junilla daughter of Sejanus. Claudius later divorced Urgulanilla for adultery and on suspicion of murdering her sisterinlaw Apronia. When Urgulanilla gave birth after the divorce Claudius repudiated the baby girl Claudia as the father was allegedly one of his own freedmen. Later this action made him the target of criticism by his enemies. Aelia Paetinaedit Soon after possibly in 28 Claudius married Aelia Paetina a relative of Sejanus if not Sejanuss adoptive sister. During their marriage Claudius and Paetina had a daughter Claudia Antonia. He later divorced her after the marriage became a political liability. One version suggests that it may have been due to emotional and mental abuse by Paetina.54 Valeria Messalinaedit Messalina holding her son Britannicus Louvre Some years after divorcing Aelia Paetina in 38 or early 39 Claudius married Valeria Messalina who was his first cousin once removed Claudiuss grandmother Octavia the Younger was Valerias greatgrandmother on both her mother and fathers side and closely allied with Caligulas circle. Shortly thereafter she gave birth to a daughter Claudia Octavia. A son first named Tiberius Claudius Germanicus and later known as Britannicus was born just after Claudiuss accession. This marriage ended in tragedy. The ancient historians allege that Messalina was a nymphomaniac who was regularly unfaithful to ClaudiusTacitus states she went so far as to compete with a prostitute to see who could have more sexual partners in a night55  and manipulated his policies to amass wealth. In 48 Messalina married her lover Gaius Silius in a public ceremony while Claudius was at Ostia. The Death of Messalina by GeorgesAntoine Rochegrosse 1916 Sources disagree as to whether or not she divorced the Emperor first and whether the intention was to usurp the throne. Under Roman law the spouse needed to be informed that he or she had been divorced before a new marriage could take place the sources state that Claudius was in total ignorance until after the marriage.56 Scramuzza in his biography suggests that Silius may have convinced Messalina that Claudius was doomed and the union was her only hope of retaining her rank and protecting her children.575859 The historian Tacitus suggests that Claudiuss ongoing term as Censor may have prevented him from noticing the affair before it reached such a critical point after which she was executed.60 Agrippina the Youngeredit Claudius married once more. Ancient sources tell that his freedmen put forward three candidates Caligulas third wife Lollia Paulina Claudiuss divorced second wife Aelia Paetina and Claudiuss niece Agrippina the Younger. According to Suetonius Agrippina won out through her feminine wiles. She gradually seized power from Claudius and successfully conspired to eliminate his sons rivals opening the way for her son to become emperor.61 Sculpture of Agrippina crowning her young son Nero c. AD 5459 The truth is probably more political. The attempted coup dtat by Silius and Messalina probably made Claudius realize the weakness of his position as a member of the Claudian but not the Julian family. This weakness was compounded by the fact that he did not yet have an obvious adult heir Britannicus being just a boy. Agrippina was one of the few remaining descendants of Augustus and her son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus the future Nero was one of the last males of the Imperial family. Coup attempts might rally around the pair and Agrippina was already showing such ambition. It has been suggested that the Senate may have pushed for the marriage an attempt to end the feud between the Julian and Claudian branches.62 This feud dated back to Agrippinas mothers actions against Tiberius after the death of her husband Germanicus Claudiuss brother actions that Tiberius had punished. In any case Claudius accepted Agrippina and later adopted the mature Ahenobarbus as his son renaming him as Nero Claudius Caesar. Nero was married to Claudiuss daughter Octavia made joint heir with the underage Britannicus and promoted Augustus had similarly named his grandson Postumus Agrippa and his stepson Tiberius as joint heirs63 and Tiberius had named Caligula as his joint heir with his grandson Tiberius Gemellus. Adoption of adults or near adults was an old tradition in Rome when a suitable natural adult heir was unavailable as was the case during Britannicuss minority. Claudius may have previously looked to adopt one of his sonsinlaw to protect his own reign.64 Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix who was married to Claudiuss daughter Claudia Antonia was only descended from Octavia and Antony on one side  not close enough to the Imperial family to ensure his right to be Emperor although that did not stop others from making him the object of a coup attempt against Nero a few years later besides being the halfbrother of Valeria Messalina which told against him. Nero was more popular with the general public as both the grandson of Germanicus and the direct descendant of Augustus. Affliction and personalityedit The historian Suetonius describes the physical manifestations of Claudiuss condition in relatively good detail.65 His knees were weak and gave way under him and his head shook. He stammered and his speech was confused. He slobbered and his nose ran when he was excited. The Stoic Seneca states in his Apocolocyntosis that Claudiuss voice belonged to no land animal and that his hands were weak as well.66 Claudius depicted as the Roman god Jupiter However he showed no physical deformity as Suetonius notes that when calm and seated he was a tall wellbuilt figure of dignitas.65 When angered or stressed his symptoms became worse. Historians agree that this condition improved upon his accession to the throne.67 Claudius himself claimed that he had exaggerated his ailments to save his life.68 Modern assessments of his health have changed several times in the past century. Prior to World War II infantile paralysis or polio was widely accepted as the cause. This is the diagnosis used in Robert Gravess Claudius novels first published in the 19
30 s. The New York Times wrote in 1934 that Claudius suffered from infantile paralysis which led to his limp state and measles which made him deaf at seven months of age among several other ailments.69 Polio does not explain many of the described symptoms however and a more recent theory implicates cerebral palsy as the cause.54 Tourette syndrome has also been considered a possibility.7071 As a person ancient historians described Claudius as generous and lowbrow a man who sometimes lunched with the plebeians.7273 They also paint him as bloodthirsty and cruel overfond of gladiatorial combat and executions and very quick to anger Claudius himself acknowledged the latter trait and apologized publicly for his temper.7475 According to the ancient historians he was also excessively trusting and easily manipulated by his wives and freedmen3976 but at the same time they portray him as paranoid and apathetic dull and easily confused.7778 Claudiuss extant works present a different view painting a picture of an intelligent scholarly wellread and conscientious administrator with an eye to detail and justice. Thus Claudius becomes an enigma. Since the discovery of his Letter to the Alexandrians much work has been done to rehabilitate Claudius and determine the truth.citation needed Scholarly works and their impactedit Claudius wrote copiously throughout his life. Arnaldo Momigliano states that during the reign of Tiberius which covers the peak of Claudiuss literary career it became impolitic to speak of republican Rome. The trend among the young historians was either to write about the new empire or about obscure antiquarian topics. Claudius was the rare scholar who covered both.79 Besides his history of Augustus reign that caused him so much grief his major works included Tyrrhenika a twentybook Etruscan history and Carchedonica an eightvolume history of Carthage80 as well as an Etruscan dictionary. He also wrote a book on diceplaying. Despite the general avoidance of the topic of the Republican era he penned a defense of Cicero against the charges of Asinius Gallus. Modern historians have used this to determine the nature of his politics and of the aborted chapters of his civil war history. The Claudian letters He proposed a reform of the Latin alphabet by the addition of three new letters he officially instituted the change during his censorship but they did not survive his reign. Claudius also tried to revive the old custom of putting dots between successive words Classical Latin was written with no spacing. Finally he wrote an eightvolume autobiography that Suetonius describes as lacking in taste.81 Claudius like most of the members of his dynasty harshly criticized his predecessors and relatives in surviving speeches.82 None of the works survived but other sources reference to him provide material for the surviving histories of the JulioClaudian dynasty. Suetonius quotes Claudiuss autobiography once and must have used it as a source numerous times. Tacitus uses Claudiuss arguments for the orthographical innovations mentioned above and may have used him for some of the more antiquarian passages in his annals. Claudius is the source for numerous passages of Plinys Natural History.83 The influence of historical study on Claudius is obvious. In his speech on Gallic senators he uses a version of the founding of Rome identical to that of Livy his tutor in adolescence. The speech is meticulous in details a common mark of all his extant works and he goes into long digressions on related matters.citation needed This indicates a deep knowledge of a variety of historical subjects that he shared.clarification needed Many of the public works instituted in his reign were based on plans first suggested by Julius Caesar. Levick believes this emulation of Caesar may have spread to all aspects of his policies.84 His censorship seems to have been based on those of his ancestors particularly Appius Claudius Caecus and he used the office to put into place many policies based on those of Republican times. This is when many of his religious reforms took effect also his building efforts greatly increased during his tenure. In fact his assumption of the office of Censor may have been motivated by a desire to see his academic labors bear fruit. For example he believed as most Romans did that Caecus had used the power of the censorship office to introduce the letter R and so used his own term to introduce his new letters.85 Deathedit A statue of Claudius at the Domvs Romana Malta Ancient historians agree that Claudius was murdered by poison  possibly contained in mushrooms or on a feather ostensibly put down his throat to induce vomiting  and died in the early hours of 13 October 
54.8 6 Nearly all implicate his final and powerful wife Agrippina as the instigator. Agrippina and Claudius had become more combative in the months leading up to his death. This carried on to the point where Claudius openly lamented his bad wives and began to comment on Britannicus approaching manhood with an eye towards restoring his status within the imperial family. Agrippina had motive in ensuring the succession of Nero before Britannicus could gain power.87 Some implicate either his taster Halotus his doctor Xenophon or the infamous poisoner Locusta as the administrator of the fatal substance.88 Some say he died after prolonged suffering following a single dose at dinner and some have him recovering only to be poisoned again.89 Among his contemporary sources Seneca the Younger ascribed the emperors death to natural causes while Josephus only spoke of rumors of his poisoning.90 Some historians have cast doubt on whether Claudius was murdered or merely died from illness or old age.c Evidence against his murder include his serious illnesses in his last years his unhealthy lifestyle and the fact that his taster Halotus continued to serve in the same position under Nero. Claudius had been so ill the year before that Nero vowed games for his recovery and the year of 54 seems to have been such an unhealthy year that one sitting member of each magistracy died within the span of a few months. He may even have died by eating a naturally poisonous mushroom possibly Amanita muscaria.91 On the other hand some modern scholars claim the near universality of the accusations in ancient texts lends credence to the crime.92 Claudiuss ashes were interred in the Mausoleum of Augustus on 24 October 54 after a funeral similar to that of his greatuncle Augustus 40 years earlier. Legacyedit Divine honoursedit Already while alive he received the widespread private worship of a living princeps93 and was worshipped in Britannia in his own temple in Camulodunum. Claudius was deified by Nero and the Senate almost immediately.94 Views of the new regimeedit Agrippina had sent Narcissus away shortly before Claudiuss death and now had the freedman murdered. The last act of this secretary of letters was to burn all of Claudiuss correspondence  most likely so it could not be used against him and others in an already hostile new regime. Thus Claudiuss private words about his own policies and motives were lost to history. Just as Claudius had criticized his predecessors in official edicts Nero often criticized the deceased Emperor and many Claudian laws and edicts were disregarded under the reasoning that he was too stupid and senile to have meant them.95 Senecas Apocolocyntosis mocks the deification of Claudius and reinforces the view of Claudius as an unpleasant fool this remained the official view for the duration of Neros reign. Eventually Nero stopped referring to his deified adoptive father at all. Claudiuss temple was left unfinished after only some of the foundation had been laid down. Eventually the site was overtaken by Neros Golden House.96 Flavian and later perspectivesedit The Flavians who had risen to prominence under Claudius took a different tack. They needed to shore up their legitimacy but also justify the fall of the JulioClaudians. They reached back to Claudius in contrast with Nero to show that they were associated with a good regime. Commemorative coins were issued of Claudius and his son Britannicus who had been a friend of Emperor Titus Titus was born in 39 Britannicus was born in 41. When Neros Golden House was burned the Temple of Claudius was finally completed on the Caelian Hill.96 However as the Flavians became established they needed to emphasize their own credentials more and their references to Claudius ceased. Instead he was lumped with the other emperors of the fallen dynasty. His statecult in Rome probably continued until the abolition of all cults of dead Emperors by Maximinus Thrax in 2372
38.9 7 The Feriale Duranum probably identical to the festival calendars of every regular army unit assigns him a sacrifice of a steer on his birthday the Kalends of August.98 And such commemoration and consequent feasting probably continued until the Christianization and disintegration of the army in the late 
4 th century.97 Views of ancient historiansedit The ancient historians Tacitus Suetonius in The Twelve Caesars and Cassius Dio all wrote after the last of the Flavians had gone. All three were senators or equites. They took the side of the Senate in most conflicts with the Princeps invariably viewing him as being in the wrong. This resulted in biases both conscious and unconscious. Suetonius lost access to the official archives shortly after beginning his work. He was forced to rely on secondhand accounts when it came to Claudius with the exception of Augustuss letters which had been gathered earlier. Suetonius painted Claudius as a ridiculous figure belittling many of his acts and crediting his good works to his retinue.99 Tacitus wrote a narrative for his fellow senators and fitted each of the emperors into a simple mold of his choosing.100 He wrote of Claudius as a passive pawn and an idiot in affairs relating to the palace and public life. During his Censorship of 4748 Tacitus allows the reader a glimpse of a Claudius who is more statesmanlike XI.2325 but it is a mere glimpse. Tacitus is usually held to have hidden his use of Claudiuss writings and to have omitted Claudiuss character from his works.d Even his version of Claudiuss Lyons tablet speech is edited to be devoid of the emperors personality. Dio was less biased but seems to have used Suetonius and Tacitus as sources. Thus the conception of Claudius as a weak fool controlled by those he supposedly ruled was preserved for the ages. As time passed Claudius was mostly forgotten outside of the historians accounts. His books were lost first as their antiquarian subjects became unfashionable. In the 
2 nd century Pertinax who shared his birthday became emperor overshadowing commemoration of Claudius.102 In modern mediaedit The best known fictional representation of the Emperor Claudius was contained in the books I Claudius and Claudius the God published in 1934 and 1935 respectively by Robert Graves both written in the firstperson to give the reader the impression that they are Claudiuss autobiography. Graves employed a fictive artifice to suggest that they were recently discovered genuine translations of Claudiuss writings. Claudiuss extant letters speeches and sayings were incorporated into the text mostly in the second book Claudius the God to add authenticity. In 1937 director Josef von Sternberg attempted a film version of I Claudius with Charles Laughton as Claudius. However the lead actress Merle Oberon had a nearfatal car accident and the movie was never finished. The surviving reels were featured in the BBC documentary The Epic That Never Was 1965. The motion picture rights for a new film eventually passed to producer Scott Rudin b. 19
58.1 03 Gravess two books were the basis for a British television adaptation I Claudius produced by the BBC. The series starred Derek Jacobi as Claudius and was broadcast in 1976 on BBC
2.1 04 It was a substantial critical success and won several BAFTA awards. The series was later broadcast in the United States on Masterpiece Theatre in 1977. The 1996 
7 VHS release and the later DVD release of the television series include The Epic That Never Was documentary. A radio adaptation of the Graves novels by Robin Brooks and directed by Jonquil Panting was broadcast in six onehour episodes on BBC Radio 4 beginning 4 December 2010. The cast featured Tom GoodmanHill as Claudius Derek Jacobi as Augustus Harriet Walter as Livia Tim McInnerny as Tiberius and Samuel Barnett as Caligula. In 2011 it was announced rights for a miniseries adaptation passed to HBO and BBC Two. Anne Thomopoulos and Jane Tranter producers of the popular HBOBBC2 Rome miniseries were attached to the I Claudius project. However as of 2018 it has yet to be produced and no release date is pending. The 1954 film Demetrius and the Gladiators also portrayed him sympathetically played by Barry Jones. In the 1960 film Messalina Claudius is portrayed by Mino Doro. On television Freddie Jones portrayed Claudius in the 1968 British television series The Caesars. The 1975 TV Special Further Up Pompeii based on the Frankie Howerd sitcom Up Pompeii featured Cyril Appleton as Claudius. In the 1979 motion picture Caligula where the role was performed by Giancarlo Badessi Claudius is depicted as an idiot in contrast to Robert Graves portrait of Claudius as a cunning and deeply intelligent man who is perceived by others to be an idiot. In the 1981 FrancoItalian film Caligula and Messalina he was portrayed by Gino Turini as John Turner. The 1985 madefortelevision miniseries A.D. features actor Richard Kiley as Claudius. Kiley portrays him as thoughtful but willing to cater to public opinion as well as being under the influence of Agrippina. In the 2004 TV film Imperium Nero Claudius is portrayed by Massimo Dapporto. He is portrayed in Season 3 of the Netflix documentary series Roman Empire which focused on the reign of Caligula by Kelson Henderson. The series concludes with Claudiuss accession. There is also a reference to Claudiuss suppression of a coup in the movie Gladiator though that incident is entirely fictional. In the series Britannia 2018 Claudius visits Britannia played by Steve Pemberton as a fool who is drugged by Aulus Plautius. He is portrayed by Derek Jacobi in the 2019 BBC film Horrible Histories The Movie  Rotten Romans In literature Claudius and his contemporaries appear in the historical novel The Roman by Mika Waltari. Canadianborn science fiction writer A. E. van Vogt reimagined Robert Gravess Claudius story in his two novels Empire of the Atom and The Wizard of Linn. The historical novel Chariot of the Soul by Linda Proud features Claudius as host and mentor of the young Togidubnus son of King Verica of the Atrebates during his tenyear stay in Rome. When Togidubnus returns to Britain in advance of the Roman army it is with a mission given to him by Claudius. See alsoedit JulioClaudian family tree List of Roman emperors Temple of Claudius Notesedit  Claudius was born as Tiberius Claudius Drusus and changed his name after his elder brother was adopted into the Julii following Drusus death.1 Simpson2 and Hurley3 suggest that he added the Germanicus in 9 BC by senatorial decree and switched Drusus for Nero when he became head of the family Claudii Nerones in AD 4. Stuart4 and Levick5 somewhat ignore Suetonius and propose that his name was always Ti. Claudius Nero and that he added Germanicus only in AD 4.  Sometimes referred to as Claudius I in reference to the later emperor Claudius Gothicus Claudius II.  Scramuzza 1940 pp. 9293 says that tradition makes every emperor the victim of foul play so we cant know if Claudius was truly murdered. The Emperor appears to have been seriously ill since at least 53. Levick 2015 pp. 7677 raises the possibility that Claudius was killed by the stress of fighting with Agrippina over the succession but concludes that the timing makes murder the most likely cause.  Annales XI 14 is often thought to be a good example the digression on the history of writing is actually Claudiuss own argument for his new letters and fits in with his personality and extant writings. Tacitus makes no explicit attribution  and so there exists the possibility that the digression is Tacituss own work or derivative of another source.101 Referencesedit  Suetonius Claudius 
2.1  Claudius was born at Lugdunum on the Kalends of Augustus in the consulship of Iullus Antonius and Fabius Africanus the very day when an altar was first dedicated to Augustus in that town and he received the name of Tiberius Claudius Drusus. Later on the adoption of his elder brother into the Julian family he took the surname of Germanicus.  Simpson pp. 365366.  Hurley p. 68.  Stuart p. 318 note 7.  Levick 2015 pp. 11 2122.  Cassius Dio 60 2.  Suetonius Claudius 2.  Suetonius Claudius 4.  Scramuzza 1940 p. 39.  a b Stuart.  Cassius Dio 60 2 Suhr 1955 suggests that this must refer to before Claudius came to power.  Major 1992.  a b Josephus Antiquitates Iudiacae XIX. Cassius Dio Historia Romana 60 
1.3   Josephus Ant. Iud. XIX.  Josephus Bellum Judaicum II 204233.  a b Suetonius Claudius 11.  Josephus Ant. Iud. XIX 268269.  Cassius Dio 50 3 4.  Claudius. The Royal Titulary of Ancient Egypt. Retrieved 12 March 2018.  Levick 2015 p. 51.  Suetonius Claudius 10.  Coin Museum No. R187407
15.4 . British Museum Online Collection. Retrieved 26 February 2018.  Pliny the Elder Book 336 .  Suetonius Claudius 
25.3 .  Cassius Dio 
60.2 4.  Head of the Emperor Claudius. British Museum.  Pliny the Elder 
5.1 
5.2 .  Cassius Dio 
60.8  
60.9 .  Scramuzza 1940 chapter 9.  Scramuzza 1940 Chap. 7 p. 142.  Suetonius Claudius 15.  Cassius Dio 61 33.  Scramuzza 1940 chapter 6.  Josephus Ant. Iud. XIX.
5.3  287.  Scramuzza 1940 chapter 7 p. 129.  Scramuzza 1940 chapter 7.  Suetonius Claudius 16.  Suetonius Claudius 32.  a b c d Suetonius Claudius 29.  Tacitus XII 57.  Acts 1128 KJV httpsen.wikisource.orgwikiPage
3 AKJV17
72 OxfordEdition
2 Cvol.2.djvu370  Scramuzza 1940 chapter 9 pp. 173174.  English translation of Berlin papyrus by W.D. Hogarth in Momigliano 1934.  a b Tacitus XII 65. Seneca Ad Polybium.  Scholz Piotr O. 2001. Eunuchs and Castrati A Cultural History. Markus Wiener Publishers. p. 119. ISBN 9781558762008.  Pliny the Elder XXXIII xlvii 133137.  Suetonius Claudius 25.  Suetonius Claudius 12.  a b c Suetonius Claudius 21.  Pliny the Elder Book IX 1415.  Humphrey 1986 pp. 100101.  Suetonius Claudius 
25.5  
29.1 .  Cassius Dio 

60.2.4 .  a b Leon 1948.  Tacitus IX 10 Cassius Dio 
61.3 1 Pliny the Elder X 172.  Levick 2015 p. 74.  Scramuzza 1940 p. 90.  Momigliano 1934 pp. 67.  Levick 2015 p. 73.  Tacitus XI. 2538..  Suetonius Claudius 26.  Scramuzza 1940 pp. 9192. See also Tacitus XII 6 7 and Suetonius Claudius 26  Levick 2015 pp. 8081. See also Scramuzza 1940 p. 92  Oost 1958.  a b Suetonius Claudius 30.  Seneca the Younger 5 6.  Suetonius Claudius 31.  Suetonius Claudius 38.  Jack Peter Monro 10 June 1934. Robert Gravess Story of a Flagrant Age in Rome I Claudius Is a Brilliant Picture of Rome During the Reigns of Augustus Tiberius and Caligula. The New York Times. p. BR4. Retrieved 30 May 2023  via ProQuest.  Burden George. The Imperial Gene Archived 11 June 2001 at the Wayback Machine The Medical Post 16 July 1996. Retrieved 24 June 2007.  Murad Ali 2010. A Neurological Mystery from History The Case of Claudius Caesar. Journal of the History of the Neurosciences. 19 3 221227. doi
10.1 08009647040902872775. PMID 20628951. S
2 CID 205664150.  Suetonius Claudius 5 21 40.  Cassius Dio 
50.2  5 12 31.  Suetonius Claudius 34 38.  Tacitus XII 20.  Cassius Dio 
50.2 8.  Suetonius Claudius 3537 3940.  Cassius Dio 50 23.  Momigliano 1934 pp. 46.  Harvey Sir Paul 1937. Claudius. The Oxford Companion To Classical Literature. Oxford At The Clarendon Press. p. 107.  Suetonius Claudius 41.  See Claudiuss Tabula clesiana in which he refers to the obstinate retirement of Tiberius. See also Josephus Ant Iud. XIX where an edict of Claudius refers to Caligulas madness and lack of understanding.  See Momigliano 1934 Chap. 1 note 20 p. 83. Pliny the Elder credits him by name in Book VII 35.  Levick 1978.  Ryan 1993 refers to the historian Varros account of the introduction  Tacitus XII 6667.  Suetonius Claudius 43.  Accounts of his death Suetonius Claudius 43 44 Tacitus XII 64 6667 Josephus Ant. Iud. 
19.1 48 151 Cassius Dio 61 34 Pliny the Elder II xxiii 92 XI lxxiii 189 XXII xlvi 92  Suetonius 44.  Josephus Ant Iud. 1967 20148.  Aveline 2004 pp. 473474  Levick 2015 also as opposed to the murder of Augustus which is only found in Tacitus and Dio where he quotes Tacitus. Suetonius an inveterate gossip doesnt mention it at all.  Gradel I. Emperor worship and Roman religion. Clarendon Press Oxford 2002. ISBN 97801992754
89 page needed  Suetonius Nero 9.  Suetonius Nero 33.  a b Levick 2015.  a b Gradel I. Emperor worship and Roman religion. Clarendon Press. ISBN 9780199275489 pp. 356341 367  Hekster Olivier 2008. Rome and Its Empire AD 193284. ISBN 9780748623044.  Scramuzza 1940 p. 29.  Vessey 1971.  Griffin 1990.  Levick 2015 p. 229.  I Claudius 2009  Synopsis. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2011.  I Claudius 6 November 1977 retrieved 14 April 2016 Bibliographyedit Ancient sourcesedit Lucius Annaeus Seneca the Younger 1902 
1 st century. Apocolocyntosis divi Claudii. Translated by Allan Perley Ball. Columbia University Press. Gaius Plinius Secundus 1961 c. 77 AD. Natural History. Translated by H. Rackham W.H.S. Jones D.E. Eichholz. Harvard University Press. Josephus 1737 c. 96 AD. Chapters XIXXX. Antiquities of the Jews. Translated by William Whiston. Harvard University Press. Publius Cornelius Tacitus 1924 c. AD 110. Books 1111. The Annals. Translated by Frederick W. Shipley. Loeb Classical Library. Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus 1914 c. AD 121. Life of Claudius. The Twelve Caesars. Translated by John Carew Rolfe. Loeb Classical Library. Lucius Cassius Dio 1927 c. 230. Books 6061. Roman History. Translated by Earnest Cary. Loeb Classical Library. Modern sourcesedit Aveline John 2004. The Death of Claudius. Historia Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte. 53 4 453475. ISSN 00182311. JSTOR 4436743. Griffin Miriam 1990. Claudius in Tacitus. The Classical Quarterly. 40 2 482501. doi
10.1 0
17 S0009838800043056. ISSN 00098388. JSTOR 639107. S
2 CID 170810972. Humphrey John H. 1986. Roman Circuses Arenas for Chariot Racing. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520049215. Hurley Donna W. ed. 2001. Suetonius Diuus Claudius. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521593255. Levick B. M. 1978. Antiquarian or Revolutionary Claudius Caesars Conception of His Principate. The American Journal of Philology. 99 1 79105. doi
10.2 307293870. ISSN 00029475. JSTOR 293870. Levick Barbara 2015 1990. Claudius 
2 nd ed.. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415703574. Leon Ernestine F. 1948. The Imbecillitas of the Emperor Claudius. Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association. 79 7986. doi
10.2 307283354. ISSN 00659711. JSTOR 283354. Major Ann 1992. Was He Pushed or Did He Leap Claudius Ascent to Power. Ancient History. 22 2531. Momigliano Arnaldo 1934. Claudius the Emperor and His Achievement. Translated by W.D. Hogarth. W. Heffer and Sons. Oost Stewart Irvin 1958. The Career of M. Antonius Pallas. The American Journal of Philology. 79 2 113139. doi
10.2 307292103. ISSN 00029475. JSTOR 292103. Ruth Thomas De Coursey 1916. The problem of Claudius Some aspects of a character study. Johns Hopkins University. Ryan F. X. 1993. Some Observations on the Censorship of Claudius and Vitellius A.D. 4748. The American Journal of Philology. 114 4 611618. doi
10.2 307295428. ISSN 00029475. JSTOR 295428. Scramuzza Vincent 1940. The Emperor Claudius. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780598740687. Simpson C.J. 1981. The Early Name of the Emperor Claudius PDF. Acta Antiqua Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae. 29 363368. Stuart Meriwether 1936. The Date of the Inscription of Claudius on the Arch of Ticinum. American Journal of Archaeology. 40 3 314322. doi
10.2 307498692. JSTOR 498692. S
2 CID 191396418. Suhr Elmer G. 1955. A Portrait of Claudius. American Journal of Archaeology. 59 4 319322. doi
10.2 307500799. JSTOR 500799. S
2 CID 192971087. Vessey D. W. T. C. 1971. Thoughts on Tacitus Portrayal of Claudius. The American Journal of Philology. 92 3 385409. doi
10.2 307292801. ISSN 00029475. JSTOR 292801. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Claudius. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Claudius. Works by Claudius Claudius Letter to the Alexandrians Lyon Tablet Second half of the Lyons Tablet Tacitus version of the Lyons Tablet speech Edict confirming the rights of the people of Trent. Full Latin text here. Biography from De Imperatoribus Romanis Claudius Page Claudius I at BBC History Claudius JulioClaudian dynasty Born 1 August 10 BC Died 13 October AD 54 Roman emperors Preceded by Caligula Roman emperor 4154 Succeeded by Nero Political offices Preceded by Gn. Acerronius Proculus G. Petronius Pontius Nigrinus Roman consul 37 suffect with Caligula Succeeded by A. Caecina Paetus G. Caninius Rebilus Preceded by Caligula Gn. Sentius Saturninus Roman consul II 4243 with G. Caecina Largus 42 L. Vitellius II 43 Succeeded by T. Statilius Taurus G. Sallustius Passienus Crispus Preceded by M. Junius Silanus G. Terentius Tullius Geminus Roman consul III 47 with L. Vitellius III Succeeded by A. Vitellius L. Vipstanus Poplicola Messalla Preceded by Camerinus Antistius Vetus M. Suillius Nerullinus Roman consul IV 51 with Ser. Cornelius Scipio Salvidienus Orfitus Succeeded by Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix L. Salvius Otho Titianus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 WorldCat National Norway Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Finland Belgium United States Sweden Latvia Czech Republic Greece Netherlands Poland Vatican Academics CiNii Artists Te Papa New Zealand ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleClaudiusoldid1221411455 Categories JulioClaudian dynasty Claudius 10 BC births 54 deaths 
1 stcentury GalloRoman people 
1 stcentury historians 
1 stcentury murdered monarchs 
1 stcentury Roman consuls 
1 stcentury Roman emperors Ancient Romans in Britain Claudii Nerones Creators of writing systems Etruscologists Deified Roman emperors Husbands of Agrippina the Younger Latin historians Murdered Roman emperors People from Lugdunum People with cerebral palsy Poisoned Romans Royalty and nobility with disabilities Roman pharaohs Incest Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2022 Pages with Latin IPA Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2020 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KANTO identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with HDS identifiers Articles with SNACID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 29 April 2024 at 1947 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width