Titus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 
1.1 Family background 
2 Adult life Toggle Adult life subsection 
2.1 Judaean campaigns 

2.1.1 Year of the Four Emperors 

2.1.2 Siege of Jerusalem 
2.2 Heir to Vespasian 
3 Emperor Toggle Emperor subsection 
3.1 Succession 
3.2 Challenges 
3.3 Public works 
3.4 Death 
4 Flavian family tree 
5 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 
5.1 Historiography 
5.2 In later arts 

5.2.1 Literature 

5.2.2 Paintings and visual arts 
6 References 
7 Sources 
8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 
8.1 Primary sources 
8.2 Secondary material 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Titus 88 languages Afrikaans  Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca     Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kurd  Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy     Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha    Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn   Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from AD 79 to 81 This article is about the Roman emperor. For other uses see Titus disambiguation. Titus Bust at the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek Roman emperor Reign 24 June 79  13 September 81 Predecessor Vespasian Successor Domitian Born 30 December 39 Rome Italy Died 13 September 81810913 aged 41 Rome Italy Burial Rome Spouses Arrecina Tertulla c.62 AD her death Marcia Furnilla c.6365 AD divorced Berenice concubine AD 79 separated Issue Julia Flavia by Arrecina Flavia by Furnilla Names Titus Flavius Vespasianus birth Titus Caesar Vespasianus 69791 Regnal name Imperator Titus Caesar Vespasianus Augustus Dynasty Flavian Father Vespasian Mother Domitilla Roman imperial dynasties Aureus of Titus Flavian dynasty Chronology Vespasian 6979 AD Titus 7981 AD Domitian 8196 AD Family Gens Flavia Flavian tree CategoryFlavian dynasty Preceded by Year of the Four Emperors Followed by NervaAntonine dynasty v t e Titus Caesar Vespasianus tats TYts 30 December 39  13 September AD 81 was Roman emperor from 79 to 81. A member of the Flavian dynasty Titus succeeded his father Vespasian upon his death becoming the first Roman emperor to succeed his biological father. Before becoming emperor Titus gained renown as a military commander serving under his father in Judea during the First JewishRoman War. The campaign came to a brief halt with the death of emperor Nero in 68 launching Vespasians bid for the imperial power during the Year of the Four Emperors. When Vespasian was declared Emperor on 1 July 69 Titus was left in charge of ending the Jewish rebellion. In 70 he besieged and captured Jerusalem and destroyed the city and the Second Temple. For this achievement Titus was awarded a triumph the Arch of Titus commemorates his victory to this day and age. During his fathers rule Titus gained notoriety in Rome serving as prefect of the Praetorian Guard and for carrying on a controversial relationship with the Jewish queen Berenice. Despite concerns over his character Titus ruled to great acclaim following the death of Vespasian in 79 and was considered a good emperor by Suetonius and other contemporary historians. As emperor Titus is best known for completing the Colosseum and for his generosity in relieving the suffering caused by two disasters the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79 and a fire in Rome in 80. After barely two years in office Titus died of a fever on 13 September 81. He was deified by the Roman Senate and succeeded by his younger brother Domitian. Early lifeedit Titus was born in Rome probably on 30 December 39 AD as the eldest son of Titus Flavius Vespasianus commonly known as Vespasian and Domitilla the Elder.2 He had one younger sister Domitilla the Younger born 45 and one younger brother Titus Flavius Domitianus born 51 commonly referred to as Domitian. Family backgroundedit Decades of civil war during the 
1 st century BC had contributed greatly to the demise of the old aristocracy of Rome which was gradually replaced in prominence by a new Italian nobility during the early 
1 st century.3 One such family was the gens Flavia which rose from relative obscurity to prominence in only four generations acquiring wealth and status under the Emperors of the JulioClaudian dynasty. Tituss greatgrandfather Titus Flavius Petro had served as a centurion under Pompey during Caesars Civil War. His military career ended in disgrace when he fled the battlefield at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC.4 Nevertheless Petro managed to improve his status by marrying the extremelywealthy Tertulla whose fortune guaranteed the upwards mobility of Petros son Titus Flavius Sabinus I Tituss grandfather.5 Sabinus himself amassed further wealth and possible equestrian status through his services as tax collector in Asia and banker in Helvetia. By marrying Vespasia Polla he allied himself to the more prestigious patrician gens Vespasia ensuring the elevation of his sons Titus Flavius Sabinus II and Vespasian to the senatorial rank.5 The political career of Vespasian included the offices of quaestor aedile and praetor and culminated with a consulship in 51 the year Domitian was born. As a military commander he gained early renown by participating in the Roman invasion of Britain in 
43.6  What little is known of Tituss early life has been handed down by Suetonius who recorded that he was brought up at the imperial court in the company of Britannicus7 the son of Emperor Claudius who would be murdered by Nero in 55. The story was even told that Titus was reclining next to Britannicus on the night he was murdered and sipped of the poison that was handed to him.7 Further details on his education are scarce but it seems he showed early promise in the military arts and was a skilled poet and orator both in Greek and Latin.8 Adult lifeedit Titus c. 70 AD From around 57 to 59 he was a military tribune in Germania. He also served in Britannia and perhaps arrived about 60 with reinforcements needed after the revolt of Boudica. About 63 he returned to Rome and married Arrecina Tertulla daughter of Marcus Arrecinus Clemens a former Prefect of the Praetorian Guard. She died about 
65.9  Titus then took a new wife of a much more distinguished family Marcia Furnilla. However Marcias family was closely linked to the opposition to Nero. Her uncle Barea Soranus and his daughter Servilia were among those who perished after the failed Pisonian conspiracy of 
65.1 0 Some modern historians theorise that Titus divorced his wife because of her familys connection to the conspiracy.1112 Titus never remarried and appears to have had multiple daughters13 at least one of them by Marcia Furnilla.14 The only one known to have survived to adulthood was Julia Flavia perhaps Tituss child by Arrecina whose mother was also named Julia.15 During this period Titus also practiced law and attained the rank of quaestor.14 Judaean campaignsedit Further information First JewishRoman War The province of Judaea during the 
1 st century. In 66 the Jews of the Judaea Province revolted against the Roman Empire. Cestius Gallus the legate of Syria was defeated at the battle of BethHoron and forced to retreat from Jerusalem.16 The proRoman King Agrippa II and his sister Berenice fled the city to Galilee where they later gave themselves up to the Romans.17 Nero appointed Vespasian to put down the rebellion who was dispatched to the region at once with the Fifth Legion and Tenth Legion.17 He was later joined at Ptolemais by Titus with the Fifteenth Legion.18 With a strength of 60000 professional soldiers the Romans prepared to sweep across Galilee and march on Jerusalem.18 The history of the war was covered in detail by the RomanJewish historian Josephus in his work The War of the Jews. Josephus served as a commander in the city of Yodfat when the Roman army invaded Galilee in 67. After an exhausting siege which lasted 47 days the city fell with an estimated 40000 killed. Titus however was not simply set on ending the war.19 Surviving one of several group suicides Josephus surrendered to Vespasian and became a prisoner. He later wrote that he had provided the Romans with intelligence on the ongoing revolt.20 By 68 the entire coast and the north of Judaea were subjugated by the Roman Army with decisive victories won at Taricheae and Gamala where Titus distinguished himself as a skilled general.1421 Year of the Four Emperorsedit A map of the Roman Empire during the Year of the Four Emperors AD 69. Blue areas indicate provinces loyal to Vespasian and Gaius Licinius Mucianus. The last and most significant fortified city held by the Jewish resistance was Jerusalem. The campaign came to a sudden halt when news arrived of Neros death.22 Almost simultaneously the Roman Senate had declared Galba the governor of Hispania as emperor. Vespasian decided to await further orders and sent Titus to greet the new princeps.23 Before reaching Italy Titus learnt that Galba had been murdered and replaced by Otho the governor of Lusitania and that Vitellius and his armies in Germania were preparing to march on the capital intent on overthrowing Otho. Not wanting to risk being taken hostage by one side or the other he abandoned the journey to Rome and rejoined his father in Judaea.24 Meanwhile Otho was defeated in the First Battle of Bedriacum and committed suicide.25 When the news reached the armies in Judaea and gyptus they took matters into their own hands and declared Vespasian emperor on 1 July 
69.2 6 Vespasian accepted and after negotiations by Titus joined forces with Gaius Licinius Mucianus governor of Syria.27 A strong force drawn from the Judaean and Syrian legions marched on Rome under the command of Mucianus and Vespasian travelled to Alexandria leaving Titus in charge to end the Jewish rebellion.2829 By the end of 69 the forces of Vitellius had been beaten and Vespasian was officially declared emperor by the Senate on 21 December thus ending the Year of the Four Emperors.30 Siege of Jerusalemedit Main article Siege of Jerusalem AD 70 Arch of Titus North inner panel relief of Titus as triumphator Arch of Titus South inner panel closeup of relief showing spoils from the fall of Jerusalem Destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem Francesco Hayez oil on canvas 1867 depicts the destruction and looting of the Second Temple by the Roman Army. Meanwhile the Jews had become embroiled in a civil war of their own by splitting the resistance in Jerusalem among several factions. The Sicarii led by Menahem ben Judah could hold on for long the Zealots led by Eleazar ben Simon eventually fell under the command of the Galilean leader John of Gush Halav and the other northern rebel commander Simon Bar Giora managed to gain leadership over the Idumeans.31 Titus besieged Jerusalem. The Roman Army was joined by the Twelfth Legion which had been previously defeated under Cestius Gallus and from Alexandria Vespasian sent Tiberius Julius Alexander governor of Egypt to act as Titus second in command.32 Titus surrounded the city with three legions Vth XIIth and XVth on the western side and one Xth on the Mount of Olives to the east. He put pressure on the food and water supplies of the inhabitants by allowing pilgrims to enter the city to celebrate Passover and then refusing them egress. Jewish raids continuously harassed the Roman Army one of which nearly resulted in Titus being captured.33 After attempts by Josephus to negotiate a surrender had failed the Romans resumed hostilities and quickly breached the first and second walls of the city.34 To intimidate the resistance Titus ordered deserters from the Jewish side to be crucified around the city wall.35 By that time the Jews had been exhausted by famine and when the weak third wall was breached bitter street fighting ensued.36 The Romans finally captured the Antonia Fortress and began a frontal assault on the gates of the Second Temple.37 As they breached the gate the Romans set the upper and lower city aflame culminating with the destruction of the Temple. When the fires subsided Titus gave the order to destroy the remainder of the city allegedly intending that no one would remember the name Jerusalem.38 The Temple was demolished Tituss soldiers proclaimed him imperator in honour of the victory.39 Jerusalem was sacked and much of the population killed or dispersed. Josephus claims that 1100000 people were killed during the siege most of whom were Jewish.40 Josephuss death toll assumptions are rejected as impossible by modern scholarship since about a million people then lived in the Land of Israel half of them Jewish and sizable Jewish populations remained in the area after the war was over even in the hardhit region of Judea.41 However 97000 were captured and enslaved including Simon BarGiora and John of Gischala.40 Many fled to areas around the Mediterranean Sea. Titus reportedly refused to accept a wreath of victory as he claimed that he had not won the victory on his own but had been the vehicle through which their God had manifested his wrath against his people.42 The Jewish diaspora during the Temples destruction according to Josephus was in Parthia Persia Babylonia Iraq and Arabia and some were beyond the Euphrates and in Adiabene Kurdistan.43 Heir to Vespasianedit Tituss triumph after the First JewishRoman War was celebrated with the Arch of Titus in Rome which shows the treasures taken from the Temple including the Menorah and the trumpets of Jericho. Unable to sail to Italy during the winter Titus celebrated elaborate games at Caesarea Maritima and Berytus and then travelled to Zeugma on the Euphrates where he was presented with a crown by Vologases I of Parthia. While he was visiting Antioch he confirmed the traditional rights of the Jews in that city.44 Statue of Titus modelled after the Doryphoros of Polykleitos 7981 AD Vatican Museums On his way to Alexandria he stopped in Memphis to consecrate the sacred bull Apis. According to Suetonius that caused consternation since the ceremony required Titus to wear a diadem which the Romans associated with monarchy and the partisanship of Tituss legions had already led to fears that he might rebel against his father. Titus returned quickly to Rome in the hope according to Suetonius of allaying any suspicions about his conduct.45 Upon his arrival in Rome in 71 Titus was awarded a triumph.46 Accompanied by Vespasian and Domitian Titus rode into the city enthusiastically saluted by the Roman populace and preceded by a lavish parade containing treasures and captives from the war. Josephus describes a procession with large amounts of gold and silver carried along the route followed by elaborate reenactments of the war Jewish prisoners and finally the treasures taken from the Temple of Jerusalem including the Menorah and the Pentateuch.47 Simon Bar Giora was executed in the Forum and the procession closed with religious sacrifices at the Temple of Jupiter.48 The triumphal Arch of Titus which stands at one entrance to the Forum memorialises the victory of Titus. With Vespasian declared emperor Titus and his brother Domitian received the title of Caesar from the Senate.49 In addition to sharing tribunician power with his father Titus held seven consulships during Vespasians reign50 and acted as his secretary appearing in the Senate on his behalf.50 More crucially he was appointed Praetorian prefect commander of the Praetorian Guard ensuring its loyalty to the emperor and further solidifying Vespasians position as a legitimate ruler.50 In that capacity Titus achieved considerable notoriety in Rome for his violent actions frequently ordering the execution of suspected traitors on the spot.50 When in 79 a plot by Aulus Caecina Alienus and Eprius Marcellus to overthrow Vespasian was uncovered Titus invited Alienus to dinner and ordered him to be stabbed before he had even left the room.5051 During the Jewish Wars Titus had begun a love affair with Berenice the sister of Agrippa II.24 The Herodians had collaborated with the Romans during the rebellion and Berenice herself had supported Vespasian in his campaign to become emperor.52 In 75 she returned to Titus and openly lived with him in the palace as his promised wife. The Romans were wary of the eastern queen and disapproved of their relationship.53 When the pair was publicly denounced by Cynics in the theatre Titus acceded to the pressure and sent her away54 but his reputation suffered further regardless. Emperoredit Successionedit A Roman denarius depicting Titus c. 79. The reverse commemorates his triumph in the Judaean Wars representing a Jewish captive kneeling in front of a trophy of arms. Caption IMP. T. CAESAR VESPASIANVS AVG.  TRibunus POTestas VIII COnSul VII Vespasian died of an infection on 2355 or 2456 June 79 AD and was immediately succeeded by his son Titus.57 He was the first Roman emperor to come to the throne after his own biological father. As Pharaoh of Egypt Titus adopted the titulary Autokrator Titos Kaisaros Hununefer Benermerut Emperor Titus Caesar the perfect and popular youth.58 Because of his many alleged vices many Romans feared that he would be another Nero.59 Against those expectations however Titus proved to be an effective emperor and was well loved by the population who praised him highly when they found that he possessed the greatest virtues instead of vices.59 One of his first acts as emperor was to order a halt to trials based on treason charges60 which had long plagued the principate. The law of treason or law of majestas was originally intended to prosecute those who had corruptly impaired the people and majesty of Rome by any revolutionary action.61 Under Augustus however that custom had been revived and applied to cover slander and libel as well.61 This led to numerous trials and executions under Tiberius Caligula and Nero and the formation of networks of informers delators which terrorised Romes political system for decades.60 Titus put an end to that practice against himself or anyone else and declared It is impossible for me to be insulted or abused in any way. For I do naught that deserves censure and I care not for what is reported falsely. As for the emperors who are dead and gone they will avenge themselves in case anyone does them a wrong if in very truth they are demigods and possess any power.62 Consequently no senators were put to death during his reign62 he thus kept to his promise that he would assume the office of Pontifex Maximus for the purpose of keeping his hands unstained.63 Informants were publicly punished and banished from the city. Titus further prevented abuses by making it unlawful for a person to be tried under different laws for the same offense.60 Finally when Berenice returned to Rome he sent her away.59 As emperor he became known for his generosity and Suetonius states that upon realising he had brought no benefit to anyone during a whole day he remarked Friends I have lost a day.60 Challengesedit The Eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 completely destroyed Pompeii and Herculaneum. Plaster casts of actual victims found during excavations are now on display in some of the ruins. Although Tituss brief reign was marked by a relative absence of major military or political conflicts he faced a number of major disasters. A few months after his accession Mount Vesuvius erupted.64 The eruption almost completely destroyed the cities and resort communities around the Bay of Naples. The cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum were buried under metres of stone and lava65 killing thousands.66 Titus appointed two exconsuls to organise and coordinate the relief effort and personally donated large amounts of money from the imperial treasury to aid the victims of the volcano.60 Additionally he visited Pompeii once after the eruption and again the following year.67 During the second visit in spring of 80 a fire broke out in Rome and burned large parts of the city for three days and three nights.6067 Although the extent of the damage was not as disastrous as during the Great Fire of 64 and crucially spared the many districts of insulae Cassius Dio records a long list of important public buildings that were destroyed including Agrippas Pantheon the Temple of Jupiter the Diribitorium parts of the Theatre of Pompey and the Saepta Julia among others.67 Once again Titus personally compensated for the damaged regions.67 According to Suetonius a plague also broke out during the fire.60 The nature of the disease however and the death toll are unknown. Meanwhile war had resumed in Britannia where Gnaeus Julius Agricola pushed further into Caledonia and managed to establish several forts there.68 As a result of his actions Titus received the title of imperator for the fifteenth time between 9 September and 31 December 79 AD.69 His reign also saw the rebellion led by Terentius Maximus one of several false Neros who appeared throughout the 
70 s.70 Although Nero was primarily known as a universallyhated tyrant there is evidence that for much of his reign he remained highly popular in the eastern provinces. Reports that Nero had survived his overthrow were fuelled by the confusing circumstances of his death and several prophecies foretelling his return.71 According to Cassius Dio Terentius Maximus resembled Nero in voice and appearance and like him sang to the lyre.62 Terentius established a following in Asia Minor but was soon forced to flee beyond the Euphrates and took refuge with the Parthians.6270 In addition sources state that Titus discovered that his brother Domitian was plotting against him but refused to have him killed or banished.6372 Public worksedit The Flavian Amphitheatre better known as the Colosseum was completed after 10 years construction during the reign of Titus and inaugurated with spectacular games that lasted for 100 days. See Inaugural games of the Flavian Amphitheatre. Construction of the Flavian Amphitheatre now better known as the Colosseum was begun in 70 under Vespasian and was finally completed in 80 under Titus.73 In addition to providing spectacular entertainments to the Roman populace the building was also conceived as a gigantic triumphal monument to commemorate the military achievements of the Flavians during the Jewish Wars.74 The inaugural games lasted for a hundred days and were said to be extremely elaborate including gladiatorial combat fights between wild animals elephants and cranes mock naval battles for which the theatre was flooded horse races and chariot races.75 During the games wooden balls were dropped into the audience inscribed with various prizes clothing gold or even slaves which could then be traded for the designated item.75 Adjacent to the amphitheatre within the precinct of Neros Golden House Titus had also ordered the construction of a new public bath house the Baths of Titus.75 Construction of the building was hastily finished to coincide with the completion of the Flavian Amphitheatre.59 Practice of the imperial cult was revived by Titus but apparently it met with some difficulty since Vespasian was not deified until six months after his death.76 To honour and glorify the Flavian dynasty further foundations were laid for what would later become the Temple of Vespasian and Titus which was finished by Domitian.7778 Deathedit Marble statue of Titus found near the Lateran Baptistry Chiaramonti Museum of the Vatican Museums At the closing of the games Titus officially dedicated the amphitheatre and the baths in what was his final recorded act as Emperor.72 He set out for the Sabine territories but fell ill at the first posting station79 where he died of a fever reportedly in the same farmhouse as his father.80 Allegedly the last words he uttered before passing away were I have made but one mistake.7279 Titus had ruled the Roman Empire for just over two years from the death of his father in 79 to his own on 13 September 
81.7 2 He was succeeded by Domitian whose first act as emperor was to deify his brother.81 Historians have speculated on the exact nature of his death and to which mistake Titus alluded in his final words. Philostratus wrote that he was poisoned by Domitian with a sea hare Aplysia depilans and that his death had been foretold to him by Apollonius of Tyana.82 Suetonius and Cassius Dio maintain that he died of natural causes but both accuse Domitian of having left the ailing Titus for dead.7281 Consequently Dio believed the mistake to refer to not having Tituss brother executed when he was found to be openly plotting against him.72 The Babylonian Talmud Gittin 
56 b attributes Tituss death to an insect that flew into his nose and picked at his brain for seven years in a repetition of another legend referring to the biblical King Nimrod.838485 According to Rabbinic literature Titus was a descendant of Esau and dared to challenge the Lord.86 Jewish tradition says that Titus was plagued by God for destroying the second Temple and died as a result of a gnat going up his nose causing a large growth inside of his brain that killed him.8788 A story is recorded in which Onkelos a nephew of the Roman emperor Titus who destroyed the Second Temple intent on converting to Judaism summons up spirits to help make up his mind. Each describes his punishment in the afterlife.Onkelos son of Kolonikos ... went and raised Titus from the dead by magical arts and asked him Who is most in repute in the other world He replied Israel. What then he said about joining them He said Their observances are burdensome and you will not be able to carry them out. Go and attack them in that world and you will be at the top as it is written Her adversaries are become the head etc. whoever harasses Israel becomes head. He asked him What is your punishment in the other world He replied What I decreed for myself. Every day my ashes are collected and sentence is passed on me and I am burnt and my ashes are scattered over the seven seas...89 Flavian family treeedit v t e FLAVIAN DYNASTY detailed family tree Titus Flavius Petro Tertulla Vespasius Pollio Julia the Younger Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasia Polla Vespasius praetor Aemilia Lepida Agrippina the Elder Germanicus Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasian 6979 Domitilla the Elder Flavia died young Junia Lepida Vistilia Titus Flavius Sabinus Domitilla the Younger Titus 7981 Arrecina Tertulla Cassia Longina Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo Caesonia Caligula 3741 Titus Flavius Sabinus Titus Flavius Clemens Flavia Domitilla Julia Flavia Domitian 8196 Domitia Longina Domitia Flavius Caesar Legacyedit Historiographyedit The Arch of Titus on the Via Sacra just to the southeast of the Roman Forum in Rome Tituss record among ancient historians stands as one of the most exemplary of any emperor. All surviving accounts from the period many of them written by his own contemporaries present a highly favourable view toward Titus. His character has especially prospered in comparison with that of his brother Domitian. The Wars of the Jews offers a firsthand eyewitness account of the Jewish rebellion and the character of Titus. The neutrality of Josephuss writings has come into question however as he was heavily indebted to the Flavians. In 71 he arrived in Rome in the entourage of Titus became a Roman citizen and took on the Roman nomen Flavius and praenomen Titus from his patrons. He received an annual pension and lived in the palace.90 It was in Rome and under Flavian patronage that Josephus wrote all of his known works. The War of the Jews is heavily slanted against the leaders of the revolt by portraying the rebellion as weak and unorganised and even blaming the Jews for causing the war.91 His credibility as a historian later came under fire.92 Another contemporary of Titus was Publius Cornelius Tacitus who started his public career in 80 or 81 and credits the Flavian dynasty with his elevation.93 The Histories his account of the period was published during the reign of Trajan. Unfortunately only the first five books from this work have survived with the text on Tituss and Domitians reign entirely lost. Suetonius Tranquilius gives a short but highlyfavourable account on Tituss reign in The Lives of Twelve Caesars94 emphasising his military achievements and his generosity as emperor and in short describing him as follows Titus of the same surname as his father was the delight and darling of the human race such surpassing ability had he by nature art or good fortune to win the affections of all men and that too which is no easy task while he was emperor.94 Finally Cassius Dio wrote his Roman History over 100 years after the death of Titus. He shares a similar outlook as Suetonius possibly even using the latter as a source but is more reserved by noting His satisfactory record may also have been due to the fact that he survived his accession but a very short time for he was thus given no opportunity for wrongdoing. For he lived after this only two years two months and twenty daysin addition to the thirtynine years five months and twentyfive days he had already lived at that time. In this respect indeed he is regarded as having equalled the long reign of Augustus since it is maintained that Augustus would never have been loved had he lived a shorter time nor Titus had he lived longer. For Augustus though at the outset he showed himself rather harsh because of the wars and the factional strife was later able in the course of time to achieve a brilliant reputation for his kindly deeds Titus on the other hand ruled with mildness and died at the height of his glory whereas if he had lived a long time it might have been shown that he owes his present fame more to good fortune than to merit.57 Pliny the Elder who later died during the eruption of Mount Vesuvius95 dedicated his Naturalis Historia to Titus.96 In contrast to the ideal portrayal of Titus in Roman histories Jewish memory has Titus the Wicked remembered as an evil oppressor and destroyer of the Temple. For example one legend in the Babylonian Talmud describes Titus as having had sex with a prostitute on a Torah scroll inside the Temple during its destruction.97 In later artsedit The Triumph of Titus by Sir Lawrence AlmaTadema 1885. The composition suggests a love affair between Titus and Domitians wife Domitia Longina see below. The war in Judaea and the life of Titus particularly his relationship with Berenice have inspired writers and artists through the centuries. The basrelief in the Arch of Titus has been influential in the depiction of the destruction of Jerusalem with the Menorah frequently being used to symbolise the looting of the Second Temple. Literatureedit The early mediaeval Christian text Vindicta Salvatoris anachronistically portrays Titus as Roman clientking of Libya north of Judah.98 Brnice a play by Jean Racine 1670 which focuses on the love affair between Titus and Berenice. Tite et Brnice a play by Pierre Corneille which was in competition with Racine the same year and concerns the same subject matter. Titus and Berenice a 1676 play by Thomas Otway La clemenza di Tito an opera by Mozart which centres around a plot to kill Emperor Titus instigated by Vitellia the daughter of Vitellius to gain what she believes to be her rightful place as Queen. The Josephus Trilogy novels by Lion Feuchtwanger about the life of Flavius Josephus and his relation with the Flavian dynasty. Der jdische Krieg Josephus 1932 Die Shne The Jews of Rome 1935 Der Tag wird kommen The day will come Josephus and the Emperor 1942 The Marcus Didius Falco novels which take place during the reign of Vespasian. Titus figures prominently in The PearlMaiden a novel by H. Rider Haggard first published in 1901. Paintings and visual artsedit The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus by Wilhelm von Kaulbach 1846. Oil on canvas 585 x 705 cm. Neue Pinakothek Munich. An allegorical depiction of the destruction of Jerusalem dramatically centered around the figure of Titus. The Destruction and Sack of the Temple of Jerusalem by Nicolas Poussin 1626. Oil on canvas 1
45.8  x 194 cm. Israel Museum Jerusalem. Depicts the destruction and looting of the Second Temple by the Roman army led by Titus. The Destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem by Francesco Hayez 1867. Oil on canvas 183 x 252 cm. Galleria dArte Moderna Venice. Depicts the destruction and looting of the Second Temple by the Roman army. The Siege and Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans Under the Command of Titus A.D. 70 by David Roberts 1850. Oil on canvas 136 x 197 cm. Private collection. Depicts the burning and looting of Jerusalem by the Roman army under Titus. The Triumph of Titus and Vespasian by Giulio Romano 1540. Oil on wood 170 x 120 cm. Louvre Paris. Depicts Titus and Vespasian as they ride into Rome on a triumphal chariot preceded by a parade carrying spoils from the war in Judaea. The painting anachronistically features the Arch of Titus which was not completed until the reign of Domitian. The Triumph of Titus by Lawrence AlmaTadema 1885. Oil on canvas. Private collection. This painting depicts the triumphal procession of Titus and his family. AlmaTadema was known for his meticulous historical research on the ancient world.99 Vespasian dressed as Pontifex Maximus walks at the head of his family followed by Domitian and his first wife Domitia Longina who he had only recently married. Behind Domitian follows Titus dressed in religious regalia. An exchange of glances between Titus and Domitia suggests an affair which historians have speculated upon.7279 Rear Panel of the Franks Casket. Northumbrian early 
8 th century. Whales bone carving with AngloSaxon runic inscription 
22.9  x 19 cm. British Museum London. Titus leads Roman army into Jerusalem and captures Temple. Inhabitants flee into exile judgement is passed on offenders and captives are led away. Referencesedit  Hammond p. 27.  Suetonius claims Titus was born in the year Caligula was assassinated 41. However this contradicts his statement that Titus died in his 
42 nd year as well as Cassius Dio who notes that Titus was 39 at the time of his accession. See Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 1 11 Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.18 and Brian Jones Robert Milns 2002. Suetonius The Flavian Emperors A Historical Commentary. London Bristol Classical Press. p. 91. ISBN 9781853996139.  Jones 1992 p. 3  Jones 1992 p. 1  a b Jones 1992 p. 2  Jones 1992 p. 8  a b Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 2  Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 3  Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 4 with Jones and Milns pp. 9596  Tacitus Annals XVI.3033  Gavin Townend Some Flavian Connections The Journal of Roman Studies 1961 p. 57. See Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 4  Jones 1992 p. 11  Philostratus The Life of Apollonius of Tyana VII.7 Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine  a b c Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 4  Jones and Milns pp. 96 167.  Josephus The Wars of the Jews II.
19.9   a b Josephus The Wars of the Jews III.
1.2   a b Josephus The War of the Jews III.
4.2   Josephus The Wars of the Jews III.
7.3 4  Josephus The Wars of the Jews III.
8.8   Josephus The Wars of the Jews III.10  Josephus The Wars of the Jews IV.
9.2   Tacitus Histories II.1  a b Tacitus Histories II.2  Tacitus Histories II.4149  Josephus The Wars of the Jews IV.
10.4   Tacitus Histories II.5  Josephus The Wars of the Jews IV.
11.1   Tacitus Histories II.82  Tacitus Histories IV.3  Josephus The Wars of the Jews V.
1.4   Josephus The Wars of the Jews V.
1.6   Josephus The Wars of the Jews V.
2.2   Josephus The Wars of the Jews V.
6 V.9  Josephus The Wars of the Jews V.
11.1   Josephus The Wars of the Jews VI.
2 VI.3  Josephus The Wars of the Jews VI.
4.1   Sulpicius Severus Chronicles II.
30.6 7. For Tacitus as the source see T.D. Barnes July 1977. The Fragments of Tacitus Histories. Classical Philology. 72 3 224231 pp. 226228. doi
10.1 086366355. S
2 CID 161875316.  Josephus The Wars of the Jews VI.
6.1   a b Josephus The Wars of the Jews VI.
9.3   Schwartz Seth 1984. Political social and economic life in the land of Israel. In Davies William David Finkelstein Louis Katz Steven T. eds.. The Cambridge History of Judaism Volume 4 The Late RomanRabbinic Period. Cambridge University Press. p. 24. ISBN 9780521772488.  Philostratus The Life of Apollonius of Tyana 
6.2 9 Archived 15 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Josephus. BJ. 

1.1.5 .  Josephus The Wars of the Jews VII.
3.1  VII.
5.2   Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 5  Cassius Dio Roman History LXV.6  Josephus The Wars of the Jews VII.
5.5   Josephus The Wars of the Jews VII.
5.6   Cassius Dio Roman History LXV.1  a b c d e Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 6  Cassius Dio Roman History LXV.16  Tacitus Histories II.81  Schalit A. 2007. Berenice. In M. Berenbaum  F. Skolnik Eds. Encyclopaedia Judaica 
2 nd ed. Vol. 3 pp. 410411. Macmillan Reference US.  Cassius Dio Roman History LXV.15  Suetonius Lives of the Twelve Caesars Life of Vespasian 24  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.17  a b Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.18  Titus. The Royal Titulary of Ancient Egypt. Retrieved 13 March 2018.  a b c d Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 7  a b c d e f g Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 8  a b Tacitus Annals I.72  a b c d Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.19  a b Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 9  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.22  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.23  The exact number of casualties is unknown but estimates of the population of Pompeii range between 10000  Engineering of Pompeii Ruins Reveal Roman Technology for Construction Transportation and Water Distribution. Archived from the original on 8 July 2008. Retrieved 10 March 2009. and 25000 1 with at least 1000 bodies currently recovered in and around the city ruins.  a b c d Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.24  Tacitus Agricola 22  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.20  a b Tacitus Histories I.2  Sanford Eva Matthews 1937. Nero and the East. Harvard Studies in Classical Philology. 48 75103. doi
10.2 307310691. JSTOR 310691.  a b c d e f g Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.26  Roth Leland M. 1993. Understanding Architecture Its Elements History and Meaning 
1 st ed.. Boulder CO Westview Press. ISBN 9780064301589.  Claridge Amanda 1998. Rome An Oxford Archaeological Guide 
1 st ed.. Oxford UK Oxford University Press 1998. pp. 276282. ISBN 9780192880031.  a b c Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.25  Coins bearing the inscription Divus Vespasianus were not issued until 80 or 81 by Titus.  Jones Brian W. The Emperor Titus. New York St. Martins P 1984. 143.  Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Domitian 5  a b c Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 10  Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 11  a b Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Domitian 2  Philostratus The Life of Apollonius of Tyana 
6.3 2 Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Tractate Gittin 
56 b. www.sefaria.org.il.  Rosner Fred. Medicine in the Bible and Talmud. p. 76. Pub. 1995 KTAV Publishing House ISBN 0881255068. Extract viewable at 2  WikisourcePageLegends of Old Testament Characters.djvu178  Tituss Death Chabad  Quinn Thomas Director 26 June 1995. Urban Legends Season 3 Episode 1 Television series. United States. FilmRise.  Tituss Death. Chabad.org. Retrieved 8 November 2018.  Babylonian Talmud Gittin 
56 b
57 a. 1935 Soncino edition  Josephus The Life of Flavius Josephus 76  Josephus The Wars of the Jews II.17  Josephus Flavius The Jewish War tr. G.A. Williamson introduction by E. Mary Smallwood. New York Penguin 1981 p. 24  Tacitus Histories I.1  a b Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus 1  The Destruction of Pompeii 79 AD Translation of Plinys letters. Original.  Pliny the Elder Natural Histories Preface  Babylonian Talmud Gittin 
56 b  Ehrman and Plee 2011 p. 523.  Prettejohn Elizabeth March 2002. Lawrence AlmaTadema and the Modern City of Ancient Rome. The Art Bulletin. 84 1 115129. doi
10.2 3073177255. JSTOR 3177255. Sourcesedit Hammond Mason 1957. Imperial Elements in the Formula of the Roman Emperors during the First Two and a Half Centuries of the Empire. Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. 25 1964. doi
10.2 3074238646. JSTOR 4238646. Jones Brian W. 1992. The Emperor Domitian. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415101950. Brian Jones Robert Milns 2002. Suetonius The Flavian Emperors A Historical Commentary. London Bristol Classical Press. p. 91. ISBN 9781853996139. Ehrman Bart D. Plee Zlatko 2011. The Apocryphal Gospels Texts and Translations. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199732104. apocryphal gospels texts and translations. Further readingedit Primary sourcesedit Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Titus Latin text with English translation Cassius Dio Roman History Books 65 and 66 English translation Josephus The War of the Jews English translation Tacitus Histories Books 2 4 and 5 English translation Secondary materialedit Coinage of Titus at Wildwinds.com A private collection of coins minted by Titus Biography of Titus at romanemperors.org Wayback Machine Austin Simmons The Cipherment of the Franks Casket Titus is twice depicted on the back side of the Franks Casket. External linksedit Media related to Titus category at Wikimedia Commons Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasianus . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 26 
11 th ed.. 1911. p. 1032. Titus Flavian dynasty Born 30 December AD 39 Died 13 September AD 81 Political offices Preceded by Vespasian Roman emperor 7981 Succeeded by Domitian Preceded by Gnaeus Caecilius Simplex Gaius Quinctius Atticus Roman consul 70 with Vespasian Succeeded by Gaius Licinius Mucianus II Quintus Petillius Cerialis as suffect consuls Preceded by Gnaeus Pompeius Collega Quintus Julius Cordus as suffect consuls Roman consul 72 with Vespasian Succeeded by Gaius Licinius Mucianus III Titus Flavius Sabinus II as suffect consuls Preceded by Sextus Julius Frontinus and ignotus as suffect consuls Roman consul 7477 with Vespasian followed by Domitian Succeeded by Gaius Catellius Celer Marcus Arruntius Aquila as suffect consuls Preceded by Quintus Articuleius Paetus and ignotus as suffect consuls Roman consul 7980 Succeeded by A. Didius Gallus Fabricius Veiento II L. Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus as suffect consuls v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Belgium United States Czech Republic Croatia Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTitusoldid1222244968 Categories Titus 39 births 81 deaths 
1 stcentury Roman emperors 
1 stcentury Roman poets 
1 stcentury praetorian prefects Ancient Roman military personnel Ancient Romans in Britain Jews and Judaism in the Roman Empire Deified Roman emperors Flavian dynasty Flavii 
1 stcentury Roman consuls People of the First JewishRoman War Roman quaestors Vespasian Sons of Roman emperors Roman pharaohs Imperial Roman generals Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 4 May 2024 at 2006 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width