Domitian - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 
1.1 Background and family 
1.2 Youth and character 
2 Rise of the Flavians Toggle Rise of the Flavians subsection 
2.1 Year of the Four Emperors 
2.2 Aftermath of the war 
2.3 Marriage 
2.4 Ceremonial heir 7181 
3 Emperor 8196 Toggle Emperor 8196 subsection 
3.1 Rule 

3.1.1 Palaces villas and other major buildings 
3.2 Economy 
3.3 Military campaigns 

3.3.1 Campaign against the Chatti 

3.3.2 Conquest of northern Britain 7784 

3.3.3 Dacian wars 8588 
3.4 Religious policy 
3.5 Opposition 

3.5.1 Revolt of Governor Saturninus 89 

3.5.2 Relationship with the Senate 
4 Death and succession Toggle Death and succession subsection 
4.1 Assassination 
4.2 Succession and aftermath 
5 Flavian family tree 
6 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 
6.1 Ancient sources 
6.2 Modern revisionism 
7 See also 
8 Notes 
9 References Toggle References subsection 
9.1 Citations 
9.2 Bibliography 
10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 
10.1 Primary sources 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Domitian 89 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Lombard Magyar  Malagasy      Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha     Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn   Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from AD 81 to 96 For other people named Domitian see Domitian disambiguation. Domitian Bust in the Louvre Roman emperor Reign 14 September 81  18 September 96 Predecessor Titus Successor Nerva Born 24 October 51 Rome Italy Roman Empire Died 18 September 96960918 aged 44 Rome Italy Burial Rome Spouse Domitia Longina m.70 Issue Flavius Caesar1 Flavia
2 a Vespasian Minor possibly adopted4 Domitian Minor possibly adopted4 Names Titus Flavius Domitianus birth Caesar Domitianus 69815 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Domitianus Augustus Dynasty Flavian Father Vespasian Mother Domitilla Roman imperial dynasties Flavian dynasty Chronology Vespasian 6979 AD Titus 7981 AD Domitian 8196 AD Family Gens Flavia Flavian tree CategoryFlavian dynasty Preceded by Year of the Four Emperors Followed by NervaAntonine dynasty v t e Domitian dmn in dMISHn een Latin Domitianus 24 October 51  18 September 96 was Roman emperor from 81 to 96. The son of Vespasian and the younger brother of Titus his two predecessors on the throne he was the last member of the Flavian dynasty. Described as a ruthless but efficient autocrat6 his authoritarian style of ruling put him at sharp odds with the Senate whose powers he drastically curtailed. Domitian had a minor and largely ceremonial role during the reigns of his father and brother. After the death of his brother Domitian was declared emperor by the Praetorian Guard. His 
15 year reign was the longest since that of Tiberius.b As emperor Domitian strengthened the economy by revaluing the Roman coinage expanded the border defenses of the empire and initiated a massive building program to restore the damaged city of Rome. Significant wars were fought in Britain where his general Agricola attempted to conquer Caledonia Scotland and in Dacia where Domitian was unable to procure a decisive victory against King Decebalus. Domitians government exhibited strong authoritarian characteristics. Religious military and cultural propaganda fostered a cult of personality and by nominating himself perpetual censor he sought to control public and private morals. As a consequence Domitian was popular with the people and the army but considered a tyrant by members of the Roman Senate. Domitians reign came to an end in 96 when he was assassinated by court officials. He was succeeded the same day by his advisor Nerva. After his death Domitians memory was condemned to oblivion by the Senate while senatorial and equestrian authors such as Tacitus Pliny the Younger and Suetonius propagated the view of Domitian as a cruel and paranoid tyrant. Modern revisionists instead have characterized Domitian as a ruthless but efficient autocrat whose cultural economic and political programs provided the foundation of the peaceful second century. Early lifeedit Background and familyedit The Flavian family tree indicating the descendants of Titus Flavius Petro and Tertulla Domitian was born in Rome on 24 October 517 the youngest son of Titus Flavius Vespasianuscommonly known as Vespasianand Flavia Domitilla Major.8 He had an older sister Domitilla the Younger and brother also named Titus Flavius Vespasianus.9 Decades of civil war during the 
1 st century BC had contributed greatly to the demise of the old aristocracy of Rome which a new Italian nobility gradually replaced in prominence during the early part of the 
1 st century.10 One such family the Flavians or Flavia gens rose from relative obscurity to prominence in just four generations acquiring wealth and status under the emperors of the JulioClaudian dynasty.8 Domitians greatgrandfather Titus Flavius Petro had served as a centurion under Pompey during Caesars civil war. His military career ended in disgrace when he fled the battlefield at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC.8 Nevertheless Petro managed to improve his status by marrying the extremely wealthy Tertulla whose fortune guaranteed the upward mobility of Petros son Titus Flavius Sabinus Domitians grandfather.11 Sabinus himself amassed further wealth and possible equestrian status through his services as tax collector in Asia and banker in Helvetia modern Switzerland. By marrying Vespasia Polla he allied the Flavian family to the more prestigious gens Vespasia ensuring the elevation of his sons Titus Flavius Sabinus and Vespasian to senatorial rank.11 A denarius of Domitian. Caption CAES. DOMIT. AVG. GERM. P. M. TR. P. XIIII. The political career of Vespasian included the offices of quaestor aedile and praetor and culminated in a consulship in 51 the year of Domitians birth. As a military commander Vespasian gained early renown by participating in the Roman invasion of Britain in 
43.1 2 Nevertheless ancient sources allege poverty for the Flavian family at the time of Domitians upbringing7 even claiming Vespasian had fallen into disrepute under the emperors Caligula 3741 and Nero 54
68.1 3 Modern history has refuted these claims suggesting these stories later circulated under Flavian rule as part of a propaganda campaign to diminish success under the less reputable Emperors of the JulioClaudian dynasty and to maximize achievements under Emperor Claudius 4154 and his son Britannicus.14 By all appearances the Flavians enjoyed high imperial favour throughout the 
40 s and 
60 s. While Titus received a court education in the company of Britannicus Vespasian pursued a successful political and military career. Following a prolonged period of retirement during the 
50 s he returned to public office under Nero serving as proconsul of the Africa Province in 63 and accompanying the emperor Nero during an official tour of Greece in 
66.1 5 That same year Jews from the Province of Judaea revolted against the Roman Empire sparking what is now known as the First JewishRoman War. Vespasian was assigned to lead the Roman army against the insurgents with Tituswho had completed his military education by this timein charge of a legion.16 Youth and characteredit A sestertius of Domitian. Caption IMP. CAES. DOMIT. AVG. GERM. CONS. IV CENS. PERP. P.  IOVI VICTORI. Of the three Flavian emperors Domitian would rule the longest despite the fact that his youth and early career were largely spent in the shadow of his older brother. Titus had gained military renown during the First JewishRoman War. After their father Vespasian became emperor in 69 following the civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors Titus held a great many offices while Domitian received honours but no responsibilities.17 By the time he was 16 years old Domitians mother and sister had long since died18 while his father and brother were continuously active in the Roman military commanding armies in Germania and Judaea. For Domitian this meant that a significant part of his adolescence was spent in the absence of his near relatives.19 During the JewishRoman wars he was likely taken under the care of his uncle Titus Flavius Sabinus II at the time serving as city prefect of Rome or possibly even Marcus Cocceius Nerva a loyal friend of the Flavians and the future successor to Domitian.1920 He received the education of a young man of the privileged senatorial class studying rhetoric and literature. In his biography in the Lives of the Twelve Caesars Suetonius attests to Domitians ability to quote the important poets and writers such as Homer or Virgil on appropriate occasions2122 and describes him as a learned and educated adolescent with elegant conversation.23 Among his first published works were poetry as well as writings on law and administration.19 Unlike his brother Titus Domitian was not educated at court. Whether he received formal military training is not recorded but according to Suetonius he displayed considerable marksmanship with the bow and arrow.2425 A detailed description of Domitians appearance and character is provided by Suetonius who devotes a substantial part of his biography to his personality He was tall of stature with a modest expression and a high colour. His eyes were large but his sight was somewhat dim. He was handsome and graceful too especially when a young man and indeed in his whole body with the exception of his feet the toes of which were somewhat cramped. In later life he had the further disfigurement of baldness a protruding belly and spindling legs though the latter had become thin from a long illness.26 Domitian was allegedly extremely sensitive regarding his baldness which he disguised in later life by wearing wigs.27 According to Suetonius he even wrote a book on the subject of hair care.28 With regard to Domitians personality however the account of Suetonius alternates sharply between portraying Domitian as the emperortyrant a man both physically and intellectually lazy and the intelligent refined personality drawn elsewhere.29 Historian Brian Jones concludes in The Emperor Domitian that assessing the true nature of Domitians personality is inherently complicated by the bias of the surviving sources.29 Common threads nonetheless emerge from the available evidence. He appears to have lacked the natural charisma of his brother and father. He was prone to suspicion displayed an odd sometimes selfdeprecating sense of humour3031 and often communicated in cryptic ways. This ambiguity of character was further exacerbated by his remoteness and as he grew older he increasingly displayed a preference for solitude which may have stemmed from his isolated upbringing.
19 who Indeed by the age of eighteen nearly all of his closest relatives had died by war or disease. Having spent the greater part of his early life in the twilight of Neros reign Domitians formative years would have been strongly influenced by the political turmoil of the 
60 s culminating with the civil war of 69 which brought his family to power.32 Rise of the Flaviansedit Year of the Four Emperorsedit Main article Year of the Four Emperors The Roman Empire during the Year of the Four Emperors 69 Blue areas indicate provinces loyal to Vespasian and Gaius Licinius Mucianus Green areas indicate provinces loyal to Vitelliusimage reference needed On 9 June 68 amid growing opposition of the Senate and the army Nero committed suicide and with him the JulioClaudian dynasty came to an end. Chaos ensued leading to a year of brutal civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors during which the four most influential generals in the Roman EmpireGalba Otho Vitellius and Vespasiansuccessively vied for imperial power.33 News of Neros death reached Vespasian as he was preparing to besiege the city of Jerusalem. Almost simultaneously the Senate had declared Galba then governor of Hispania Tarraconensis modern northern Spain as Emperor of Rome. Rather than continue his campaign Vespasian decided to await further orders and send Titus to greet the new Emperor.33 Before reaching Italy Titus learnt that Galba had been murdered and replaced by Otho the governor of Lusitania modern Portugal. At the same time Vitellius and his armies in Germania had risen in revolt and prepared to march on Rome intent on overthrowing Otho. Not wanting to risk being taken hostage by one side or the other Titus abandoned the journey to Rome and rejoined his father in Judaea.34 Otho and Vitellius realized the potential threat posed by the Flavian faction. With four legions at his disposal Vespasian commanded a strength of nearly 80000 soldiers. His position in Judaea further granted him the advantage of being nearest to the vital province of Egypt which controlled the grain supply to Rome. His brother Titus Flavius Sabinus II as city prefect commanded the entire city garrison of Rome.16 Tensions among the Flavian troops ran high but so long as either Galba or Otho remained in power Vespasian refused to take action.35 When Otho was defeated by Vitellius at the First Battle of Bedriacum the armies in Judaea and Egypt took matters into their own hands and declared Vespasian emperor on 1 July 
69.3 6 Vespasian accepted and entered an alliance with Gaius Licinius Mucianus the governor of Syria against Vitellius.36 A strong force drawn from the Judaean and Syrian legions marched on Rome under the command of Mucianus while Vespasian travelled to Alexandria leaving Titus in charge of ending the Jewish rebellion.37 In Rome Domitian was placed under house arrest by Vitellius as a safeguard against Flavian aggression.32 Support for the old emperor waned as more legions around the empire pledged their allegiance to Vespasian. On 24 October 69 the forces of Vitellius and Vespasian under Marcus Antonius Primus met at the Second Battle of Bedriacum which ended in a crushing defeat for the armies of Vitellius.38 In despair Vitellius attempted to negotiate a surrender. Terms of peace including a voluntary abdication were agreed upon with Titus Flavius Sabinus II but the soldiers of the Praetorian Guardthe imperial bodyguardconsidered such a resignation disgraceful and prevented Vitellius from carrying out the treaty.39 On the morning of 18 December the emperor appeared to deposit the imperial insignia at the Temple of Concord but at the last minute retraced his steps to the Imperial palace. In the confusion the leading men of the state gathered at Sabinus house proclaiming Vespasian as Emperor but the multitude dispersed when Vitellian cohorts clashed with the armed escort of Sabinus who was forced to retreat to the Capitoline Hill.40 During the night he was joined by his relatives including Domitian. The armies of Mucianus were nearing Rome but the besieged Flavian party did not hold out for longer than a day. On 19 December Vitellianists burst onto the Capitol and in a skirmish Sabinus was captured and executed. Domitian managed to escape by disguising himself as a worshipper of Isis and spent the night in safety with one of his fathers supporters Cornelius Primus.40 By the afternoon of 20 December Vitellius was dead his armies having been defeated by the Flavian legions. With nothing more to be feared Domitian came forward to meet the invading forces he was universally saluted by the title of Caesar and the mass of troops conducted him to his fathers house.40 The following day 21 December the Senate proclaimed Vespasian emperor of the Roman Empire.41 Aftermath of the waredit The Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis detail by Rembrandt 1661. During the Batavian rebellion Domitian eagerly sought the opportunity to attain military glory but was denied command of a legion by superior officers. Although the war had officially ended a state of anarchy and lawlessness pervaded in the first days following the demise of Vitellius. Order was properly restored by Mucianus in early 70 but Vespasian did not enter Rome until September of that year.40 In the meantime Domitian acted as the representative of the Flavian family in the Roman Senate. He received the title of Caesar and was appointed praetor with consular power.42 The ancient historian Tacitus describes Domitians first speech in the Senate as brief and measured at the same time noting his ability to elude awkward questions.43 Domitians authority was merely nominal foreshadowing what was to be his role for at least ten more years. By all accounts Mucianus held the real power in Vespasians absence and he was careful to ensure that Domitian still only eighteen years old did not overstep the boundaries of his function.42 Strict control was also maintained over the young Caesars entourage promoting away Flavian generals such as Arrius Varus and Antonius Primus and replacing them with more reliable men such as Arrecinus Clemens.42 Equally curtailed by Mucianus were Domitians military ambitions. The civil war of 69 had severely destabilized the provinces leading to several local uprisings such as the Batavian revolt in Gaul. Batavian auxiliaries of the Rhine legions led by Gaius Julius Civilis had rebelled with the aid of a faction of Treveri under the command of Julius Classicus. Seven legions were sent from Rome led by Vespasians brotherinlaw Quintus Petillius Cerialis.24 Although the revolt was quickly suppressed exaggerated reports of disaster prompted Mucianus to depart the capital with reinforcements of his own. Domitian eagerly sought the opportunity to attain military glory and joined the other officers with the intention of commanding a legion of his own. According to Tacitus Mucianus was not keen on this prospect but since he considered Domitian a liability in any capacity that was entrusted to him he preferred to keep him close at hand rather than in Rome.44 When news arrived of Cerialis victory over Civilis Mucianus tactfully dissuaded Domitian from pursuing further military endeavours.24 Domitian then wrote to Cerialis personally suggesting he hand over command of his army but once again he was snubbed.24 With the return of Vespasian in late September his political role was rendered all but obsolete and Domitian withdrew from government devoting his time to arts and literature.45 Marriageedit A bust of Domitia Longina Louvre Where his political and military career had ended in disappointment Domitians private affairs were more successful. In 70 Vespasian attempted to arrange a dynastic marriage between his youngest son and the daughter of Titus Julia Flavia46 but Domitian was adamant in his love for Domitia Longina going so far as to persuade her husband Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus to divorce her so that Domitian could marry her himself.46 Despite its initial recklessness the alliance was very prestigious for both families. Domitia Longina was the younger daughter of Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo a respected general and honoured politician who had distinguished himself for his leadership in Armenia. Following the failed Pisonian conspiracy against Nero in 65 he had been forced to commit suicide. She was also a granddaughter of Junia Lepida a descendant of Emperor Augustus. The new marriage not only reestablished ties to senatorial opposition but also served the broader Flavian propaganda of the time which sought to diminish Vespasians political success under Nero. Instead connections to Claudius and Britannicus were emphasised and Neros victims or those otherwise disadvantaged by him rehabilitated.47 In 80 Domitia and Domitians only attested son was born. It is not known what the boys name was but he died in childhood in 
83.4 8 Shortly following his accession as emperor Domitian bestowed the honorific title of Augusta upon Domitia while their son was deified appearing as such on the reverse of coin types from this period.49 Nevertheless the marriage appears to have faced a significant crisis in 83. For reasons unknown Domitian briefly exiled Domitia and then soon recalled her either out of love or due to rumours that he was carrying on a relationship with his niece Julia Flavia.50 Jones argues that most likely he did so for her failure to produce an heir.48 By 84 Domitia had returned to the palace51 where she lived for the remainder of Domitians reign without incident.52 Little is known of Domitias activities as empress or how much influence she wielded in Domitians government but it seems her role was limited. From Suetonius we know that she at least accompanied the Emperor to the amphitheatre while the Jewish writer Josephus speaks of benefits he received from her.53 It is not known whether Domitian had other children but he did not marry again. Despite allegations by Roman sources of adultery and divorce the marriage appears to have been happy.54 Ceremonial heir 71
81 edit The Triumph of Titus by Sir Lawrence AlmaTadema 1885 depicting the Flavian family during the triumphal procession of 71. Vespasian proceeds at the head of the family dressed as pontifex maximus followed by Domitian with Domitia Longina and finally Titus also dressed in religious regalia. An exchange of glances between Titus and Domitia suggests an affair upon which historians have speculated.48 AlmaTadema was known for his meticulous historical research on the ancient world.55 Before becoming Emperor Domitians role in the Flavian government was largely ceremonial. In June 71 Titus returned triumphant from the war in Judaea. Ultimately the rebellion had claimed the lives of tens of thousands perhaps hundreds of thousands a majority of whom were Jewish.5657 The city and temple of Jerusalem were completely destroyed its most valuable treasures carried off by the Roman army and nearly 100000 people were captured and enslaved.58 For his victory the Senate awarded Titus a Roman triumph. On the day of the festivities the Flavian family rode into the capital preceded by a lavish parade that displayed the spoils of the war.59 The family procession was headed by Vespasian and Titus while Domitian riding a magnificent white horse followed with the remaining Flavian relatives.60 Leaders of the Jewish resistance were executed in the Forum Romanum after which the procession closed with religious sacrifices at the Temple of Jupiter.59 A triumphal arch the Arch of Titus was erected at the southeast entrance to the Forum to commemorate the successful end of the war.61 Yet the return of Titus further highlighted the comparative insignificance of Domitian both militarily and politically. As the eldest and most experienced of Vespasians sons Titus shared tribunician power with his father received seven consulships the censorship and was given command of the Praetorian Guard powers that left no doubt he was the designated heir to the Empire.62 As a second son Domitian held honorary titles such as Caesar or Princeps Iuventutis and several priesthoods including those of augur pontifex frater arvalis magister frater arvalium and sacerdos collegiorum omnium63 but no office with imperium. He held six consulships during Vespasians reign but only one of these in 73 was an ordinary consulship. The other five were less prestigious suffect consulships which he held in 71 75 76 77 and 79 respectively usually replacing his father or brother in midJanuary.62 While ceremonial these offices no doubt gained Domitian valuable experience in the Roman Senate and may have contributed to his later reservations about its relevance.63 Under Vespasian and Titus nonFlavians were virtually excluded from the important public offices. Mucianus himself all but disappeared from historical records during this time and it is believed he died sometime between 75 and 
77.6 4 Real power was unmistakably concentrated in the hands of the Flavian faction the weakened Senate only maintained the facade of democracy.65 Because Titus effectively acted as coemperor with his father no abrupt change in Flavian policy occurred when Vespasian died on 24 June 79. Titus assured Domitian that full partnership in the government would soon be his but neither tribunician power nor imperium of any kind was conferred upon him during Titus brief reign.66 Two major disasters struck during 79 and 80. In OctoberNovember 79 Mount Vesuvius erupted67 burying the surrounding cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum under metres of ash and lava the following year a fire broke out in Rome that lasted three days and destroyed a number of important public buildings.68 Consequently Titus spent much of his reign coordinating relief efforts and restoring damaged property. On 13 September 81 after barely two years in office he unexpectedly died of fever during a trip to the Sabine territories.66 Ancient authors have implicated Domitian in the death of his brother either by directly accusing him of murder69 or implying he left the ailing Titus for dead6070 even alleging that during his lifetime Domitian was openly plotting against his brother.70 It is difficult to assess the factual veracity of these statements given the known bias of the surviving sources. Brotherly affection was likely at a minimum but this was hardly surprising considering that Domitian had barely seen Titus after the age of seven.66 Whatever the nature of their relationship Domitian seems to have displayed little sympathy when his brother lay dying instead making for the Praetorian camp where he was proclaimed emperor. The following day 14 September71 the Senate confirmed Domitians powers granting tribunician power the office of pontifex maximus and the titles of Augustus venerable and Pater Patriae father of the country.72 Emperor 81
96 edit Ruleedit A silver tetradrachm of Domitian from the Antioch Mint in Syria. c 9192 AD.c As emperor Domitian quickly dispensed with the republican facade his father and brother had maintained during their reign.73 By moving the centre of government to the imperial court Domitian openly rendered the Senates powers obsolete.74 According to Pliny the Younger Domitian believed that the Roman Empire was to be governed as a divine monarchy with himself as the benevolent despot at its head.75 In addition to exercising absolute political power Domitian believed the emperors role encompassed every aspect of daily life guiding the Roman people as a cultural and moral authority.76 To usher in the new era he embarked on ambitious economic military and cultural programs with the intention of restoring the Empire to the splendour it had seen under the Emperor Augustus.77 Despite these grand designs Domitian was determined to govern the Empire conscientiously and scrupulously. He became personally involved in all branches of the administration edicts were issued governing the smallest details of everyday life and law while taxation and public morals were rigidly enforced.78 According to Suetonius the imperial bureaucracy never ran more efficiently than under Domitian whose exacting standards and suspicious nature maintained historically low corruption among provincial governors and elected officials.7980 Although he made no pretence regarding the significance of the Senate under his absolute rule those senators he deemed unworthy were expelled from the Senate and in the distribution of public offices he rarely favored family members a policy that stood in contrast to the nepotism practiced by Vespasian and Titus.81 Above all however Domitian valued loyalty and malleability in those he assigned to strategic posts qualities he found more often in men of the equestrian order than in members of the Senate or his own family whom he regarded with suspicion and promptly removed from office if they disagreed with imperial policy.82 The reality of Domitians autocracy was further highlighted by the fact that more than any emperor since Tiberius he spent significant periods of time away from the capital.83 Although the Senates power had been in decline since the fall of the Republic under Domitian the seat of power was no longer even in Rome but rather wherever the Emperor was.73 Until the completion of the Flavian Palace on the Palatine Hill the imperial court was situated at Alba or Circeii and sometimes even farther afield. Domitian toured the European provinces extensively and spent at least three years of his reign in Germania and Illyricum conducting military campaigns on the frontiers of the Empire.84 Palaces villas and other major buildingsedit Gate of Domitian and Trajan at the northern entrance of the Temple of Hathor and Domitian as Pharaoh on the same gate in Dendera Egypt.8586 For his personal use he was active in constructing many monumental buildings including the Villa of Domitian a vast and sumptuous palace situated 20 km outside Rome in the Alban Hills. In Rome itself he built the Palace of Domitian on the Palatine Hill. Seven other villas are linked with Domitian at Tusculum Antium Sabaudia Vicarello Caieta Terracina87 and Baiae.88 Only that at Sabaudia has been positively identified.89 The Stadium of Domitian was dedicated in 86 AD as a gift to the people of Rome as part of an Imperial building program following the damage or destruction of most of the buildings on the Field of Mars by fire in 79 AD. It was Romes first permanent venue for competitive athletics and is today occupied by the Piazza Navona.90 In Egypt too Domitian was quite active in constructing buildings and decorating them. He appears together with Trajan in offering scenes on the propylon of the Temple of Hathor at Dendera. His cartouche also appears in the column shafts of the Temple of Khnum at Esna.9192 Economyedit Upon his accession Domitian revalued the Roman currency by increasing the silver content of the denarius by 12. This coin commemorates the deification of Domitians son.d Domitians tendency towards micromanagement was nowhere more evident than in his financial policy. The question of whether Domitian left the Roman Empire in debt or with a surplus at the time of his death has been fiercely debated. The evidence points to a balanced economy for the greater part of Domitians reign.93 Upon his accession he revalued the Roman currency dramatically. He increased the silver purity of the denarius from 90 to 98  the actual silver weight increasing from 
2.8 7 grams to 
3.2 6 grams. A financial crisis in 85 forced a devaluation of the silver purity and weight to 
93.5  and 
3.0 4 grams respectively.9495 Nevertheless the new values were still higher than the levels that Vespasian and Titus had maintained during their reigns. Domitians rigorous taxation policy ensured that this standard was sustained for the following eleven years.95 Coinage from this era displays a highly consistent degree of quality including meticulous attention to Domitians titulature and refined artwork on the reverse portraits.95 Jones estimates Domitians annual income at more than 
1.2  billion sestertii of which over onethird would presumably have been spent maintaining the Roman army.93 The other major expense was the extensive reconstruction of Rome. At the time of Domitians accession the city was still suffering from the damage caused by the Great Fire of 64 the civil war of 69 and the fire in 
80.9 6 Much more than a renovation project Domitians building program was intended to be the crowning achievement of an Empirewide cultural renaissance. Around fifty structures were erected restored or completed achievements second only to those of Augustus.96 Among the most important new structures were an odeon a stadium and an expansive palace on the Palatine Hill known as the Flavian Palace which was designed by Domitians master architect Rabirius.97 The most important building Domitian restored was the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill said to have been covered with a gilded roof. Among those completed were the Temple of Vespasian and Titus the Arch of Titus and the Flavian Amphitheatre Colosseum to which he added a fourth level and finished the interior seating area.61 In order to appease the people of Rome an estimated 135 million sestertii was spent on donatives or congiaria throughout Domitians reign.98 The Emperor also revived the practice of public banquets which had been reduced to a simple distribution of food under Nero while he invested large sums on entertainment and games. In 86 he founded the Capitoline Games a quadrennial contest comprising athletic displays chariot racing and competitions for oratory music and acting.99 Military campaignsedit A rock inscription at Gobustan Azerbaijan then Caucasian Albania mentioning Domitian and Legio XII Fulminata The military campaigns undertaken during Domitians reign were generally defensive in nature as the Emperor rejected the idea of expansionist warfare.100 His most significant military contribution was the development of the Limes Germanicus which encompassed a vast network of roads forts and watchtowers constructed along the Rhine river to defend the Empire.101 Nevertheless several important wars were fought in Gaul against the Chatti and across the Danube frontier against the Suebi the Sarmatians and the Dacians.102 The conquest of Britain continued under the command of Gnaeus Julius Agricola who expanded the Roman Empire as far as Caledonia or modern day Scotland. Domitian also founded a new legion in 82 the Legio I Minervia to fight against the Chatti.102 Domitian is also credited on the easternmost evidence of Roman military presence103 the rock inscription near Boyukdash mountain in presentday Azerbaijan. As judged by the carved titles of Caesar Augustus and Germanicus the related march took place between 84 and 96 AD. Domitians administration of the Roman army was characterized by the same fastidious involvement he exhibited in other branches of the government. His competence as a military strategist was criticized by his contemporaries however.100 Although he claimed several triumphs these were largely propaganda manoeuvres. Tacitus derided Domitians victory against the Chatti as a mock triumph and criticized his decision to retreat in Britain following the conquests of Agricola.104105 Nevertheless Domitian appears to have been very popular among the soldiers spending an estimated three years of his reign among the army on campaignsmore than any emperor since Augustusand raising their pay by onethird.101106 While the army command may have disapproved of his tactical and strategic decisions the loyalty of the common soldier was unquestioned.107 Campaign against the Chattiedit Once Emperor Domitian immediately sought to attain his long delayed military glory. As early as 82 or possibly 83 he went to Gaul ostensibly to conduct a census and suddenly ordered an attack on the Chatti.108 For this purpose a new legion was founded Legio I Minervia which constructed some 75 kilometres 46 mi of roads through Chattan territory to uncover the enemys hiding places.102 Although little information survives of the battles fought enough early victories were apparently achieved for Domitian to be back in Rome by the end of 83 where he celebrated an elaborate triumph and conferred upon himself the title of Germanicus.109 Domitians supposed victory was much scorned by ancient authors who described the campaign as uncalled for110 and a mock triumph.104 The evidence lends some credence to these claims as the Chatti would later play a significant role during the revolt of Saturninus in 
89.1 01 Conquest of northern Britain 77
84 edit Main article Roman conquest of Britain Gnaeus Julius Agricola Bath One of the most detailed reports of military activity under the Flavian dynasty was written by Tacitus whose biography of his fatherinlaw Gnaeus Julius Agricola largely concerns the conquest of northern Britain between 77 and 
84.1 01 Agricola arrived c.77 as governor of Roman Britain immediately launching campaigns into Caledonia modern Scotland. In 82 Agricola crossed an unidentified body of water and defeated peoples unknown to the Romans until then.111 He fortified the coast facing Irelandcitation needed and Tacitus recalls that his fatherinlaw often claimed the island could be conquered with a single legion and a few auxiliaries.112 He had given refuge to an exiled Irish king whom he hoped he might use as the excuse for conquest. This conquest never happened but some historians believe that the crossing referred to was in fact a smallscale exploratory or punitive expedition to Ireland.113 Turning his attention from Ireland the following year Agricola raised a fleet and pushed beyond the River Forth into Caledonia. To aid the advance a large legionary fortress was constructed at Inchtuthil.112 In the summer of 84 Agricola faced the armies of the Caledonians led by Calgacus at the Battle of Mons Graupius.114 Although the Romans inflicted heavy losses on the enemy twothirds of the Caledonian army escaped and hid in the Scottish marshes and Highlands ultimately preventing Agricola from bringing the entire British island under his control.112 In 85 Agricola was recalled to Rome by Domitian having served for more than six years as governor longer than normal for consular legates during the Flavian era.112 Tacitus claims that Domitian ordered his recall because Agricolas successes outshone the Emperors own modest victories in Germania.104 The relationship between Agricola and the Emperor is unclear on the one hand Agricola was awarded triumphal decorations and a statue on the other Agricola never again held a civil or military post in spite of his experience and renown. He was offered the governorship of the province of Africa but declined it either due to ill health or as Tacitus claims the machinations of Domitian.115 Not long after Agricolas recall from Britain the Roman Empire entered into war with the Kingdom of Dacia in the East. Reinforcements were needed and in 87 or 88 Domitian ordered a largescale strategic withdrawal of troops in the British province. The fortress at Inchtuthil was dismantled and the Caledonian forts and watchtowers abandoned moving the Roman frontier some 120 kilometres 75 mi further south.116 The army command may have resented Domitians decision to retreat but to him the Caledonian territories never represented anything more than a loss to the Roman treasury.101 Dacian wars 85
88 edit Further information Domitians Dacian War The Roman province of Dacia purple area after the conquest of Trajan in 106 with the Black Sea to the far right.image reference needed The most significant threat the Roman Empire faced during the reign of Domitian arose from the northern provinces of Illyricum where the Suebi the Sarmatians and the Dacians continuously harassed Roman settlements along the Danube river. Of these the Sarmatians and the Dacians posed the most formidable threat. In approximately 84 or 85 the Dacians led by King Decebalus crossed the Danube into the province of Moesia wreaking havoc and killing the Moesian governor Oppius Sabinus.117 Domitian quickly launched a counteroffensive personally travelling to the region accompanied by a large force commanded by his praetorian prefect Cornelius Fuscus. Fuscus successfully drove the Dacians back across the border in mid85 prompting Domitian to return to Rome and celebrate his second triumph.118 The victory proved shortlived however as early in 86 Fuscus embarked on an illfated expedition into Dacia. Fuscus was killed and the battle standard of the Praetorian Guard was lost.117 The loss of the battle standard or aquila was indicative of a crushing defeat and a serious affront to Roman national pride. Domitian returned to Moesia in August 86. He divided the province into Lower Moesia and Upper Moesia and transferred three additional legions to the Danube. In 87 the Romans invaded Dacia once more this time under the command of Tettius Julianus and finally defeated Decebalus in late 88 at the same site where Fuscus had previously perished.119 An attack on the Dacian capital Sarmizegetusa was forestalled when new troubles arose on the German frontier in 
89.8 3 In order to avert having to conduct a war on two fronts Domitian agreed to terms of peace with Decebalus negotiating free access of Roman troops through the Dacian region while granting Decebalus an annual subsidy of 8 million sesterces.83 Contemporary authors severely criticized this treaty which was considered shameful to the Romans and left the deaths of Sabinus and Fuscus unavenged.120 For the remainder of Domitians reign Dacia remained a relatively peaceful client kingdom but Decebalus used the Roman money to fortify his defenses.121 Domitian probably wanted a new war against the Dacians and reinforced Upper Moesia with two more cavalry units brought from Syria and with at least five cohorts brought from Pannonia. Trajan continued Domitians policy and added two more units to the auxiliary forces of Upper Moesia and then he used the build up of troops for his Dacian wars.122123 Eventually the Romans achieved a decisive victory against Decebalus in 106. Again the Roman army sustained heavy losses but Trajan succeeded in capturing Sarmizegetusa and importantly annexed the Dacian gold and silver mines.121 Religious policyedit The genius of Domitian with the aegis and a cornucopia marble statue Capitoline Museums Rome Domitian firmly believed in the traditional Roman religion and personally saw to it that ancient customs and morals were observed throughout his reign. In order to justify the divine nature of the Flavian rule Domitian emphasized connections with the chief deity Jupiter76 perhaps most significantly through the impressive restoration of the Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill. A small chapel dedicated to Jupiter Conservator was also constructed near the house where Domitian had fled to safety on 20 December 69. Later in his reign he replaced it with a more expansive building dedicated to Jupiter Custos.124 The goddess he worshipped the most zealously however was Minerva. Not only did he keep a personal shrine dedicated to her in his bedroom she regularly appeared on his coinagein four different attested reverse typesand he founded a legion Legio I Minervia in her name.125 Domitian also revived the practice of the imperial cult which had fallen somewhat out of use under Vespasian. Significantly his first act as emperor was the deification of his brother Titus. Upon their deaths his infant son and niece Julia Flavia were likewise enrolled among the gods. With regards to the emperor himself as a religious figure both Suetonius and Cassius Dio allege that Domitian officially gave himself the title of Dominus et Deus Lord and God.126127 However not only did he reject the title of Dominus during his reign128129 but since he issued no official documentation or coinage to this effect historians such as Brian Jones contend that such phrases were addressed to Domitian by flatterers who wished to earn favors from him.79 To foster the worship of the imperial family he erected a dynastic mausoleum on the site of Vespasians former house on the Quirinal130 and completed the Temple of Vespasian and Titus a shrine dedicated to the worship of his deified father and brother.61 To memorialize the military triumphs of the Flavian family he ordered the construction of the Templum Divorum and the Templum Fortuna Redux and completed the Arch of Titus. Construction projects such as these constituted only the most visible part of Domitians religious policy which also concerned itself with the fulfilment of religious law and public morals. In 85 he nominated himself perpetual censor the office that held the task of supervising Roman morals and conduct.131 Once again Domitian acquitted himself of this task dutifully and with care. He renewed the Lex Iulia de Adulteriis Coercendis under which adultery was punishable by exile. From the list of jurors he struck an equestrian who had divorced his wife and taken her back while an exquaestor was expelled from the Senate for acting and dancing.78 As eunuchs were popularly used as servants Domitian punished people who castrated others132 and wanted to ban the eunuchs themselves.133 Subsequent emperors made similar prohibitions but Domitian may have been the first to do so.134 Despite his moralizing Domitian had his own favorite eunuch boy Earinus135136 who was commemorated by the contemporary court poets Martial and Statius.137 Domitian also heavily prosecuted corruption among public officials removing jurors if they accepted bribes and rescinding legislation when a conflict of interest was suspected.78 He ensured that libellous writings especially those directed against himself were punishable by exile or death.78 Actors were likewise regarded with suspicion.138 Consequently he forbade mimes from appearing on stage in public. Philosophers did not fare much better. Epictetus who had set himself up in Rome as a professor of philosophy remarked that philosophers were able to look tyrants steadily in the face139 and it was Domitians decree of 94 expelling all philosophers from Rome that caused Epictetus to shift his base to the recently founded Roman city of Nicopolis in Epirus Greece where he lived simply worked safely and died of old age.139 In 87 Vestal Virgins were found to have broken their sacred vows of lifelong public chastity. As the Vestals were regarded as daughters of the community this offense essentially constituted incest. Accordingly those found guilty of any such transgression were condemned to death either by a manner of their choosing or according to the ancient fashion which dictated that Vestals should be buried alive.140 Coin of Domitian found in the Buddhist stupa of Ahin Posh dedicated under the Kushan Empire in 150160 in modern Afghanistan. Foreign religions were tolerated insofar as they did not interfere with public order or could be assimilated with the traditional Roman religion. The worship of Egyptian deities in particular flourished under the Flavian dynasty to an extent not seen again until the reign of Commodus. Veneration of Serapis and Isis who were identified with Jupiter and Minerva respectively was especially prominent.125 Fourth century writings by Eusebius maintain that Jews and Christians were heavily persecuted toward the end of Domitians reign.141142 The Book of Revelation and First Epistle of Clement are thought by some to have been written during this period the latter making mention of sudden and repeated misfortunes which are assumed to refer to persecutions under Domitian.143 Although Jews were heavily taxed no contemporary authors give specific details of trials or executions based on religious offenses other than those within the Roman religion.144 Suetonius mentions having seen in his youth a nonagenarian being stripped by a procurator to see if he was circumcised.145 Oppositionedit Revolt of Governor Saturninus 
89 edit Domitian Capitoline Museums Rome On 1 January 89 the governor of Germania Superior Lucius Antonius Saturninus and his two legions at Mainz Legio XIV Gemina and Legio XXI Rapax revolted against the Roman Empire with the aid of the Germanic Chatti people.107 The precise cause for the rebellion is uncertain although it appears to have been planned well in advance. The Senatorial officers may have disapproved of Domitians military strategies such as his decision to fortify the German frontier rather than attack as well as his recent retreat from Britain and finally the disgraceful policy of appeasement towards Decebalus.146 At any rate the uprising was strictly confined to Saturninus province and quickly detected once the rumour spread across the neighbouring provinces. The governor of Germania Inferior Aulus Bucius Lappius Maximus moved to the region at once assisted by Titus Flavius Norbanus the procurator of Rhaetia. From Spain Trajan was summoned while Domitian himself came from Rome with the Praetorian Guard.147 By a stroke of luck a thaw prevented the Chatti from crossing the Rhine and coming to Saturninus aid.147 Within twentyfour days the rebellion was crushed and its leaders at Mainz savagely punished. The mutinous legions were sent to the front in Illyricum while those who had assisted in their defeat were duly rewarded.148 Lappius Maximus received the governorship of the province of Syria a second consulship in May 95 and finally a priesthood which he still held in 102. Titus Flavius Norbanus may have been appointed to the prefecture of Egypt but almost certainly became prefect of the Praetorian Guard by 94 with Titus Petronius Secundus as his colleague.149 Domitian opened the year following the revolt by sharing the consulship with Marcus Cocceius Nerva suggesting the latter had played a part in uncovering the conspiracy perhaps in a fashion similar to the one he played during the Pisonian conspiracy under Nero.150 Although little is known about the life and career of Nerva before his accession as Emperor in 96 he appears to have been a highly adaptable diplomat surviving multiple regime changes and emerging as one of the Flavians most trusted advisors.150 His consulship may therefore have been intended to emphasize the stability and status quo of the regime.151 The revolt had been suppressed and the Empire returned to order. Relationship with the Senateedit Domitian in military garb wearing the muscle cuirass with decorative reliefs from VaisonlaRomaine France Since the fall of the Republic the authority of the Roman Senate had largely eroded under the quasimonarchical system of government established by Augustus known as the Principate. The Principate allowed the existence of a de facto dictatorial regime while maintaining the formal framework of the Roman Republic.152 Most Emperors upheld the public facade of democracy and in return the Senate implicitly acknowledged the Emperors status as a de facto monarch.153 Some rulers handled this arrangement with less subtlety than others. Domitian was not so subtle often coming to the Senate as a triumpher and conqueror to show his disdain for them. From the outset of his reign he stressed the reality of his autocracy.153 He disliked aristocrats and had no fear of showing it withdrawing every decisionmaking power from the Senate to reduce its control to an administrative one and instead relying on a small set of friends and equestrians to control the important offices of state.154155 The dislike was mutual. After Domitians assassination the senators of Rome rushed to the Senate house where they immediately passed a motion condemning his memory to oblivion.156 Under the rulers of the NervanAntonian dynasty senatorial authors published histories that elaborated on the view of Domitian as a tyrant.153 Nevertheless the evidence suggests that Domitian did make concessions toward senatorial opinion. Whereas his father and brother had concentrated consular power largely in the hands of the Flavian family Domitian admitted a surprisingly large number of provincials and potential opponents to the consulship allowing them to head the official calendar by opening the year as an ordinary consul.157 Whether this was a genuine attempt to reconcile with hostile factions in the Senate cannot be ascertained. By offering the consulship to potential opponents Domitian may have wanted to compromise these senators in the eyes of their supporters. When their conduct proved unsatisfactory they were almost invariably brought to trial and exiled or executed and their property was confiscated.154 Both Tacitus and Suetonius speak of escalating persecutions toward the end of Domitians reign identifying a point of sharp increase around 93 or sometime after the failed revolt of Saturninus in 
89.1 58159 At least twenty senatorial opponents were executed160 including Domitia Longinas former husband Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus and three of Domitians own family members Titus Flavius Sabinus Titus Flavius Clemens and Marcus Arrecinus Clemens.161 Flavius Clemens was a cousin of Domitian and the emperor had even designated Clemens two young sons as his successors calling them as Vespasian and Domitian.162 Some of these men were executed as early as 83 or 85 however lending little credit to Tacitus notion of a reign of terror late in Domitians reign. According to Suetonius some were convicted for corruption or treason others on trivial charges which Domitian justified through his suspicion He used to say that the lot of Emperors was most unfortunate since when they discovered a conspiracy no one believed them unless they had been murdered.163 Jones compares the executions of Domitian to those under Emperor Claudius 4154 noting that Claudius executed around 35 senators and 300 equestrians and yet was still deified by the Senate and regarded as one of the good Emperors of history.164 Domitian was apparently unable to gain support among the aristocracy despite attempts to appease hostile factions with consular appointments. His autocratic style of government accentuated the Senates loss of power while his policy of treating patricians and even family members as equals to all Romans earned him their contempt.164 Death and successionedit Assassinationedit According to Suetonius Domitian worshipped Minerva as his protector goddess with superstitious veneration. In a dream she is said to have abandoned the emperor prior to the assassination. Domitian was assassinated on 18 September 96 in a conspiracy by court officials.165 A highly detailed account of the plot and the assassination is provided by Suetonius. He alleges that Domitians chamberlain Parthenius played the main role in the plot and historian John Grainger cites Parthenius likely fear over Domitians recent execution of Neros former secretary Epaphroditus as a possible motive.166167 The act itself was carried out by a freedman of Parthenius named Maximus and a steward of Domitians niece Flavia Domitilla named Stephanus.168 According to Suetonius a number of omens had foretold Domitians death. The Germanic soothsayer Larginus Proclus predicted the date of Domitians death and was consequently sentenced to death by him.169170 Several days prior to the assassination Minerva had appeared to the emperor in a dream. She announced that she had been disarmed by Jupiter and could no longer give Domitian her protection.125171 According to an auspice he had received the Emperor believed that his death would be at midday. As a result he was always restless around that time. On the day of the assassination Domitian was distressed and repeatedly asked a servant to tell him what time it was. The servant who was himself one of the plotters lied to the emperor telling him that it was already late in the afternoon.172 Apparently put at ease the Emperor went to his desk to sign some decrees. Stephanus who had been feigning an injury to his arm for several days and wearing a bandage to allow him to carry a concealed dagger suddenly appeared ...he pretended that he had discovered a plot and was for that reason granted an audience whereupon as the amazed Domitian perused a document he had handed him Stephanus stabbed him in the groin. The wounded Emperor put up a fight but succumbed to seven further stabs his assailants being a subaltern named Clodianus Partheniuss freedman Maximus Satur a headchamberlain and one of the imperial gladiators.173 During the attack Stephanus and Domitian had struggled on the floor during which time Stephanus was stabbed by the emperor and died shortly afterward. Domitians body was carried away on a common bier and unceremoniously cremated by his nurse Phyllis. Later she took the emperors ashes to the Flavian Temple and mingled them with those of his niece Julia. He was 44 years old. As had been foretold his death came at midday.174 Cassius Dio writing nearly a hundred years later suggests that the assassination was improvised while Suetonius implies it was a wellorganized conspiracy175 citing Stephanus feigned injury and claiming that the doors to the servants quarters had been locked prior to the attack and that a sword Domitian kept concealed beneath his pillow as a last line of personal protection against a wouldbe assassin had also been removed beforehand.176172 Dio included Domitia Longina among the conspirators but in light of her attested devotion to Domitianeven years after her husband had diedher involvement in the plot seems highly unlikely.53 The precise involvement of the Praetorian Guard is unclear. One of the guards commanders Titus Petronius Secundus was almost certainly aware of the plot. The other Titus Flavius Norbanus the former governor of Raetia was a member of Domitians family.177168 Succession and aftermathedit Upon the death of Domitian Nerva was proclaimed Emperor by the Senate. The Fasti Ostienses the Ostian Calendar records that on the same day as Domitians assassination the Senate proclaimed Marcus Cocceius Nerva emperor.178 Despite his political experience this was a remarkable choice. Nerva was old and childless and had spent much of his career out of the public light prompting both ancient and modern authors to speculate on his involvement in Domitians assassination.179180 According to Cassius Dio the conspirators approached Nerva as a potential successor prior to the assassination suggesting that he was at least aware of the plot.181182 He does not appear in Suetonius version of the events but this may be understandable since his works were published under Nervas direct descendants Trajan and Hadrian. To suggest the dynasty owed its accession to murder would have been less than sensitive.181 On the other hand Nerva lacked widespread support in the Empire and as a known Flavian loyalist his track record would not have recommended him to the conspirators. The precise facts have been obscured by history183 but modern historians believe Nerva was proclaimed Emperor solely on the initiative of the Senate within hours after the news of the assassination broke.178 The decision may have been hasty so as to avoid civil war but neither appears to have been involved in the conspiracy.184 The Senate nonetheless rejoiced at the death of Domitian and immediately following Nervas accession as Emperor passed damnatio memoriae on Domitians memory his coins and statues were melted his arches were torn down and his name was erased from all public records.185 Domitian and over a century later Publius Septimius Geta were the only emperors known to have officially received a damnatio memoriae though others may have received de facto ones. In many instances existing portraits of Domitian such as those found on the Cancelleria Reliefs were simply recarved to fit the likeness of Nerva which allowed quick production of new images and recycling of previous material.186 Yet the order of the Senate was only partially executed in Rome and wholly disregarded in most of the provinces outside Italy.185 According to Suetonius the people of Rome met the news of Domitians death with indifference but the army was much grieved calling for his deification immediately after the assassination and in several provinces rioting.187 As a compensation measure the Praetorian Guard demanded the execution of Domitians assassins which Nerva refused. Instead he merely dismissed Titus Petronius Secundus and replaced him with a former commander Casperius Aelianus.188 Dissatisfaction with this state of affairs continued to loom over Nervas reign and ultimately erupted into a crisis in October 97 when members of the Praetorian Guard led by Casperius Aelianus laid siege to the Imperial Palace and took Nerva hostage.189 He was forced to submit to their demands agreeing to hand over those responsible for Domitians death and even giving a speech thanking the rebellious Praetorians.189 Titus Petronius Secundus and Parthenius were sought out and killed. Nerva was unharmed in this assault but his authority was damaged beyond repair. Shortly thereafter he announced the adoption of Trajan as his successor and with this decision nearly abdicated.190 Flavian family treeedit v t e FLAVIAN DYNASTY detailed family tree Titus Flavius Petro Tertulla Vespasius Pollio Julia the Younger Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasia Polla Vespasius praetor Aemilia Lepida Agrippina the Elder Germanicus Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasian 6979 Domitilla the Elder Flavia died young Junia Lepida Vistilia Titus Flavius Sabinus Domitilla the Younger Titus 7981 Arrecina Tertulla Cassia Longina Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo Caesonia Caligula 3741 Titus Flavius Sabinus Titus Flavius Clemens Flavia Domitilla Julia Flavia Domitian 8196 Domitia Longina Domitia Flavius Caesar Legacyedit Ancient sourcesedit Domitian as Emperor Vatican Museums possibly recut from a statue of Nero The classic view of Domitian is usually negative since most of the antique sources were related to the Senatorial or aristocratic class with which Domitian had notoriously difficult relations.156 Furthermore contemporary historians such as Pliny the Younger Tacitus and Suetonius all wrote after his reign when his memory had been condemned to oblivion by the Senate. The work of Domitians court poets Martial and Statius constitutes virtually the only literary evidence concurrent with his reign. Perhaps as unsurprising as the attitude of postDomitianic historians the poems of Martial and Statius are highly adulatory praising Domitians achievements as equalling those of the gods.191 The most extensive account of the life of Domitian to survive was written by the historian Suetonius who was born during the reign of Vespasian and published his works under Emperor Hadrian 117138. His De vita Caesarum is the source of much of what is known of Domitian. Although his text is predominantly negative it neither exclusively condemns nor praises Domitian and asserts that his rule started well but gradually declined into terror.192 The biography is problematic however in that it appears to contradict itself with regards to Domitians rule and personality at the same time presenting him as a conscientious moderate man and as a decadent libertine.29 According to Suetonius Domitian wholly feigned his interest in arts and literature and never bothered to acquaint himself with classic authors. Other passages alluding to Domitians love of epigrammatic expression suggest that he was in fact familiar with classic writers while he also patronized poets and architects founded artistic Olympics and personally restored the library of Rome at great expense after it had burned down.29 De Vita Caesarum is also the source of several outrageous stories regarding Domitians married life. According to Suetonius Domitia Longina was exiled in 83 because of an affair with a famous actor named Paris. When Domitian found out he allegedly murdered Paris in the street and promptly divorced his wife with Suetonius further adding that once Domitia was exiled Domitian took Julia as his mistress who later died during a failed abortion.54193 Modern historians consider this highly implausible however noting that malicious rumours such as those concerning Domitias alleged infidelity were eagerly repeated by postDomitianic authors and used to highlight the hypocrisy of a ruler publicly preaching a return to Augustan morals while privately indulging in excesses and presiding over a corrupt court.194 Nevertheless the account of Suetonius has dominated imperial historiography for centuries. Although Tacitus is usually considered to be the most reliable author of this era his views on Domitian are complicated by the fact that his fatherinlaw Gnaeus Julius Agricola may have been a personal enemy of the Emperor.195 In his biographical work Agricola Tacitus maintains that Agricola was forced into retirement because his triumph over the Caledonians highlighted Domitians own inadequacy as a military commander. Several modern authors such as Dorey have argued the opposite that Agricola was in fact a close friend of Domitian and that Tacitus merely sought to distance his family from the fallen dynasty once Nerva was in power.195196 Tacitus major historical works including The Histories and Agricolas biography were all written and published under Domitians successors Nerva 9698 and Trajan 98117. Unfortunately the part of Tacitus Histories dealing with the reign of the Flavian dynasty is almost entirely lost. His views on Domitian survive through brief comments in its first five books and the short but highly negative characterization in Agricola in which he severely criticizes Domitians military endeavours. Nevertheless Tacitus admits his debt to the Flavians with regard to his own public career.197 Other influential 
2 nd century authors include Juvenal and Pliny the Younger the latter of whom was a friend of Tacitus and in 100 delivered his famous Panegyricus Traiani before Trajan and the Roman Senate exalting the new era of restored freedom while condemning Domitian as a tyrant. Juvenal savagely satirized the Domitianic court in his Satires depicting the Emperor and his entourage as corrupt violent and unjust. As a consequence the antiDomitianic tradition was already well established by the end of the 
2 nd century and by the 
3 rd century even expanded upon by early Church historians who identified Domitian as an early persecutor of Christians such as in the Acts of John. Modern revisionismedit Bust of Domitian wearing the civic crown from the Palazzo Massimo alle Terme Rome Over the course of the 
20 th century Domitians military administrative and economic policies were reevaluated. Hostile views of Domitian had been propagated until archeological and numismatic advances brought renewed attention to his reign and necessitated a revision of the literary tradition established by Tacitus and Pliny. It would be nearly a hundred years after Stphane Gsells 1894 Essai sur le rgne de lempereur Domitien however before any new booklength studies were published.6 The first of these was Jones 1992 The Emperor Domitian. He concludes that Domitian was a ruthless but efficient autocrat.6 For the majority of his reign there was no widespread dissatisfaction with his policies. His harshness was limited to a highly vocal minority who exaggerated his despotism in favor of the NervanAntonian dynasty that followed.6 His foreign policy was realistic rejecting expansionist warfare and negotiating peace at a time when Roman military tradition dictated aggressive conquest. Persecution of religious minorities such as Jews and Christians was nonexistent.198 In 1930 Ronald Syme argued for a complete reassessment of Domitians financial policy which had been largely viewed as a disaster.199 His economic program which was rigorously efficient maintained the Roman currency at a standard it would never again achieve. Domitians government nonetheless exhibited totalitarian characteristics. As Emperor he saw himself as the new Augustus an enlightened despot destined to guide the Roman Empire into a new era of Flavian renaissance.77 Using religious military and cultural propaganda he fostered a cult of personality. He deified three of his family members and erected massive structures to commemorate the Flavian achievements. Elaborate triumphs were celebrated in order to boost his image as a warrioremperor but many of these were either unearned or premature.100 By nominating himself perpetual censor he sought to control public and private morals.131 He started several major construction projects in Rome including the Aqua Traiana and the Baths of Trajan.200 He became personally involved in all branches of the government and successfully prosecuted corruption among public officials. The dark side of his censorial power involved a restriction in freedom of speech and an increasingly oppressive attitude toward the Roman Senate. He punished libel with exile or death and due to his suspicious nature increasingly accepted information from informers to bring false charges of treason if necessary.201 Despite his vilification by contemporary historians Domitians administration provided the foundation for the Principate of the peaceful 
2 nd century. His successors Nerva and Trajan were less restrictive but in reality their policies differed little from his. Much more than a gloomy coda to the...
1 st century the Roman Empire prospered between 81 and 96 in a reign that Theodor Mommsen described as a somber but intelligent despotism.6202 See alsoedit Cultural depictions of Domitian List of Roman emperors Notesedit  Both children died young and were deified.3  The closest reigns to 15 years were Claudius and Neros and it was soon to be surpassed by Trajans 19 years.  Obverse Laureate bust of Emperor Domitian facing right Classical Medusa at the nick of Domitians neck. Legend reads AYTO. KAIAP OMITIANO EB. EPM. imp. caesar Domitianus Avg. Germ. Reverse Eagle standing on a thunderbolt palm before wings open head facing right holding wreath in its beak. Legend reads ETOY NEOY EPOY ENEKATOY new sacred year eleventh Size 
27 mm 
14.8 g Reference Prieur p. 22 no. 1
47 S  Caption IMP. CAES. DOMITIANVS AVG. P. M.  DIVUS CAESAR MP. DOMITIANI F. Referencesedit Citationsedit  Garzetti Albino 2014. From Tiberius to the Antonines A History of the Roman Empire AD 14192. Routledge Revivals. Routledge. pp. 266 833. ISBN 9781317698449.  Deroux Carl 2010. Studies in Latin Literature and Roman History. Vol. 323. Latomus. p. 283.  Vagi David L. 2012. Coinage and History of the Roman Empire C. 82 B.C.  A.D. 480 History. Taylor  Francis. p. 212. ISBN 9781579583163.  a b Hammond Mason 1956. The Transmission of the Powers of the Roman Emperor from the Death of Nero in A.D. 68 to That of Alexander Severus in A.D. 235. Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. 24 61133. doi
10.2 3074238640. JSTOR 4238640.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 491. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b c d e Gowing Alain M. 1992. Review The Emperor Domitian. Bryn Mawr Classical Review.  a b Suetonius Life of Domitian 1  a b c Jones 1992 p. 1  Townend 1961 p. 62  Jones 1992 p. 3  a b Jones 1992 p. 2  Jones 1992 p. 8  Suetonius Life of Domitian 4  Jones 1992 p. 7  Jones 1992 pp. 911  a b Jones 1992 p. 11  McFayden Donald 1920. The American Journal of Theology. Vol. 24. University of Chicago Press. p. 48. ISSN 15503283. JSTOR 3155938.  Waters 1964 pp. 5253  a b c d Jones 1992 p. 13  Murison 2003 p. 149  Suetonius Life of Domitian 9  Suetonius Life of Domitian 
12.3   Suetonius Life of Domitian 20  a b c d Jones 1992 p. 16  Suetonius Life of Domitian 19  Suetonius De Vita Caesarum Life of Domitian 18  Morgan 1997 p. 214  Suetonius Life of Domitian 18  a b c d Jones 1992 p. 198  Morgan 1997 p. 209  Suetonius Life of Domitian 21  a b Waters 1964 p. 54  a b Sullivan 1953 p. 69  Wellesley 2000 p. 44  Wellesley 2000 p. 45  a b Sullivan 1953 p. 68  Wellesley 2000 p. 126  Tacitus Histories III.34  Wellesley 2000 pp. 166 189  a b c d Jones 1992 p. 14  Wellesley 1956 p. 213  a b c Jones 1992 p. 15  Tacitus Histories IV.40  Tacitus Histories IV.68  Jones 1992 p. 17  a b Jones 1992 p. 33  Jones 1992 p. 34  a b c Jones 1993 p. 36  Jones 1992 pp. 161162  Jones 1992 p. 39  Varner 1995 p. 200  Jones 1992 pp. 3435  a b Jones 1992 p. 37  a b Jones 1992 p. 35  Prettejohn Elizabeth March 2002. Lawrence AlmaTadema and the Modern City of Ancient Rome. The Art Bulletin. 84 1 115129. doi
10.2 3073177255. JSTOR 3177255.  Jonathan J. Price 2011. The Jewish Population of Jerusalem. In Mladen Popovic ed.. The Jewish Revolt Against Rome Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Brill. pp. 410411. ISBN 9789004216686.  James J. Bloom 2014. The Jewish Revolts Against Rome A.D. 66135 A Military Analysis. McFarland. p. 247. ISBN 9780786460205.  Josephus The Wars of the Jews VI.
9.3   a b Josephus The Wars of the Jews VII.
5.5   a b Suetonius Life of Domitian 2  a b c Jones 1992 p. 93  a b Jones 1992 p. 18  a b Jones 1992 p. 19  Crook John A. 1951. Titus and Berenice. The American Journal of Philology. 72 2 162175. doi
10.2 307292544. JSTOR 292544.  Jones 1992 p. 163  a b c Jones 1992 p. 20  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.22  Jones 1992 p. 80  Philostratus The Life of Apollonius of Tyana 
6.3 2 Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine  a b Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.26  This is a date found in the Acta Fratrum Arvalium. The text reads XV... ob imperium Caes..s divi f... Domitiani Aug... where XVIII is the earliest possible date.  Jones 1992 p. 21  a b Jones 1992 p. 22  Jones Brian W. 1994. Pallas. Presses Universitaires du Midi. p. 331. ISSN 00310387. JSTOR 43660547.  Brunt P. A. 1979. The Journal of Roman Studies. Vol. 69. Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies Cambridge University Press. p. 173. doi
10.2 307299067. ISSN 00754358. JSTOR 299067. S
2 CID 163284681.  a b Jones 1992 p. 99  a b Jones 1992 p. 72  a b c d Jones 1992 p. 107  a b Jones 1992 p. 109  Suetonius Life of Domitian 8  Jones 1992 p. 164  Jones 1992 pp. 178179  a b c Jones 1992 p. 150  Jones 1992 pp. 2628  Bard Kathryn A. 2005. Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. Routledge. pp. 252254. ISBN 9781134665259.  Bard Kathryn A. 2015. An Introduction to the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. John Wiley  Sons. p. 325. ISBN 9780470673362.  Martial V 1  Martial IV 30  DarwallSmith Robin 1994. Albanum and the villas of Domitian. Pallas. 40 1 145165. doi
10.3 4
06 palla.19
94.1 315. ISSN 00310387.  Roth Leland M. 1993. Understanding Architecture Its Elements History and Meaning First ed.. Boulder CO Westview Press. pp. 233. ISBN 0064301583.  Trajan was in fact quite active in Egypt. Separate scenes of Domitian and Trajan making offerings to the gods appear on reliefs on the propylon of the Temple of Hathor at Dendera. There are cartouches of Domitian and Trajan on the column shafts of the Temple of Knum at Esna and on the exterior a frieze text mentions Domitian Trajan and Hadrian Stadter Philip A. Stockt L. Van der 2002. Sage and Emperor Plutarch Greek Intellectuals and Roman Power in the Time of Trajan 98117 A.D.. Leuven University Press. p. 75. ISBN 9789058672391.  Domitian relief in Esna  a b Jones 1992 p. 73  Roman Currency of the Principate. 1 November 2008. Archived from the original on 1 November 2008.  a b c Jones 1992 p. 75  a b Jones 1992 p. 79  Jones 1992 pp. 8488  Jones 1992 p. 74  Jones 1992 p. 103  a b c Jones 1992 p. 127  a b c d e Jones 1992 p. 131  a b c Jones 1992 p. 130  Millar Fergus 2002. Rome the Greek World and the East The Roman Republic and the Augustan revolution. UNC Press Books. p. 51. ISBN 9780807849903.  a b c Tacitus Agricola 39  Tacitus Histories I.2  Syme 1930 p. 64  a b Jones 1992 p. 144  Jones 1992 p. 128  Jones 1992 p. 129  Suetonius Life of Domitian 6  Tacitus Agricola 24  a b c d Jones 1992 p. 132  Reed Nicholas 1971. The Fifth Year of Agricolas Campaigns. Britannia. 2 143148. doi
10.2 307525804. JSTOR 525804. S
2 CID 164089455.  Tacitus Agricola 29  Tacitus Agricola 42  Jones 1992 p. 133  a b Jones 1992 p. 138  Jones 1992 p. 139  Jones 1992 p. 142  Jones 1992 p. 195  a b Salmon Edward Togo 1936. Trajans Conquest of Dacia. Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association. 67 83105. doi
10.2 307283229. JSTOR 283229.  Knight D. J. 1991. The Movements of the Auxilia from Augustus to Hadrian. Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik. 85 189208.  MateiPopescu Florian 20062007. The Auxiliary Units from Moesia Superior in Domitians Time and the Problem of CIL XVI 41. Ephemeris Napocensis. 1617 3148.  Jones 1992 p. 88  a b c Jones 1992 p. 100  Suetonius Domitian 132  Dio Roman History 6747  Jones 1992 p. 108  contra Deissmann Adolf 1995. Light From the Ancient East. Peabody Massachusetts Hendrickson Publishers. pp. 357 n. 1. ISBN 9781565631557.  Jones 1992 p. 87  a b Jones 1992 p. 106  RankeHeinemann Uta 1990. Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven Women Sexuality and the Catholic Church. Translated by Heinegg Peter. New York Doubleday. p. 46.  Murray Stephen O. 2000. Homosexualities. University of Chicago Press. p. 299.  Guilland Rodolphe 1943. Les Eunuques dans lEmpire Byzantin tude de titulature et de prosopographie byzantines. tudes Byzantines. 1 197238. doi
10.3 4
06 rebyz.19
43.9 07.  Charles Michael B. AnagnostouLaoutides Eva 2010. The Sexual Hypocrisy of Domitian Suet. Dom. 8 3. LAntiquit Classique. 79 1 173187. doi
10.3 4
06 antiq.20
10.3 772.  Galbi Douglas 12 April 2020. Earinus Emperor Domitian and laws against castration. purple motes. Retrieved 12 July 2020.  Quinn John T. 2002. Earinus the Eunuch Martial from Book 9 and Statius Silvae 
3.4 . Diotma. Retrieved 16 September 2021.  Grainger 2003 p. 54  a b Epictetus translated by T.W.Rolleston London Walter Scott Ltd undated p. xviii  Jones 1992 p. 101  Eusebius of Caessarea 325. Church History.  Smallwood E.M. 1956. Domitians attitude towards the Jews and Judaism. Classical Philology. 51 113. doi
10.1 086363978. S
2 CID 161356789.  Brown Raymond E. 1997. An Introduction to the New Testament. New York Doubleday. pp. 805809. ISBN 9780385247672.  Jones 1992 p. 119  Suetonius Life of Domitian 12  Jones 1992 p. 145  a b Jones 1992 p. 146  Jones 1992 p. 149  Jones 1992 pp. 148149  a b Grainger 2003 p. 30  Murison 2003 p. 150  Waters K. H. 1963. The Second Dynasty of Rome. Phoenix. 17 3 198218 201. doi
10.2 3071086720. JSTOR 1086720.  a b c Jones 1992 p. 161  a b Jones 1992 p. 169  TimeTravelRome 16 March 2022. Domitian Misery of Absolutism and Splendor of Rome. Time Travel Rome. Retrieved 5 December 2022.  a b Jones 1992 p. 160  Jones 1992 pp. 163168  Tacitus Agricola 45  Suetonius Life of Domitian 10  For a full list of senatorial victims see Jones 1992 pp. 182188  M. Arrecinus Clemens may have been exiled instead of executed see Jones 1992 p. 187  Suetonius Life of Domitian 15  Suetonius De Vita Caesarum Life of Domitian 21  a b Jones 1992 p. 192  Suetonius Life of Domitian 17.  Grainger 2003 p. 16  Suetonius Life of Domitian 1416  a b Grainger 2003 p. 19  Suetonius Life of Domitian 16  Cassius Dio Roman History 
67.1 6  Suetonius Life of Domitian 15  a b Grainger 2003 pp. 13  Suetonius 1979. Domitian 17. The Twelve Caesars. Translated by Graves.  Jones 1992 p. 38  Grainger 2003 p. 5  Suetonius Life of Domitian 17  Werner Eck  Andreas Pangerl Titus Flavius Norbanus praefectus praetorio Domitians als Statthalter Rtiens in einem neuen Militrdiplom ZPE 163 2007 239251  a b Murison 2003 p. 153  Murison 2003 p. 151  Grainger 2003 pp. 427  a b Jones 1992 p. 194  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVII.15  Syme Ronald 1983. Domitian The Last Years. Chiron. 13 121146.  Jones 1992 p. 196  a b Grainger 2003 p. 49  Last Hugh 1948. On the Flavian Reliefs from the Palazzo della Cancelleria. The Journal of Roman Studies. 38 12 914. doi
10.2 307298163. JSTOR 298163. S
2 CID 250352207.  Grainger 2003 pp. 3233  Grainger 2003 p. 40  a b Grainger 2003 pp. 9495  Syme Ronald 1980. Guard Prefects of Trajan and Hadrian. The Journal of Roman Studies. 70 6480. doi
10.2 307299556. JSTOR 299556. S
2 CID 162498865.  Jones 1992 p. 32  Waters 1964 p. 51  Suetonius Life of Domitian 22  Levick 2002 p. 211  a b Jones 1992 p. 58  Dorey T. A. 1960. Agricola and Domitian. Greece  Rome. 7 1 6671. doi
10.1 0
17 s0017383500014029. JSTOR 640729. S
2 CID 162793177.  Tacitus Histories I.1  Jones 1992 pp. 114119  His article begins with The work of the spade and the use of common sense have done much to mitigate the influence of Tacitus and Pliny and redeem the memory of Domitian from infamy or oblivion. But much remains to be done. Imperial Finances p. 55  Anderson J. C. 1985. The Date of the Thermae Traiani and the Topography of the Oppius Mons. American Journal of Archaeology 89 507  Jones 1992 p. 180  Syme 1930 p. 67 Bibliographyedit Grainger John D. 2003. Nerva and the Roman Succession Crisis of AD 9699. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415289177. Jones Brian W. 1992. The Emperor Domitian. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415101950. Levick Barbara 2002. Corbulos Daughter. Greece  Rome. 49 2 199211. doi
10.1 0
93 gr

49.2.1 99. JSTOR 826906. Morgan Llewelyn 1997. Achilleae Comae Hair and Heroism According to Domitian. The Classical Quarterly. New Series. 47 1 209214. doi
10.1 0
93 cq

47.1.2 09. JSTOR 639608. Murison Charles Leslie 2003. M. Cocceius Nerva and the Flavians. Transactions of the American Philological Association. 133 1 147157. doi
10.1 3
53 apa.20
03.0 008. S
2 CID 162211747. Suetonius 1979. The Twelve Caesars. Translated by Graves Robert. Ontario Canada Penguin Books Canada LTD. ISBN 9780140054163. Sullivan Philip B. 1953. A Note on the Flavian Accession. The Classical Journal. 49 2 6770. JSTOR 3293160. Syme Ronald 1930. The Imperial Finances under Domitian Nerva and Trajan. The Journal of Roman Studies. 20 5570. doi
10.2 307297385. JSTOR 297385. S
2 CID 163980436. Townend Gavin 1961. Some Flavian Connections. The Journal of Roman Studies. 51 1  2 5462. doi
10.2 307298836. JSTOR 298836. S
2 CID 163868319. Waters K. H. 1964. The Character of Domitian. Phoenix. 18 1 4977. doi
10.2 3071086912. JSTOR 1086912. Wellesley Kenneth 1956. Three Historical Puzzles in Histories 3. The Classical Quarterly. 6 34 207214. doi
10.1 0
17 S0009838800020188. JSTOR 636914. S
2 CID 170747190. Wellesley Kenneth 2000 1975. The Year of the Four Emperors. Roman Imperial Biographies. London Routledge. p. 272. ISBN 9780415236201. Further readingedit Gsell Stphane 1894. Essai sur le rgne de lempereur Domitien. Bibliothque des coles franaises dAthnes et de Rome in French. Paris E. Thorin. Retrieved 10 February 2007. Jones Brian W. 1984. The Emperor Titus. London Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9780312244439. Levick Barbara 1999. Vespasian Roman Imperial Biographies. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415166188. in French Minaud Grard Les vies de 12 femmes dempereur romain  Devoirs Intrigues  Volupts Paris LHarmattan 2012 ch. 5 La vie de Domitia Longina femme de Domitien pp. 121146. ISBN 9782336002910. Southern Pat 1997. Domitian Tragic Tyrant. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415165259. Primary sourcesedit Cassius Dio Roman History Book 67 English translation Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Domitian Latin text with English translation Tacitus Agricola English translation Tacitus Histories English translation External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Domitian. Donahue John 10 October 1997. Titus Flavius Domitianus A.D. 8196. De Imperatoribus Romanis An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Rulers and their Families. Retrieved 10 February 2007. A private collection of coins minted by Domitian Domitian Flavian dynasty Born 24 October AD 51 Died 18 September AD 96 Political offices Preceded by Titus Roman emperor 8196 Succeeded by Nerva Preceded by Vespasian V Titus III Roman consul 73 with L. Valerius Catullus Messallinus Succeeded by Vespasian VI Titus IV Preceded by Vespasian IX Titus VII Roman consul 80 with Titus VIII Succeeded by L. Flavius Silva M. Asinius Pollio Verrucosus Preceded by L. Flavius Silva M. Asinius Pollio Verrucosus Roman consul 8288 Succeeded by T. Aurelius Fulvus M. Asinius Atratinus Preceded by T. Aurelius Fulvus M. Asinius Atratinus Roman consul 90 with Marcus Cocceius Nerva II Succeeded by M. Acilius Glabrio Trajan Preceded by M. Acilius Glabrio Trajan Roman consul 92 with Q. Volusius Saturninus Succeeded by Sex. Pompeius Collega Q. Peducaeus Priscinus Preceded by L. Nonius Calpurnius Torquatus Asprenas T. Sextius Magius Lateranus Roman consul 95 with T. Flavius Clemens Succeeded by C. Manlius Valens C. Antistius Vetus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI 2 VIAF 2 3 WorldCat National Norway Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Belgium United States Sweden Czech Republic Australia Greece Croatia Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other SNAC IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDomitianoldid1220947190 Categories Domitian 51 births 96 deaths 
1 stcentury clergy 
1 stcentury murdered monarchs 
1 stcentury Roman emperors 
1 stcentury Roman poets Augurs of the Roman Empire Deaths by stabbing in ancient Rome Eponymous archons Flavian dynasty Flavii 
1 stcentury Roman consuls Imperial Roman praetors Murdered Roman emperors Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae Roman pharaohs Sons of Roman emperors Assassinated heads of state in Europe Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles Use dmy dates from September 2023 Articles containing Latinlanguage text All articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases Articles with specifically marked weaselworded phrases from September 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Articles with Frenchlanguage sources fr Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SNACID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 26 April 2024 at 2222 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width