Vespasian - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Military and political career Toggle Military and political career subsection 
2.1 Early career 
2.2 Invasion of Britannia 
2.3 Later political career 
2.4 JewishRoman War 
3 Year of the Four Emperors 69 
4 Emperor 6979 Toggle Emperor 6979 subsection 
4.1 Aftermath of the civil war 
4.2 Arrival in Rome and gathering support 
4.3 Propaganda campaign 
4.4 Construction and conspiracies 
4.5 Roman expansion in Britain 
4.6 Death 
5 Legacy 
6 Family and personal life Toggle Family and personal life subsection 
6.1 Ancestors and relatives 
6.2 Marriage and children 
7 Gallery 
8 Flavian family tree 
9 See also 
10 References 
11 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
11.1 Primary sources 
11.2 Secondary sources 
12 Further reading 
13 External links Toggle the table of contents Vespasian 89 languages Afrikaans   Aragons Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg     Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Gidhlig Galego Hakkng    Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy     Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontis Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn   Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from AD 69 to 79 For others with the given name or surname see Vespasian name. Vespasian Bust at the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek Roman emperor Reign 1 July 69  23 June 79 Predecessor Vitellius Successor Titus Born Titus Flavius Vespasianus 17 November 9 AD1 Falacrinum Italy Died 23 June 79 aged 694 Aquae Cutiliae Burial Rome Spouses Domitilla the Elder died before 69 Caenis mistress and later concubine after his wifes death c.6574 Issue Detail Titus Domitilla the Younger Domitian Names Titus Flavius Vespasianus Regnal name Imperator Caesar Vespasianus Augustus5 Dynasty Flavian Father Titus Flavius Sabinus Mother Vespasia Polla Vespasian vspein zin Latin Vespasianus wspasians 17 November AD 9  23 June 79 was Roman emperor from 69 to 79. The last emperor to reign in the Year of the Four Emperors he founded the Flavian dynasty which ruled the Empire for 27 years. His fiscal reforms and consolidation of the empire brought political stability and a vast building program. Vespasian was the first emperor from an equestrian family and only rose later in his lifetime into the senatorial rank the first of his family to do so. Vespasians renown came from his military success6 he was legate of Legio II Augusta during the Roman invasion of Britain in 43 and subjugated Judaea during the Jewish rebellion of 
66.7  While Vespasian besieged Jerusalem during the Jewish rebellion emperor Nero committed suicide and plunged Rome into a year of civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors. After Galba and Otho perished in quick succession Vitellius became emperor in April 69. The Roman legions of Roman Egypt and Judaea reacted by declaring Vespasian their commander the emperor on 1 July 
69.8  In his bid for imperial power Vespasian joined forces with Mucianus the governor of Syria and Primus a general in Pannonia leaving his son Titus to command the besieging forces at Jerusalem. Primus and Mucianus led the Flavian forces against Vitellius while Vespasian took control of Egypt. On 20 December 69 Vitellius was defeated and the following day Vespasian was declared emperor by the Senate.9 Little information survives about the government during Vespasians tenyear rule. He reformed the financial system of the Roman Empire after the campaign against Judaea ended successfully and initiated several ambitious construction projects including the building of the Flavian Amphitheatre better known today as the Roman Colosseum. Through his general Agricola Vespasian increased imperial expansion in Britain. Vespasian is often credited with restoring political stability to Rome following the chaotic reigns of his predecessors. After he died in 79 he was succeeded by his eldest son Titus thus becoming the first Roman emperor to be succeeded by his natural son and establishing the Flavian dynasty. Early lifeedit Vespasian born Titus Flavius Vespasianus pronounced tts fawijs ws.pasijans was born in a village northeast of Rome called Falacrinae.10 His family was relatively undistinguished and lacking in pedigree. Vespasian was the son of Titus Flavius Sabinus a Roman moneylender debt collector and tax collector. His mother Vespasia Polla also belonged to the equestrian order in society with her father rising to the rank of prefect of the camp and her brother becoming a Senator.11 He was educated in the countryside in Cosa near what is today Ansedonia Italy under the guidance of his paternal grandmother so much so that even when he became emperor he often returned to the places of his childhood having left the former villa exactly as it had been.12 Early in his life he was somewhat overshadowed by his older brother Titus Flavius Sabinus who had entered public life and pursued the cursus honorum holding an important military command in the Danube. Military and political careeredit Early careeredit Vespasian leading his forces against the Jewish revolt a miniature in a 1470 illuminated manuscript version of the history of Josephus In preparation for a praetorship Vespasian needed two periods of service in the minor magistracies one military and the other public. Vespasian served in the military in Thracia for about three years. On his return to Rome in about 30 AD he obtained a post in the vigintivirate the minor magistracies most probably in one of the posts in charge of street cleaning.13 His early performance was so unsuccessful that Emperor Caligula reportedly stuffed handfuls of muck down his toga to correct the uncleaned Roman streets formally his responsibility.11 During the period of the ascendancy of Sejanus there is no record of Vespasian engaging in any significant political activity. After completion of a term in the vigintivirate Vespasian was entitled to stand for election as quaestor a senatorial office. But his lack of political or family influence meant that Vespasian served as quaestor in one of the provincial posts in Crete rather than as assistant to important men in Rome.13 Next he needed to gain a praetorship carrying the Imperium but nonpatricians and the less wellconnected had to serve in at least one intermediary post as an aedile or tribune. Vespasian failed at his first attempt to gain an aedileship but was successful in his second attempt becoming an aedile in 38. Despite his lack of significant family connections or success in office he achieved praetorship in either 39 or 40 at the youngest age permitted 30 during a period of political upheaval in the organisation of elections. His longstanding relationship with freedwoman Antonia Caenis confidential secretary to Antonia Minor the Emperors grandmother and part of the circle of courtiers and servants around the Emperor may have contributed to his success.13 Invasion of Britanniaedit Upon the accession of Claudius as emperor in 41 Vespasian was appointed legate of Legio II Augusta stationed in Germania thanks to the influence of the Imperial freedman Narcissus. In 43 Vespasian and the II Augusta participated in the Roman invasion of Britain and he distinguished himself under the overall command of Aulus Plautius. After participating in crucial early battles on the rivers Medway and Thames he was sent to reduce the south west penetrating through the modern counties of Hampshire Wiltshire Dorset Somerset Devon and Cornwall with the probable objectives of securing the south coast ports and harbours along with the tin mines of Cornwall and the silver and lead mines of Somerset. Vespasian marched from Noviomagus Reginorum Chichester to subdue the hostile Durotriges and Dumnonii tribes14 and captured twenty oppida towns or more probably hill forts including Hod Hill and Maiden Castle in Dorset. He also invaded Vectis now the Isle of Wight finally setting up a fortress and legionary headquarters at Isca Dumnoniorum Exeter. During this time he injured himself and had not fully recovered until he went to Egypt. These successes earned him triumphal regalia ornamenta triumphalia on his return to Rome. Later political careeredit Roman Emperor Nero sends Vespasian with an army to put down the Jewish revolt AD 66 depiction of 1503 His success as the legate of a legion earned him a consulship in 51 after which he retired from public life having incurred the enmity of Claudius wife Agrippina who was the most powerful and influential figure in her husbands reign.11 He came out of retirement in 63 when he was sent as governor to Africa Province. According to Tacitus ii.97 his rule was infamous and odious but according to Suetonius Vesp. 4 he was upright and highly honourable. On one occasion Suetonius writes Vespasian was pelted with turnips. Vespasian used his time in North Africa wisely. Usually governorships were seen by exconsuls as opportunities to extort huge amounts of money to regain the wealth they had spent on their previous political campaigns. Corruption was so rife that it was almost expected that a governor would come back from these appointments with his pockets full. However Vespasian used his time in North Africa making friends instead of money something that would be far more valuable in the years to come. During his time in North Africa he found himself in financial difficulties and was forced to mortgage his estates to his brother. To revive his fortunes he turned to the mule trade and gained the nickname mulio muleteer.15 Returning from Africa Vespasian toured Greece in Neros retinue but lost Imperial favor after paying insufficient attention some sources suggest he fell asleep during one of the Emperors recitals on the lyre and found himself in the political wilderness. JewishRoman Waredit Main article First JewishRoman War Vespasian sestertius struck in 71 to celebrate the victory in the first JewishRoman war. Obverse IMP. CAES. VESPASIAN AVG. P. M. TR. P. P. P. COS. III. The legend on the reverse says IVDEA CAPTA Judaea conquered  S. C. In 66 AD Vespasian was appointed to suppress the Jewish revolt underway in Judea. The fighting there had killed the previous governor and routed Cestius Gallus the governor of Syria when he tried to restore order. Two legions with eight cavalry squadrons and ten auxiliary cohorts were therefore dispatched under the command of Vespasian while his elder son Titus arrived from Alexandria with another. During this time he became the patron of Flavius Josephus a Jewish resistance leader captured at the Siege of Yodfat who would later write his peoples history in Greek. Ultimately thousands of Jews were killed and the Romans destroyed many towns in reestablishing control over Judea they also took Jerusalem in 70. Vespasian is remembered by Josephus writing as a Roman citizen in his Antiquities of the Jews as a fair and humane official in contrast with the notorious Herod Agrippa II whom Josephus goes to great lengths to demonize. While under the emperors patronage Josephus wrote that after the Roman Legio X Fretensis accompanied by Vespasian destroyed Jericho on 21 June 68 Vespasian took a group of Jews who could not swim possibly Essenes from Qumran fettered them and threw them into the Dead Sea to test the seas legendary buoyancy. Indeed the captives bobbed up to the surface after being thrown in the water from the boats. Josephus as well as Tacitus reporting on the conclusion of the Jewish war reported a prophecy that around the time when Jerusalem and the Second Temple would be taken a man from their own nation viz. the Messiah would become governor of the habitable earth. Josephus interpreted the prophecy to denote Vespasian and his appointment as emperor in Judea.1617 Year of the Four Emperors 
69 edit Main article Year of the Four Emperors Map of the Roman Empire during the Year of the Four Emperors 69. Blue areas indicate provinces loyal to Vespasian and Gaius Licinius Mucianus. dubious  discuss Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Four Emperors Chronology Galba 6869 Otho 69 Vitellius 69 Vespasian 6979 Succession Preceded by JulioClaudian dynasty Followed by Flavian dynasty v t e After the death of Nero in 68 Rome saw a succession of shortlived emperors and a year of civil wars. Galba was murdered by supporters of Otho who was defeated by Vitellius. Othos supporters looking for another candidate to support settled on Vespasian. According to Suetonius a prophecy ubiquitous in the Eastern provinces claimed that from Judaea would come the future rulers of the world. Vespasian eventually believed that this prophecy applied to him and found a number of omens and oracles that reinforced this belief.18 Although Vespasian and Titus resolved to challenge for the Principate in February 69 they made no move until later in the year. Throughout the early months of 69 Vespasian convened frequently with the Eastern generals. Gaius Licinius Mucianus was a notable ally. Governor of Syria and commander of three legions Mucianus also held political connections to many of the most powerful Roman military commanders from Illyricum to Britannia by virtue of his service to the famous Neronian general Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo. In May 69 Mucianus formally implored Vespasian to challenge Vitellius. His appeal was followed by Vespasians official proclamation as Emperor in early July. Under instructions from the prefect Tiberius Alexander the legions at Alexandria took an oath of loyalty to Vespasian on 1 July. They were swiftly followed by Vespasians Judaean legions on 3 July and thereafter by Mucianus Syrian legions on 15 July.19 Vitellius the occupant of the throne had the veteran legions of Gaul and the Rhineland. But the feeling in Vespasians favour quickly gathered strength and the armies of Moesia Pannonia and Illyricum soon declared for him and made him the de facto master of half of the Roman world.20 While Vespasian himself was in Egypt securing its grain supply his troops entered Italy from the northeast under the leadership of Marcus Antonius Primus. They defeated Vitellius army which had awaited him in Mevania at Bedriacum or Betriacum sacked Cremona and advanced on Rome. Vitellius hastily arranged a peace with Antonius but the Emperors Praetorian Guard forced him to retain his seat. After furious fighting Antonius army entered Rome. In the resulting confusion the Capitol was destroyed by fire and Vespasians brother Sabinus was killed by a mob.20 At Alexandria on receiving the tidings of his rivals defeat and death the new emperor at once forwarded supplies of urgentlyneeded grain to Rome along with an edict assuring he would reverse the laws of Nero especially those relating to treason. While in Egypt he visited the Temple of Serapis where he reportedly experienced a vision. Later he was confronted by two labourers who were convinced that he possessed a divine power that could work miracles.20 The praefectus Aegypti was Tiberius Julius Alexander who had been governor since Neros reign.2113 He proclaimed Vespasian emperor at Alexandria on 1 July 69 AD.2113 The prefect was himself of Hellenized Jewish descent and related to Philo of Alexandria.2113 The importance of the Egyptian grain harvest Latin claustra annonae lit.key to the grain supply to Rome helped Vespasian assert control over the whole empire.2113 Vespasian was the first emperor and pharaoh since Augustus to appear in Egypt.2213 At the hippodrome of Alexandria he was hailed as pharaoh recalling the welcome of Alexander the Great at the Oracle of ZeusAmmon of the Siwa Oasis Vespasian was proclaimed the son of the creatordeity Amun ZeusAmmon in the style of the ancient pharaohs and an incarnation of Serapis in the manner of the Ptolemies.221314 As Pharaonic precedent demanded Vespasian demonstrated his divine election by the traditional methods of spitting on and trampling a blind and crippled man miraculously healing him according to Egyptian religious elites. Emperor 69
79 edit Aftermath of the civil waredit Roman imperial dynasties Flavian dynasty Chronology Vespasian 6979 AD Titus 7981 AD Domitian 8196 AD Family Gens Flavia Flavian tree CategoryFlavian dynasty Preceded by Year of the Four Emperors Followed by NervaAntonine dynasty v t e Vespasian was declared emperor by the Senate while he was in Egypt on 21 December 69 the Egyptians had declared him emperor in the summer. In the shortterm administration of the empire was given to Mucianus who was aided by Vespasians son Domitian. Mucianus started off Vespasians rule with tax reform that was to restore the empires finances. After Vespasian arrived in Rome in mid70 Mucianus continued to press Vespasian to collect as many taxes as possible.23 Vespasian and Mucianus renewed old taxes and instituted new ones increased the tribute of the provinces and kept a watchful eye upon the treasury officials. The Latin proverb Pecunia non olet Money does not stink may have been created when he had introduced a urine tax on public toilets. Before Vespasian this tax was imposed by Emperor Nero under the name of vectigal urinae in the 
1 st century AD. However the tax was removed after a while it was reenacted by Vespasian around AD 70 in order to fill the treasury.24 Vespasians policy was not well received by his son. Writing about Vespasian in their history books Dio Cassius and Suetonius mentioned When Vespasians son Titus blamed him for even laying a tax upon urine he applied to his nose a piece of the money he received in the first instalment and asked him if it stunk. And he replying no And yet said he it is derived from urine. Since then this phrase Money does not stink has been used to whitewash dubious or illegal origin of money.252624272829 In early 70 Vespasian was still in Egypt the source of Romes grain supply and had not yet left for Rome. According to Tacitus his trip was delayed due to bad weather.30 Modern historians theorize that Vespasian had been and was continuing to consolidate support from the Egyptians before departing.31 Stories of a divine Vespasian healing people circulated in Egypt.32 During this period protests erupted in Alexandria over his new tax policies and grain shipments were held up. Vespasian eventually restored order and grain shipments to Rome resumed.23 In addition to the uprising in Egypt unrest and civil war continued in the rest of the empire in 70. Judea had been rebelling since 66. Vespasians son Titus finally subdued the rebellion with the capture of Jerusalem and destruction of the Jewish Temple in 70. According to Eusebius Vespasian then ordered all descendants of the royal line of David to be hunted down causing the Jews to be persecuted from province to province. Several modern historians have suggested that Vespasian already having been told by Josephus that he was prophesied to become emperor whilst in Judaea was probably reacting to other widely known Messianic prophecies circulating at the time to suppress any rival claimants arising from that dynasty.33 Titus attended the consecration of a new Apis bull at Memphis in 70 and Vespasians reign saw imperial patronage given to Egyptian temples at the Dakhla Oasis in the Western Desert as well as Esna Kom Ombo Medinet Habu Silsila in the Nile Valley.2214 By contrast the Jewish temple at Leontopolis was sacked in 
73.2 214 In January 70 an uprising occurred in Gaul and Germany known as the second Batavian Rebellion. This rebellion was headed by Gaius Julius Civilis and Julius Sabinus. Sabinus claiming he was descended from Julius Caesar declared himself Emperor of Gaul. The rebellion defeated and absorbed two Roman legions before it was suppressed by Vespasians soninlaw Quintus Petillius Cerialis by the end of 70. Arrival in Rome and gathering supportedit In mid70 Vespasian first went to Rome dating his tribunician years from 1 July 
69.9  Vespasian immediately embarked on a series of efforts to stay in power and prevent future revolts. He offered gifts to many in the military and much of the public.34 Soldiers loyal to Vitellius were dismissed or punished.35 Vespasian also restructured the Senatorial and Equestrian orders removing his enemies and adding his allies.36 Regional autonomy of Greek provinces was repealed.37 Additionally Vespasian made significant attempts to control public perception of his rule. Propaganda campaignedit Roman aureus depicting Vespasian as Emperor. The reverse shows the goddess Fortuna. Caption IMP. CAESAR VESPASIANVS AVG.  FORTVNA AVGVST We know from Suetonius that the unexpected and still quite new emperor was lacking auctoritas English backing support and a certain maiestas English majesty.38 Many modern historians note the increased amount of propaganda that appeared during Vespasians reign.39 A component of the propaganda was the theology of victory which legitimized the right to rule through successful conquest.40 This revolved around Vespasians victory in Judea.40 Stories of a supernatural emperor who was destined to rule circulated in the empire.15 Nearly onethird of all coins minted in Rome under Vespasian celebrated military victory or peace.41 The word vindex was removed from coins so as not to remind the public of rebellious Vindex. Construction projects bore inscriptions praising Vespasian and condemning previous emperors.42 A temple of peace was constructed in the forum as well.36 Vespasian approved histories written under his reign ensuring biases against him were removed.43 Vespasian also gave financial rewards to writers.44 The ancient historians who lived through the period such as Tacitus Suetonius and Josephus speak suspiciously well of Vespasian while condemning the emperors who came before him.45 Tacitus admits that his status was elevated by Vespasian Josephus identifies Vespasian as a patron and saviour. Meanwhile Pliny the Elder dedicated his Natural Histories to Vespasians son Titus.46 Those who spoke against Vespasian were punished. A number of Stoic philosophers were accused of corrupting students with inappropriate teachings and were expelled from Rome.47 Helvidius Priscus a proRepublic philosopher was executed for his teachings.48 Numerous other philosophers and writers had their works seized destroyed and denounced for being deemed too critical of Vespasians reign some even posthumously.48 Construction and conspiraciesedit Relief depicting an animal sacrifice from an altar of the Temple of Vespasian in Pompeii Between 71 and 79 much of Vespasians reign is a mystery. Historians report that Vespasian ordered the construction of several buildings in Rome. Additionally he survived several conspiracies against him. Vespasian helped rebuild Rome after the civil war. He added the temple of Peace and the temple to the Deified Claudius.36 In 75 he erected a colossal statue of Apollo begun under Nero and he dedicated a stage of the theatre of Marcellus. He also began construction of the Colosseum using funds from the spoils of the Jewish Temple after the Siege of Jerusalem.49 Suetonius claims that Vespasian was met with constant conspiracies against him.50 Only one conspiracy is known specifically though. In 78 or 79 Eprius Marcellus and Aulus Caecina Alienus attempted to kill Vespasian. Why these men turned against Vespasian is not known. Roman expansion in Britainedit Agricola was appointed to the command of the Legio XX Valeria Victrix stationed in Britain in place of Marcus Roscius Coelius who had stirred up a mutiny against the governor Marcus Vettius Bolanus. Britain had revolted during the year of civil war and Bolanus was a mild governor. Agricola reimposed discipline on the legion and helped to consolidate Roman rule. In 71 Bolanus was replaced by a more aggressive governor Quintus Petillius Cerialis and Agricola was able to display his talents as a commander in campaigns against the Brigantes in northern England. Deathedit In his ninth consulship Vespasian had a slight illness in Campania and returning at once to Rome he left for Aquae Cutiliae and the country around Reate where he spent every summer however his illness worsened and he developed severe diarrhea. With the feeling of death overwhelming him on his deathbed he incited Vae puto deus fio. Dear me I think Im becoming a god.51 Then according to Suetonius The Twelve Caesars Taken on a sudden with such an attack of diarrhoea that he all but swooned he said An emperor ought to die standing and while he was struggling to get on his feet he died in the arms of those who tried to help him on the ninth day before the Kalends of July June 23 at the age of sixtynine years seven months and seven days. Suetonius Lives of the Twelve Caesars Life of Vespasian 2452 He died on June 23 79 AD and was succeeded by his sons Titus and then Domitian. Legacyedit Construction of the Flavian Amphitheatre better known as the Colosseum was begun by Vespasian and finished by his son Titus. Vespasian was known for his wit and his amiable manner alongside his commanding personality and military prowess. He could be liberal to impoverished Senators and equestrians and to cities and towns desolated by natural calamity. He was especially generous to men of letters and rhetors several of whom he pensioned with salaries of as much as 1000 gold pieces a year. Quintilian is said to have been the first public teacher who enjoyed this imperial favor. Pliny the Elders work the Natural History was written during Vespasians reign and dedicated to Vespasians son Titus.53 Vespasian distrusted philosophers in general. It was the talk of philosophers who liked to glorify the Republic that provoked Vespasian into reviving the obsolete penal laws against this profession as a precautionary measure.citation needed Only Helvidius Priscus was put to death after he repeatedly affronted the Emperor with studied insults which Vespasian initially tried to ignore.54 The philosopher Demetrius was banished to an island and when Vespasian heard that Demetrius was still criticizing him he sent the exiled philosopher the message You are doing everything to force me to kill you but I do not slay a barking dog.55 According to Suetonius Vespasian bore the frank language of his friends the quips of pleaders and the impudence of the philosophers with the greatest patience. He was also noted for his benefactions to the people. Much money was spent on public works and the restoration and beautification of Rome the Temple of Peace also known as the Forum of Vespasian new public baths56 and the great show piece the Colosseum.57 Vespasian debased the denarius during his reign reducing the silver purity from 
93.5  to 90. The silver weight dropped from 
2.9 7 grams to 
2.8 7 grams.58 In modern Romance languages urinals are named after him for example vespasiano in Italian and vespasienne in French59 probably in reference to a tax he placed on urine collection useful due to its ammoniac content see Pay toilet. Family and personal lifeedit Ancestors and relativesedit See also Flavia gens His paternal grandfather Titus Flavius Petro became the first to distinguish himself rising to the rank of centurion and fighting at Pharsalus for Pompey in 48 BC. Subsequently he became a debt collector.11 Petros son Titus Flavius Sabinus worked as a customs official in the province of Asia and became a moneylender on a small scale among the Helvetii. He earned a reputation as a scrupulous and honest taxfarmer. Sabinus married up in status to Vespasia Polla whose father had risen to the rank of prefect of the camp and whose brother became a Senator.11 Sabinus and Vespasia had three children the eldest of whom a girl died in infancy. The elder boy Titus Flavius Sabinus entered public life and pursued the cursus honorum. Vespasian on the other hand seemed far less likely to be successful initially not wishing to pursue high public office. He followed in his brothers footsteps when driven to it by his mothers taunting.11 Marriage and childrenedit See also Flavian dynasty During this period he married Flavia Domitilla the daughter of Flavius Liberalis from Ferentium and formerly the mistress of Statilius Capella a Roman equestrian from Sabratha in Africa.60 They had two sons Titus Flavius Vespasianus born 39 and Titus Flavius Domitianus born 51 and a daughter Domitilla born c.45. His wife Domitilla and his daughter Domitilla both died before Vespasian became Emperor in 69. After the death of his wife Vespasians longstanding mistress Antonia Caenis became his wife in all but formal status a relationship that continued until she died in 
75.1 1 Galleryedit Portrait bust of Vespasian wearing the civic crown Palazzo Massimo Rome Portrait bust of Vespasian from Ostia 6979 AD Palazzo Massimo alle Terme Rome Restored original portrait of Vespasian. Vatican Museums Rome Replica of a modern bust of Vespasian61 Pushkin Museum Moscow Bust of Vespasian c.80 AD Farnese Collection Naples National Archaeological Museum Flavian family treeedit v t e FLAVIAN DYNASTY detailed family tree Titus Flavius Petro Tertulla Vespasius Pollio Julia the Younger Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasia Polla Vespasius praetor Aemilia Lepida Agrippina the Elder Germanicus Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasian 6979 Domitilla the Elder Flavia died young Junia Lepida Vistilia Titus Flavius Sabinus Domitilla the Younger Titus 7981 Arrecina Tertulla Cassia Longina Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo Caesonia Caligula 3741 Titus Flavius Sabinus Titus Flavius Clemens Flavia Domitilla Julia Flavia Domitian 8196 Domitia Longina Domitia Flavius Caesar See alsoedit Stele of Vespasian List of Roman emperors Pecunia non olet Referencesedit  Suetonius Vesp. 2. Vespasian was born ... on the evening of the fifteenth day before the Kalends of December in the consulate of Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus and Gaius Poppaeus Sabinus five years before the death of Augustus.  Suetonius Titus 11 He died two years two months and twenty days after succeeding Vespasian.  Cassius Dio LXVI.18 For he lived after this only two years two months and twenty days.  Suetonius gives 23 June VIIII. Kal. Iul.. However he also states that he died at the age of sixtynine years seven months and seven day i.e. he died on 24 June although its possible that hes using inclusive counting. Cassius Dio 
66.1 7 states that he reigned ten years lacking six days i.e. he died on 2524 June. Both authors date Titus ascension on 24 June.23  Cooley p. 490.  The Mammoth Book of Roman Whodunnits. Edited and had nonfictional passages written by Michael Ashley Introduction by Steven Saylor. New York Carroll  Graf Publishers. 2003. p. 198. ISBN 0786712414. OCLC 53474742.cite book CS1 maint others link  Levick pp. 1638.  Scott Kenneth 1932. On Suetonius Life of Vespasian 12. Classical Philology. 27 1 83. doi
10.1 086361434. ISSN 00098
37 X. JSTOR 265251. S
2 CID 161746778. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2021. His tribunician power was reckoned from July 1 69 the day when he was proclaimed emperor by the army  a b Roberts 2007.  Suetonius Vesp. 2  a b c d e f g Morgan 2006 170173  Suetonius Vesp. p. 2  a b c Levick 1999  A History of Britain Richard Dargie 2007 p. 20  a b Suetonius Vesp. 45  Josephus War of the Jews 

6.5.4   Tacitus Histories 
5.1 3  Cassius Dio Roman History LXV.1  Caldwell Thomas 2015. The Career of Licinius Mucianus MA pp. 118149.  a b c The Internet Classics Archive  The Histories by Tacitus. classics.mit.edu. Retrieved 1 September 2022.  a b c d Ritner Robert K. 1998. Egypt under Roman rule the legacy of ancient Egypt. In Petry Carl F. ed.. Islamic Egypt 6401517. Vol. 1 1 ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 133. doi
10.1 0
17 chol97805214713
74.0 02. ISBN 9781139053372. Retrieved 26 January 2021.  a b c d Ritner Robert K. 1998. Egypt under Roman rule the legacy of ancient Egypt. In Petry Carl F. ed.. Islamic Egypt 6401517. Vol. 1 1 ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 133. doi
10.1 0
17 chol97805214713
74.0 02. ISBN 9781139053372. Retrieved 26 January 2021.  a b Cassius Dio Roman History LXV.2  a b Feeling Overtaxed The Romans Would Tax Your Urine. National Geographic News. 14 April 2016. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019.  The Lives of the Twelve Caesars by C. Suetonius Tranquillus. www.gutenberg.org. Archived from the original on 30 December 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2019.  Dion Cassius Histoire Romaine  livre LXVIII bilingue. remacle.org. Archived from the original on 26 March 2013. Retrieved 4 March 2019.  At Least You Dont Pay Urine Tax 
1 st C AD  Ancient History Blog. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019.  ItalianNotebook  Vespasians Legacy. www.italiannotebook.com. 27 January 2014. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019.  HeritageDaily 4 May 2016. The Romans created a tax on urine. HeritageDaily  Archaeology News. Archived from the original on 1 July 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2019.  Tacitus Histories IV  Sullivan Phillip A Note on Flavian Accession The Classical Journal 1953 pp. 6770  Cassius Dio Roman History LXV.89  e.g. Paul Barnett Jesus  the Rise of Early Christianity p. 31 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Jews.  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.10  Suetonius Vesp. 8  a b c Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Vespasian 9  Suetonius Vesp. 8 Philostratus II Life of Apollonius 
5.4 1  Suet. Vesp. 
7.2 .  M. P. Charleswroth Flaviana Journal of Roman Studies 27 1938 5462  a b Porter Stanley E. Pitts Andrew W. 2018. Christian Origins and the Establishment of the Early Jesus Movement. Leiden Brill. p. 303. ISBN 9789004372740.  Jones William Some Thoughts on the Propaganda of Vespasian and Domitian The Classical Journal p. 251  Aqueduct and roads dedication speak of previous emperors neglect CIL vi 12
57 ILS 218 and 931  Josephus Against Apion 9  Suetonius Vesp. 18  Otho Vitellius and the Propaganda of Vespasian The Classical Journal 1965 pp. 267269  Tacitus Histories I.1 Josephus The Life of Flavius Josephus 72 Pliny the Elder Natural Histories preface.  Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.12  a b Cassius Dio Roman History LXVI.13  Alfldy Gza 1995. Eine Bauinschrift Aus Dem Colosseum. Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik. 109 195226.  Suetonius Vesp. 25  Suetonius Life of Vespasian 234  C. Suetonius Tranquillus Divus Vespasianus chapter 24. LacusCurtius. Retrieved 29 April 2020.  Plin. HN pref.  Suetonius Lives of the Twelve Caesars Vespasian 15  Cassius Dio Roman History Book XVI 13  Fagan Garrett G. 31 May 2002. Bathing in public in the Roman world. University of Michigan Press. p. 329. ISBN 9780472088652.  Gunderson 2003 640  Roman Currency of the Principate. Archived from the original on 1 November 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2018.  ICI.RadioCanada.ca Zone Politique  11 April 2017. Plus de 3 M pour une douzaine de  vespasiennes  modernes. RadioCanada.ca. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2017.  Suetonius Vesp. 3  Buste de Vespasien This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Vespasian. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 27 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. Sourcesedit Primary sourcesedit Tacitus Histories English translation Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Vespasian Latin text with English translation Cassius Dio Roman History Books 64 65 and 66 Latin text with English translation Flavius Josephus The War of the Jews Books 2 3 and 4 English translation Secondary sourcesedit Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521840262. Lissner I. 1958. Power and Folly The Story of the Caesars. Jonathan Cape Ltd. London. Morgan Gwyn 2006. 69 A. D. The Year of the Four Emperors. London Oxford University Press. pp. 170173. ISBN 9780195124682. Levick Barbara 1999. Vespasian. Oxford Routledge. ISBN 9780415166188. Roberts J. ed. 2007. Vespasian Titus Flvius Vespsinus. Oxford Dictionary of the Classical World. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191727061. Caldwell T. 2015. The Career of Licinius Mucianus MA. The University of Melbourne. hdl1134391093. Further readingedit De Imperatoribus Romanis biography Entry on Vespasian in historical sourcebook by Mahlon H. Smith Private collection of coins minted by Vespasian The Cipherment of the Franks Casket A. Simmons Vespasian is depicted on the back side of the Franks Casket External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vespasian. Vespasian Flavian dynasty Born 17 November AD 9 Died 23 June AD 79 Political offices Preceded by Vitellius Roman emperor 6979 Succeeded by Titus Preceded by Gaius Quintius Atticus Gnaeus Caecilius Simplex Roman consul 7072 with Titus 70 Nerva 71 Titus 72 Succeeded by Domitian Lucius Valerius Catullus Messallinus Preceded by Domitian Lucius Valerius Catullus Messallinus Roman consul 7477 with Titus Succeeded by Decimus Iunius Novius Priscus Rufus Lucius Ceionius Commodus Verus Preceded by Decimus Iunius Novius Priscus Rufus Lucius Ceionius Commodus Roman consul 79 with Titus Succeeded by Titus Domitian v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Norway Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Belgium United States Sweden Czech Republic Australia Croatia Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists Te Papa New Zealand ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleVespasianoldid1221096716 Categories Vespasian AD 9 births 79 deaths 
1 stcentury Roman emperors Jews and Judaism in the Roman Empire Ancient Romans in Britain Deified Roman emperors Flavian dynasty Flavii Sabini 
1 stcentury Roman consuls People from Lazio People of the Year of the Four Emperors People of the First JewishRoman War Ancient Roman military personnel Roman quaestors Roman aediles Imperial Roman praetors Roman legates Roman governors of Africa Roman pharaohs City founders Flavii Hidden categories CS1 maint others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Use British English from October 2022 Articles containing Latinlanguage text Pages with Latin IPA All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from December 2011 Articles containing explicitly cited Englishlanguage text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 27 April 2024 at 2115 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width