Commodus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life and rise to power 161180 Toggle Early life and rise to power 161180 subsection 
1.1 Early life 
2 Sole reign 180192 Toggle Sole reign 180192 subsection 
2.1 Conspiracies of 182 

2.1.1 Cleander 
2.2 Dacia and Britain 
2.3 Cleanders zenith and fall 185190 
2.4 Megalomania 190192 
2.5 Assassination 192 
3 Character and physical prowess Toggle Character and physical prowess subsection 
3.1 Character and motivations 
3.2 Changes of name 
3.3 Commodus and Hercules 
3.4 Commodus the gladiator 
4 In popular culture 
5 NervaAntonine family tree 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 Sources 
9 Further reading 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Commodus 78 languages Afrikaans  Aragons Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar      Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit  Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 177 to 192 For other people named Commodus see Commodus disambiguation. Commodus Bust c. 180185 Roman emperor Reign Summer 177  31 December 192 senior from 17 March 180 Predecessor Marcus Aurelius Successor Pertinax Coemperor Marcus Aurelius 177180 Born 31 August 161 Lanuvium near Rome Italy Died 31 December 192 aged 31 Rome Italy Burial Rome Spouse Bruttia Crispina Names Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus12 Marcus Aurelius Commodus Antoninus3 Dynasty NervaAntonine Father Marcus Aurelius Mother Faustina the Younger Roman imperial dynasties Aureus of Commodus NervaAntonine dynasty AD 96192 Chronology Nerva 9698 Trajan 98117 Hadrian 117138 Antoninus Pius 138161 Lucius Verus 161169 Marcus Aurelius 161180 Commodus 177192 Family NervaAntonine family tree CategoryNervaAntonine dynasty Succession Preceded by Flavian dynasty Followed by Year of the Five Emperors v t e Commodus kmds4 31 August 161  31 December 192 was a Roman emperor who ruled from 177 until his assassination in 192. For the first three years of his reign he was coemperor with his father Marcus Aurelius. Commodus sole rule starting with the death of Aurelius in 180 is commonly thought to mark the end of a golden age of peace and prosperity in the history of the Roman Empire the Pax Romana. Commodus accompanied his father during the Marcomannic Wars in 172 and on a tour of the Eastern provinces in 176. The following year he became the youngest emperor and consul up to that point at the age of 16. His solo reign saw less military conflict than that of Marcus Aurelius but internal intrigues and conspiracies abounded goading Commodus to an increasingly dictatorial style of leadership. This culminated in his creating a deific personality cult including his performances as a gladiator in the Colosseum. Throughout his reign Commodus entrusted the management of affairs to his palace chamberlain and praetorian prefects namely Saoterus Perennis and Cleander. Commodus was assassinated by the wrestler Narcissus in 192 ending the NervaAntonine dynasty. He was succeeded by Pertinax the first claimant in the tumultuous Year of the Five Emperors. Early life and rise to power 1611
80 edit Early lifeedit Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus was born on 31 August AD 161 in Lanuvium near Rome.5 He was the son of the reigning emperor Marcus Aurelius and Aurelius first cousin Faustina the Younger the youngest daughter of Emperor Antoninus Pius who had died only a few months before. Commodus had an elder twin brother Titus Aurelius Fulvus Antoninus who died in 165. On 12 October 166 Commodus was made Caesar together with his younger brother Marcus Annius Verus.67 The latter died in 169 having failed to recover from an operation which left Commodus as Marcus Aurelius sole surviving son.7 He was looked after by his fathers physician Galen89 who treated many of Commodus common illnesses. Commodus received extensive tutoring by a multitude of teachers with a focus on intellectual education.10 Among his teachers Onesicrates Antistius Capella Titus Aius Sanctus and Pitholaus are mentioned.1011 Commodus as a child Commodus is known to have been at Carnuntum the headquarters of Marcus Aurelius during the Marcomannic Wars in 172. It is presumed that there on 15 October 172 he was given the victory title Germanicus in the presence of the army. The title suggests Commodus was present at his fathers victory over the Marcomanni. On 20 January 175 Commodus entered the College of Pontiffs the starting point of a career in public life. In April 175 Avidius Cassius Governor of Syria declared himself emperor following rumours that Marcus Aurelius had died. Having been accepted as emperor by Syria Palestina and Egypt Cassius carried on his rebellion even after it had become obvious Marcus was still alive. During the preparations for the campaign against Cassius Commodus assumed his toga virilis on the Danubian front on 7 July 175 thus formally entering adulthood. Cassius however was killed by one of his centurions before the campaign against him could begin. Commodus subsequently accompanied his father on a lengthy trip to the Eastern provinces during which he visited Antioch. The Emperor and his son then travelled to Athens where they were initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries. They then returned to Rome in the autumn of 176. Marcus Aurelius was the first emperor since Vespasian to have a legitimate biological son though he himself was the fifth in the line of the socalled Five Good Emperors also known as the Adoptive Emperors each of whom had adopted his successor. On 27 November 176 Marcus Aurelius bestowed the title of Imperator on Commodus.12 Modern authors often use this date as the beginning of his reign3 but the exact chronology of events is uncertain.13 Commodus was proclaimed Augustus emperor sometime before 17 June 17714 although he probably reckoned his reign back to his salutation in 1
76.1 315 He was the first and until 337 the only emperor born in the purple meaning during his fathers reign.16 On 23 December 176 the two imperatores celebrated a joint triumph.17 On 1 January 177 Commodus became consul for the first time which made him aged 15 the youngest consul up to that time the minimum age for the consulship was around 
30.1 8 He subsequently married Bruttia Crispina before accompanying his father to the Danubian front once more in 178. Marcus Aurelius died there on 17 March 180 leaving the 
18 yearold Commodus as sole emperor.19 Sole reign 1801
92 edit A denarius featuring Commodus. Inscription TR. P. VIII IMP. VI COS. IIII P. P.  S. C. full meaning Tribunicia Potestate Octava Imperator Sextum Consul Quartum Pater Patriae. Senatus Consultum  translation Holder of Tribunician Power for the Eighth Time Supreme Commander Imperator for the Sixth Time Consul for the Fourth Time Father of the Nation. Decree of the Senate.20 Upon his ascension Commodus devalued the Roman currency. He reduced the weight of the denarius from 96 per Roman pound to 105 per Roman pound 
3.8 5 grams to 
3.3 5 grams. He also reduced the silver purity from 79 percent to 76 percent  the silver weight dropping from 
2.5 7 grams to 
2.3 4 grams. In 186 he further reduced the purity and silver weight to 74 percent and 
2.2 2 grams respectively being 108 to the Roman pound.21 His reduction of the denarius during his rule was the largest since the empires first devaluation during Neros reign. Whereas the reign of Marcus Aurelius had been marked by almost continuous warfare Commodus rule was comparatively peaceful in the military sense but was also characterised by political strife and the increasingly arbitrary and capricious behaviour of the emperor himself. In the view of Cassius Dio his accession marked the descent from a kingdom of gold to one of iron and rust.22 Despite his notoriety and considering the importance of his reign Commodus years in power are not well chronicled. The principal surviving literary sources are Herodian Cassius Dio a contemporary and sometimes firsthand observer and Senator during Commodus reign whose reports for this period survive only as fragments and abbreviations and the Historia Augusta untrustworthy because of its character as a work of literature rather than of history with elements of fiction embedded within its biographies in the case of Commodus it probably embroiders what the author found in reasonably good contemporary sources. Commodus remained with the Danube armies for only a short time before negotiating a peace treaty with the Danubian tribes. He then returned to Rome and celebrated a triumph for the conclusion of the wars on 22 October 180. Unlike the preceding emperors Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius he seems to have had little interest in the business of administration. He tended throughout his reign to leave the practical running of the state to a succession of favourites beginning with Saoterus a freedman from Nicomedia who had become his chamberlain. Dissatisfaction with this state of affairs led to a series of conspiracies and attempted coups which in turn eventually provoked Commodus to take charge of affairs which he did in an increasingly dictatorial manner. Nevertheless though the senatorial order came to hate and fear him the evidence suggests he remained popular with the army and the common people for much of his reign not least because of his lavish shows of largesse recorded on his coinage and because he staged and took part in spectacular gladiatorial combats. He was not an inspired combatant. He killed animals by bow standing above the arena. When he fought fellow gladiators they would purposely submit. During this period Romes economy declined. One of the ways he paid for his donatives imperial handouts and mass entertainments was to tax the senatorial order. On many inscriptions the traditional order of the two nominal powers of the state the Senate and People Senatus Populusque Romanus was provocatively reversed Populus Senatusque.... Conspiracies of 1
82 edit This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. February 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message Commodus with attributes of Helios Apollo and Jupiter late 
2 nd century AD sardonyx cameo relief Hermitage Museum St. Petersburg At the outset of his reign Commodus aged 18 inherited many of his fathers senior advisers notably Tiberius Claudius Pompeianus the second husband of Commodus eldest sister Lucilla his fatherinlaw Gaius Bruttius Praesens Titus Fundanius Vitrasius Pollio and Aufidius Victorinus the Prefect of the City of Rome. He also had four surviving sisters all of them with husbands who were potential rivals. Lucilla was over ten years his senior and held the rank of Augusta as the widow of her first husband Lucius Verus. The first crisis of the reign came in 182 when Lucilla engineered a conspiracy against her brother. Her motive is alleged to have been the envy of the Empress Crispina. Lucillas husband Pompeianus was not involved but two men alleged to have been her lovers Marcus Ummidius Quadratus Annianus the consul of 167 also her first cousin and Appius Claudius Quintianus attempted to murder Commodus as he entered a theater. They bungled the job and were seized by the emperors bodyguard. Quadratus and Quintianus were executed. Lucilla was exiled to Capri and later killed. Pompeianus retired from public life. One of the two praetorian prefects Publius Tarrutenius Paternus had actually been involved in the conspiracy but his involvement was not discovered until later. In the meantime he and his colleague Sextus Tigidius Perennis were able to arrange for the murder of Saoterus the hated chamberlain. Commodus took the loss of Saoterus badly and Perennis now seized the chance to advance himself by implicating Paternus in a second conspiracy one apparently led by Publius Salvius Julianus the son of the jurist Salvius Julianus and betrothed to Paternus daughter. Salvius and Paternus were executed along with a number of other prominent consulars and senators. Didius Julianus the future emperor and a relative of Salvius Julianus was dismissed from the governorship of Germania Inferior. Cleanderedit After the murder of the powerful Saoterus Perennis took over the reins of government and Commodus found a new chamberlain and favourite in Cleander a Phrygian freedman who had married one of the emperors mistresses Demostratia. Cleander was in fact the person who had murdered Saoterus. After these attempts on his life Commodus spent much of his time outside Rome mostly on the family estates at Lanuvium. As he was physically strong his chief interest was sport he took part in horse racing chariot racing and combat with beasts and men mostly in private but occasionally in public. Dacia and Britainedit Commodus was inaugurated in 183 as consul with Aufidius Victorinus as colleague and assumed the title Pius. War broke out in Dacia few details are available but it appears two future contenders for the throne Clodius Albinus and Pescennius Niger both distinguished themselves in the campaign. Also in Britain in 184 the governor Ulpius Marcellus readvanced the Roman frontier northward to the Antonine Wall but the legionaries revolted against his harsh discipline and acclaimed another legate Priscus as emperor.23 Priscus refused to accept their acclamation and Perennis had all the legionary legates in Britain cashiered. On 15 October 184 at the Capitoline Games a Cynic philosopher publicly denounced Perennis before Commodus. His tale was considered false and he was immediately put to death. According to Cassius Dio Perennis though ruthless and ambitious was not personally corrupt and was a generally good administrator.23 However the following year a detachment of soldiers from Britain they had been drafted to Italy to suppress brigands also denounced Perennis to the emperor as plotting to make his own son emperor they had been enabled to do so by Cleander who was seeking to dispose of his rival and Commodus gave them permission to execute him as well as his wife and sons. The fall of Perennis brought a new spate of executions Aufidius Victorinus committed suicide. Ulpius Marcellus was replaced as governor of Britain by Pertinax. Brought to Rome and tried for treason Marcellus narrowly escaped death. Cleanders zenith and fall 1851
90 edit Remnant of a Roman bust of a youth with a blond beard perhaps depicting emperor Commodus National Archaeological Museum Athens Cleander proceeded to concentrate power in his own hands and to enrich himself by taking responsibility for all public offices. He sold and bestowed entry to Senate seats army commands governorships and increasingly suffect consulships to the highest bidder. Unrest rose throughout the empire with large numbers of army deserters causing trouble in Gaul and Germany. Pescennius Niger dealt with the deserters in Gaul in a military campaign. The revolt in Brittany was put down by two legions brought over from Britain. In 187 one of the leaders of the deserters Maternus came from Gaul intending to assassinate Commodus at the Festival of the Great Goddess in March but was betrayed and executed. In the same year Pertinax unmasked a conspiracy by two enemies of Cleander Antistius Burrus one of Commodus brothersinlaw and Arrius Antoninus. As a result Commodus appeared more rarely in public preferring to live on his estates. Early in 188 Cleander disposed of the current praetorian prefect Atilius Aebutianus and took over supreme command of the Praetorian Guard at the new rank of a pugione daggerbearer with two praetorian prefects subordinate to him. Now at the zenith of his power Cleander continued to sell public offices as his private business. The climax came in the year 190 which had 25 suffect consulsa record in the 10
00 year history of the Roman consulshipall appointed by Cleander they included the future Emperor Septimius Severus. In the spring of 190 Rome was afflicted by a food shortage for which the praefectus annonae Papirius Dionysius the official actually in charge of the grain supply contrived to lay the blame on Cleander. At the end of June a mob demonstrated against Cleander during a horse race in the Circus Maximus he sent the Praetorian Guard to put down the disturbances but Pertinax who was now City Prefect of Rome dispatched the Vigiles Urbani to oppose them. Cleander fled to Commodus who was at Laurentum in the house of the Quinctilii for protection but the mob followed him calling for his head. At the urging of his mistress Marcia Commodus had Cleander beheaded and his son killed. Other victims at this time were the praetorian prefect Julius Julianus Commodus cousin Annia Fundania Faustina and his brotherinlaw Mamertinus. Papirius Dionysius was executed too. In AD 191 Commodus took more of the reins of power though he continued to rule through a cabal consisting of Marcia his new chamberlain Eclectus and the new praetorian prefect Quintus Aemilius Laetus. Megalomania 1901
92 edit A denarius of Commodus. Inscription L. L. COMMODVS ANTONINVS AVG. In opposition to the Senate in his pronouncements and iconography Commodus had always stressed his unique status as a source of godlike power liberality and physical prowess. Innumerable statues around the empire were set up portraying him in the guise of Hercules reinforcing the image of him as a demigod a physical giant a protector and a warrior who fought against men and beasts see Commodus and Hercules and Commodus the Gladiator below. Moreover as Hercules he could claim to be the son of Jupiter the supreme god of the Roman pantheon. These tendencies now increased to megalomaniacal proportions. Far from celebrating his descent from Marcus Aurelius the actual source of his power he stressed his own personal uniqueness as the bringer of a new order seeking to recast the empire in his own image. During 191 the city of Rome was extensively damaged by a fire that raged for several days during which many public buildings including the Temple of Pax the Temple of Vesta and parts of the imperial palace were destroyed. Perhaps seeing this as an opportunity early in 192 Commodus declaring himself the new Romulus ritually refounded Rome renaming the city Colonia Lucia Annia Commodiana. All the months of the year were renamed to correspond exactly with his now twelve names Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus Augustus Herculeus Romanus Exsuperatorius Amazonius Invictus Felix and Pius. The legions were renamed Commodianae the fleet which imported grain from Africa was termed Alexandria Commodiana Togata the Senate was entitled the Commodian Fortunate Senate his palace and the Roman people themselves were all given the name Commodianus and the day on which these reforms were decreed was to be called Dies Commodianus.24 Thus he presented himself as the fountainhead of the Empire Roman life and religion. He also had the head of the Colossus of Nero adjacent to the Colosseum replaced with his own portrait gave it a club placed a bronze lion at its feet to make it look like Hercules Romanus and added an inscription boasting of being the only lefthanded fighter to conquer twelve times one thousand men.25 Assassination 1
92 edit Damnatio memoriae of Commodus on an inscription in the Museum of Roman History in Osterburken Germany. The abbreviation CO has been restored with paint. In November 192 Commodus held Plebeian Games in which he shot hundreds of animals with arrows and javelins every morning and fought as a gladiator every afternoon winning all the fights. In December he announced his intention to inaugurate the year 193 as both consul and gladiator on 1 January. When Marcia found a list of people Commodus intended to have executed she discovered that she the prefect Laetus and Eclectus were on it. The three of them plotted to assassinate the emperor. On 31 December Marcia poisoned Commodus food but he vomited up the poison so the conspirators sent his wrestling partner Narcissus to strangle him in his bath.26 Upon his death the Senate declared him a public enemy a de facto damnatio memoriae and restored the original name of the city of Rome and its institutions. Statues of Commodus were demolished. His body was buried in the Mausoleum of Hadrian. Commodus death marked the end of the NervaAntonine dynasty. Commodus was succeeded by Pertinax whose reign was short he became the first claimant to be usurped during the Year of the Five Emperors. In 195 the emperor Septimius Severus trying to gain favour with the family of Marcus Aurelius rehabilitated Commodus memory and had the Senate deify him.27 Character and physical prowessedit Character and motivationsedit Tetradrachm of Commodus. Inscription . C. KOMMOC CEB.  EP. CAP. HM E  YATC B Greek inscription for GER. SAR. Municipal Authority IV Consul II. Cassius Dio a firsthand witness describes him as not naturally wicked but on the contrary as guileless as any man that ever lived. His great simplicity however together with his cowardice made him the slave of his companions and it was through them that he at first out of ignorance missed the better life and then was led on into lustful and cruel habits which soon became second nature.28 His recorded actions do tend to show a rejection of his fathers policies his fathers advisers and especially his fathers austere lifestyle and an alienation from the surviving members of his family. It seems likely that he was raised in an atmosphere of Stoic asceticism which he rejected entirely upon his accession to sole rule. After repeated attempts on Commodus life Roman citizens were often killed for making him angry. One such notable event was the attempted extermination of the house of the Quinctilii. Condianus and Maximus were executed on the pretext that while they were not implicated in any plots their wealth and talent would make them unhappy with the current state of affairs.29 Another event as recorded by the historian Aelius Lampridius took place at the Roman baths at Terme Taurine where the emperor had an attendant thrown into an oven after he had found his bathwater to be lukewarm.3031 Changes of nameedit His original name was Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus.32 On his fathers death in 180 Commodus changed this to Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Commodus before changing back to his birth name in 1
91.1  Later that year he adopted as his full style Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus Augustus Herculeus Romanus Exsuperatorius Amazonius Invictus Felix Pius the order of some of these titles varies in the sources. Exsuperatorius the supreme was a title given to Jupiter and Amazonius identified him again with Hercules. An inscribed altar from DuraEuropos on the Euphrates shows that Commodus titles and the renaming of the months were disseminated to the farthest reaches of the Empire moreover that even auxiliary military units received the title Commodiana and that he claimed two additional titles Pacator Orbis pacifier of the world and Dominus Noster Our Lord. The latter eventually would be used as a conventional title by Roman emperors starting about a century later but Commodus seems to have been the first to assume it.33 Commodus as Hercules Capitoline Museum Commodus and Herculesedit Disdaining the more philosophic inclinations of his father Commodus was extremely proud of his physical prowess. The historian Herodian a contemporary described Commodus as an extremely handsome man.34 As mentioned above he ordered many statues to be made showing him dressed as Hercules with a lions hide and a club. He thought of himself as the reincarnation of Hercules frequently emulating the legendary heros feats by appearing in the arena to fight a variety of wild animals. He was lefthanded and very proud of the fact.35 Cassius Dio and the writers of the Augustan History say that Commodus was a skilled archer who could shoot the heads off ostriches in full gallop and kill a panther as it attacked a victim in the arena. Commodus the gladiatoredit Commodus also had a passion for gladiatorial combat which he took so far as to take to the arena himself dressed as a secutor.36 The Romans found Commodus gladiatorial combat to be scandalous and disgraceful.37 According to Herodian spectators of Commodus thought it unbecoming of an emperor to take up arms in the amphitheater for sport when he could be campaigning against barbarians among other opponents of Rome. The consensus was that it was below his office to participate as a gladiator.38 Popular rumors spread alleging he was not actually the son of Marcus Aurelius but of a gladiator his mother Faustina had taken as a lover at the coastal resort of Caieta.39 In the arena Commodus opponents always submitted to the emperor as a result he never lost. Commodus never killed his gladiatorial adversaries instead accepting their surrenders. His victories were often welcomed by his bested opponents as bearing scars dealt by the hand of an emperor was considered a mark of fortitude.
40 failed verification Cassius Dio claimed that citizens of Rome who lacked feet either through accident or illness were taken to the arena where they were tethered together for Commodus to club to death while pretending they were giants.41 Dio also wrote that it was Commodus custom to privately use deadly weapons to fight murdering and maiming his opponents.4042 For each appearance in the arena he charged the city of Rome a million sesterces straining the Roman economy. Commodus was also known for fighting exotic animals in the arena often to the horror and disgust of the Roman populace. According to Cassius Dio Commodus once killed 100 lions in a single day.43 Later he decapitated a running ostrich with a specially designed dart44 and afterward carried his sword and the bleeding head of the dead bird over to the Senators seating area and motioned to suggest that they were to be next.45 Dio notes that the targeted senators actually found this more ridiculous than frightening and chewed on laurel leaves to conceal their laughter.46 On other occasions Commodus killed three elephants on the floor of the arena by himself47 and a giraffe.48 The Emperor Commodus Leaving the Arena at the Head of the Gladiators detail by Edwin Blashfield 18481936 Hermitage Museum and Gardens Norfolk Virginia. In popular cultureedit An evil and highly narcissistic Commodus is portrayed by Canadian actor Christopher Plummer in the classic epic film The Fall of the Roman Empire 1964 directed by Anthony Mann. This film depicts all of this emperors reign from the death of Marcus Aurelius until his death while fighting against the fictional hero Livius. In the Best Picture winner Gladiator 2000 a fictionalized Commodus serves as the main antagonist of the film. He is played by Joaquin Phoenix who received a Best Supporting Actor nomination at the 
73 rd Academy Awards.49 A character in the 2013 video game Ryse Son of Rome is named Commodus and is one of the main antagonists of the game. The son of Emperor Nero he shares several traits with the historic Commodus.50 Commodus is a minor antagonist in the 2005 video game Colosseum Road to Freedom. The player can fight Commodus in the game who dresses as the god Hercules. The game takes liberties with the events surrounding his death with the player being the one who actually kills him rather than the wrestler Narcissus. Commodus appears in the Horrible Histories song Evil Emperors alongside Caligula Elagabalus and Nero a parody of Bad. The 2017 docudrama miniseries Roman Empire Reign of Blood retells his story.5152 In this version Narcissus kills Commodus in a duel after learning that the Emperors arena opponents had been armed only with edgeless swords. At first Narcissus strangles Commodus but ultimately kills him by piercing his heart with a blunt sword. Aaron Jakubenko portrays Commodus in the series. Commodus appears as one of the antagonists in the popular young adult fiction novel series The Trials of Apollo. He is revealed as having become a minor god after his death and has survived into modern times along with two other Roman emperors Caligula and Nero. He was murdered by the god Apollo who was his lover but disguised himself as Narcissus to kill him and end his tyranny. In modern times he tries to get revenge on Apollo who has been cast out of Olympus by Zeus as a mortal until he rights his wrongs. During a final battle Commodus is severely injured by Frank Zhang the demigod son of Mars and then finished off by Apollo with a scream of power that burns Commodus to ashes. Throughout the series its revealed that Nero Commodus and Caligula had been acting in the background of the two previous series Percy Jackson and the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus supplying the forces of Kronos Gaea and Octavian with financial support and resources including the Princess Andromeda cruise ship that was featured heavily in Percy Jackson and the Olympians. NervaAntonine family treeedit v t e NervaAntonine family tree Q. Marcius Barea Soranus Q. Marcius Barea Sura Antonia Furnilla M. Cocceius Nerva Sergia Plautilla P. Aelius Hadrianus Titus r.7981 Marcia Furnilla Marcia Trajanus Pater Nerva r.9698 Ulpiai Aelius Hadrianus Marullinus Flaviaii Marcianaiii C. Salonius Matidiusiv Trajan r.98117 Plotina P. Acilius Attianus P. Aelius Aferv Paulina Majorvi Lucius Mindius 2 Libo Rupilius Frugi 3 Salonia Matidiavii L. Vibius Sabinus 
1 viii Paulina Minorvi L. Julius Ursus Servianusix Matidia Minorvii Sabinaiii Hadrianvxvi r.117138 Antinousxi C. Fuscus Salinator I Julia Serviana Paulina M. Annius Verusxii Rupilia Faustinaxiiixiv Boionia Procilla Cn. Arrius Antoninus L. Ceionius Commodus Appia Severa C. Fuscus Salinator II L. Caesennius Paetus Arria Antonina Arria Fadillaxv T. Aurelius Fulvus L. Caesennius Antoninus L. Commodus Plautia unknownxvi C. Avidius Nigrinus M. Annius Verusxiii Calvisia Domitia Lucillaxvii Fundaniaxviii M. Annius Liboxiii Faustinaxv Antoninus Pius r.1381
61 xv L. Aelius Caesarxvi Avidiaxvi Cornificiaxiii Marcus Aurelius r.1611
80 xix Faustina Minorxix C. Avidius Cassiusxx Aurelia Fadillaxv Lucius Verus r.1611
69 xvi 1 Ceionia Fabiaxvi Plautius Quintillusxxi Q. Servilius Pudens Ceionia Plautiaxvi Cornificia Minorxxii M. Petronius Sura Commodus r.1771
92 xix Fadillaxxii M. Annius Verus Caesarxix Ti. Claudius Pompeianus 2 Lucillaxix M. Plautius Quintillusxvi Junius Licinius Balbus Servilia Ceionia Petronius Antoninus L. Aurelius Agaclytus 2 Aurelia Sabinaxxii L. Antistius Burrus 1 Plautius Quintillus Plautia Servilla C. Furius Sabinus Timesitheus Antonia Gordiana Junius Licinius Balbus Furia Sabina Tranquillina Gordian III r.238244 1  
1 st spouse 2  
2 nd spouse 3  
3 rd spouse Reddishpurple indicates emperor of the NervaAntonine dynasty lighter purple indicates designated imperial heir of said dynasty who never reigned grey indicates unsuccessful imperial aspirants bluishpurple indicates emperors of other dynasties dashed lines indicate adoption dotted lines indicate love affairsunmarried relationships Small Caps  posthumously deified Augusti Augustae or other Notes Except where otherwise noted the notes below indicate that an individuals parentage is as shown in the above family tree.  Sister of Trajans father Giacosa 1977 p. 7.  Giacosa 1977 p. 8.  a b Levick 2014 p. 161.  Husband of Ulpia Marciana Levick 2014 p. 161.  a b Giacosa 1977 p. 7.  a b c DIR contributor Herbert W. Benario 2000 Hadrian.  a b Giacosa 1977 p. 9.  Husband of Salonia Matidia Levick 2014 p. 161.  Smith 1870 Julius Servianus.  Smith 1870 Hadrian pp. 319322.  Lover of Hadrian Lambert 1984 p. 99 and passim deification Lamber 1984 pp. 25 etc.  Husband of Rupilia Faustina Levick 2014 p. 163.  a b c d Levick 2014 p. 163.  It is uncertain whether Rupilia Faustina was Frugis daughter by Salonia Matidia or another woman.  a b c d Levick 2014 p. 162.  a b c d e f g Levick 2014 p. 164.  Wife of M. Annius Verus Giacosa 1977 p. 10.  Wife of M. Annius Libo Levick 2014 p. 163.  a b c d e Giacosa 1977 p. 10.  The epitomator of Cassius Dio 
72.2 2 gives the story that Faustina the Elder promised to marry Avidius Cassius. This is also echoed in HA Marcus Aurelius 24.  Husband of Ceionia Fabia Levick 2014 p. 164.  a b c Levick 2014 p. 117. References DIR contributors 2000. De Imperatoribus Romanis An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Rulers and Their Families. Retrieved 14 April 2015. Giacosa Giorgio 1977. Women of the Caesars Their Lives and Portraits on Coins. Translated by R. Ross Holloway. Milan Edizioni Arte e Moneta. ISBN 0839001932. Lambert Royston 1984. Beloved and God The Story of Hadrian and Antinous. New York Viking. ISBN 0670157082. Levick Barbara 2014. Faustina I and II Imperial Women of the Golden Age. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195379419. Smith William ed. 1870. Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. See alsoedit List of Roman emperors Referencesedit  a b Hammond pp. 3233.  RE Aurelius 89  a b Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 494. ISBN 9780521840262.  Commodus. Random House Websters Unabridged Dictionary.  Historia Augusta  Life of Commodus 1  Historia Augusta 
12.8   a b David L. Vagi Coinage and History of the Roman Empire Vol. One History p. 248  Mattern Susan P. The Prince of Medicine Galen in the Roman Empire p. xx  Dio Cassius Roman History 
71.3 
3.1   a b Birley Anthony R. Marcus Aurelius A Biography p. 197  Historia Augusta 
1.6   Historia Augusta 
2.4   a b Hammond Mason 1938. The Tribunician Day during the Early Empire. Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. 15 2361 4953. doi
10.2 3074238599. ISSN 00656801. JSTOR 4238599.  Manuscripts British Museum Department of 1907. Greek Papyri in the British Museum. British museum. pp. xxxix Pap. 845. ISBN 9780714104867.  Hammond Mason 1956. The Transmission of the Powers of the Roman Emperor from the Death of Nero in A.D. 68 to That of Alexander Severus in A.D. 235. Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. 24 61133 104105. doi
10.2 3074238640. ISSN 00656801. JSTOR 4238640.  Marcel van Ackeren 2012. A Companion to Marcus Aurelius. John Wiley  Sons. p. 234. ISBN 9781405192859.  Historia Augusta 12  Historia Augusta Marcus Aurelius 
22.1 2  Dio Cassius 
72.3 3.  Coins of the Roman Empire. Numista. Retrieved 11 March 2023.  Tulane University Roman Currency of the Principate. Archived from the original on 10 February 2001. Retrieved 3 March 2011.  Dio Cassius 
72.3 
6.4  Loeb edition translated E. Cary  a b Dio Cassius 
73.1 
0.2  Loeb edition translated E. Cary  Roman Emperors  DIR commodus. www.romanemperors.org. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 24 June 2022.cite web CS1 maint bot original URL status unknown link  Dio Cassius 
73.2 
2.3   Dio Cassius 
73.2 2  To accept kinship with Commodus ... the bluntly pragmatic decision was taken to deify the former emperor thus legitimizing Severus seizure of power. See Annelise Freisenbruch Caesars Wives Sex Power and Politics in the Roman Empire London and New York Free Press 2010 187.  Dio Cassius 

73.1.2  Loeb edition translated E. Cary  Dio Cassius 

73.5.3  Loeb edition translated E. Cary  Historia Augusta. C 1 9.  Heinz W. 1986. Die Terme Taurine von Civitavecchia  ein rmisches Heilbad. Antike Welt 174 2243.  Hammond p. 32.  Spiedel M.P. 1993. Commodus the GodEmperor and the Army. Journal of Roman Studies. 83 109114. doi
10.2 307300981. JSTOR 300981. S
2 CID 162303472.  Grant Michael. The Roman Emperors 1985 p. 99.  Dio Cassius Roman History Epitome of Book LXXIII pp 111.  Gibbon Edward The history of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire. Vol. 5. Methuen 1898.  Herodians Roman History F.L. Muller Edition 
1.1 
5.7   Echols Edward C. Herodian of Antiochs History of the Roman Empire English translation UCLA Press Berkeley CA 1961 
1.1 
5.1 9  Historia Augusta Life of Marcus Aurelius XIX. The film The Fall of the Roman Empire makes use of this story one of the characters is an old gladiator who eventually reveals himself to be Commoduss real father.  a b Dio Cassius 
73.1 
0.3   Dio Cassius 
73.2 
0.3  Loeb edition translated E. Cary  Intrigue Insanity and the Reign of Commodus. Wondrium Daily. 1 December 2017. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2022.  Gibbon p. 106 disgorged at once a hundred lions a hundred darts  Gibbon Edward The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire Volume I. Everymans Library Knopf New York. 1910. p. 106 with arrows whose point was shaped in the form of a crescent  Lane Fox Robin The Classical World An Epic History from Homer to Hadrian Basic Books 2006 p. 446 brandishing a sword in one hand and bloodied neck...He gesticulated at the Senate.  Roman History by Cassius Dio penelope.uchicago.edu  Scullard H. H. The Elephant in the Greek and Roman World Thames and Hudson 1974 p. 252  Gibbon p. 107 1 Commodus killed a camelopardalis or giraffe ... the most useless of the quadrupeds.  IMDB Commodus. IMDb. Archived from the original on 9 July 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2021.cite web CS1 maint bot original URL status unknown link  Nichols Derek 8 February 2014. History Behind The Game  Ryse Son of Rome. Venture Beat. Retrieved 11 August 2018.  Agius Den 19 November 2016. Box Set Binge Roman Empire Reign of Blood The Path and Deutschland 83. Whats on TV. TI Media Limited. Retrieved 20 July 2018.  OKeefe Meghan 25 November 2016. Roman Empire Reign Of Blood Who Was The Real Lucilla. Decider. NYP Holdings Inc. Retrieved 20 July 2018. Sourcesedit Lucius Aurelius Commodus . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 6 
9 th ed.. 1878. pp. 207208. Commodus Lucius Aelius Aurelius . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 6 
11 th ed.. 1911. p. 777. Further readingedit Geoff W Adams 2013. The Emperor Commodus gladiator Hercules or a tyrant. Boca Raton FL BrownWalker Press. ISBN 1612337228. G. Alfldy Der Friedesschluss des Kaisers Commodus mit den Germanen Historia 20 1971 pp. 84109. P. A. Brunt The Fall of Perennis DioXiphilinus 

79.9.2  Classical Quarterly 23 1973 pp. 172177. J. Gag La mystique imperiale et lpreuve des jeux. CommodeHercule et lanthropologie hercalenne ANRW 
2.1 
7.2  1981 663683. Hammond Mason 1957. Imperial Elements in the Formula of the Roman Emperors during the First Two and a Half Centuries of the Empire. Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. 25 1964. doi
10.2 3074238646. JSTOR 4238646. Olivier Hekster Commodus An Emperor at the Crossroads Dutch monographs on ancient history and archaeology 23. Brill 2002. ISSN 09243550. On Heksters study see the detailed commentary by Christian Witschel Kaiser Gladiator Gott. Zur Selbstdarstellung des Commodus Scripta Classica Israelica 23 2004 pp. 255272 online. L. L. Howe The Praetorian Prefect from Commodus to Diocletian A.D. 180305. Chicago 1942. ISBN missing Falko von Saldern Studien zur Politik des Commodus. Verlag Marie Leidorf 2003 ISBN 3896468332. M.P. Speidel Commodus the GodEmperor and the Army Journal of Roman Studies 83 1993 pp. 109114. Jerry Toner The Day Commodus Killed a Rhino Understanding the Roman Games. Johns Hopkins University Press 2014. ISBN missing External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Commodus. Historia Augusta Life of Commodus Book 73 of Cassius Dios History Herodians Roman History Commodus NervaAntonine dynasty Born 31 August 161 Died 31 December 192 Regnal titles Preceded by Marcus Aurelius Roman emperor 180192 Succeeded by Pertinax Political offices Preceded by T. Pomponius Proculus Vitrasius Pollio M. Flavius Aper II as ordinary consuls Roman consul 177 with Marcus Peducaeus Plautius Quintillus Succeeded by Ser. Cornelius Scipio Salvidienus Orfitus Domitius Velius Rufus as ordinary consuls Preceded by Ser. Cornelius Scipio Salvidienus Orfitus Domitius Velius Rufus as ordinary consuls Roman consul 179 with Publius Martius Verus Succeeded by T. Flavius Claudianus L. Aemilius Iuncus as suffect consuls Preceded by L. Fulvius Rusticus G. Bruttius Praesens II Sex. Quintilius Condianus as ordinary consuls Roman consul 181 with Lucius Antistius Burrus Succeeded by M. Petronius Sura Mamertinus Q. Tineius Rufus as ordinary consuls Preceded by Marcus Petronius Sura Mamertinus Q. Tineius Rufus as ordinary consuls Roman consul 183 with Gaius Aufidius Victorinus Succeeded by L. Tutilius Pontianus Gentianus ignotus as suffect consuls Preceded by Triarius Maternus Ti. Claudius M. Appius Atilius Bradua Regillus Atticus Roman consul 186 with Marcus Acilius Glabrio II Succeeded by L. Novius Rufus L. Annius Ravus as suffect consuls Preceded by Domitius Iulius Silanus Q. Servilius Silanus as suffect consuls Roman consul 190 with Marcus Petronius Sura Septimianus Succeeded by L. Septimius Severus Apuleius Rufinus as suffect consuls Preceded by Popilius Pedo Apronianus M. Valerius Bradua Mauricus as ordinary consuls Roman consul 192 with Publius Helvius Pertinax Succeeded by Q. Pompeius Sosius Falco G. Julius Erucius Clarus Vibianus as ordinary consuls v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCommodusoldid1220440996 Categories Commodus 161 births 192 deaths 
2 ndcentury murdered monarchs 
2 ndcentury Roman emperors Aelii Aurelii Burials at the Castel SantAngelo Deaths by strangulation Deified Roman emperors Eponymous archons 
2 ndcentury Roman consuls NervaAntonine dynasty People from Lanuvio Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae Sons of Roman emperors Ancient Roman twins Roman pharaohs Assassinated heads of state in Europe Damnatio memoriae Lanuvium Hidden categories CS1 maint bot original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from April 2023 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages with missing ISBNs Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SNACID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 23 April 2024 at 1959 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width