Pescennius Niger - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Early career 
3 Septimius Severus and Niger 
4 Name 
5 Family 
6 Popular culture 
7 See also 
8 References 
9 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
9.1 Primary sources 
9.2 Secondary sources 
10 External links Toggle the table of contents Pescennius Niger 47 languages     Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Euskara  Franais Frysk  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Magyar    Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Trke   Ting Vit Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 193 to 194 Pescennius Niger Usurper of the Roman Empire Aureus of Pescennius Niger Antioch mint. Legend IMP CAES C PESC NIGER IVST AVG. Reign 9 April 193  May 194 Predecessor Didius Julianus Successor Septimius Severus Born c. 135140 Roman Empire Died 194 aged 5359 Roman Empire Names Gaius Pescennius Niger Regnal name Imperator Caesar Gaius Pescennius Niger Iustus Augustus Dynasty None Father Annius Fuscus Mother Lampridia Gaius Pescennius Niger c. 135  194 was a Roman usurper from 193 to 194 during the Year of the Five Emperors. He claimed the imperial throne in response to the murder of Pertinax and the elevation of Didius Julianus but was defeated by a rival claimant Septimius Severus and killed while attempting to flee from Antioch. Early lifeedit According to Historia Augusta Nigers parents were Annius Fuscus and Lampridia. It also states that his grandfather was a supervisor of Aquinum.1 He may have had a brother named Publius Pescennius Niger who is recorded in an inscription to have been a member of the Arval Brethren in AD 183 during the reign of Commodus.23 Early careeredit AR denarius Pescennius Niger. Antioch mint 
3.1 2 g. Inscription IMPERATOR CAESAR GAIVS PESCENNIVS NIGER IVSTVS AVGVSTVS CONSVL II FELICITAS TEMPOR. Although Niger was born into an old Italian equestrian family around the year 1354 he was the first member of his family to achieve the rank of Roman senator.5 Not much is known of his early career it is possible that he held an administrative position in Egypt and that he served in a military campaign in Dacia early in Commodus reign.6 During the late 1
80 s Niger was elected as a Suffect consul after which Commodus made him imperial legate of Syria in 1
91.7  He was still serving in Syria when news came of the murder of Pertinax followed by the auctioning off of the imperial title to Didius Julianus.8 Niger was a well regarded public figure in Rome6 and soon a popular demonstration against Didius Julianus broke out during which the citizens called out for Niger to come to Rome and claim the imperial title for himself.9 As a consequence it is alleged that Julianus dispatched a centurion to the east with orders to assassinate Niger at Antioch.10 The result of the unrest in Rome saw Niger proclaimed Emperor by the eastern legions by the end of April 1
93.1 1 On his accession Niger took the additional cognomen Justus or the Just.6 Although imperial propaganda issued on behalf of Septimius Severus later claimed that Niger was the first to rebel against Didius Julianus10 it was Severus who persisted claiming the imperial title on 14 April.5 Although Niger sent envoys to Rome to announce his elevation to the imperial throne his messengers were intercepted by Severus.6 As Niger began bolstering his support in the eastern provinces Severus marched on Rome which he entered in early June 193 after Julianus had been murdered.12 Septimius Severus and Nigeredit Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Five Emperors AD 193 Chronology Pertinax 193 Didius Julianus 193 Pescennius Niger 193194 Clodius Albinus 193197 Septimius Severus 193211 Succession Preceded by NervaAntonine dynasty Followed by Severan dynasty v t e Severus wasted no time consolidating his hold on Rome and ordered his newly appointed prefect of the watch Gaius Fulvius Plautianus to capture Nigers children and hold them as hostages.13 Meanwhile Niger was busy securing the support of all of the governors in the Asiatic provinces including the esteemed proconsul of Asia Asellius Aemilianus who had occupied Byzantium in the name of Niger.14 He then proceeded to secure direct control over Egypt while Severus did as much as he could to protect the wheat supply and ordered troops loyal to him to keep watch on the western border of Egypt and prevent the legion stationed there  Legio II Traiana Fortis  from sending military aid to Niger.15 Although the Asiatic provinces contained great wealth Nigers military resources were inferior to Severus. While Severus had the sixteen Danubian legions at his disposal Niger possessed only six three in Syria the two stationed in Arabia Petraea and one located at Melitene.13 Niger therefore decided to act aggressively and sent a force into Thrace where it defeated a part of Severus army under Lucius Fabius Cilo at Perinthus.16 Severus then marched from Rome to the east sending his general Tiberius Claudius Candidus ahead of him.17 Niger having made Byzantium his headquarters gave Asellius Aemilianus the task of defending the southern shore of the Sea of Marmara.17 As Severus approached he offered Niger the opportunity to surrender and go into exile but Niger refused trusting in the outcome of a military encounter.6 In the fall of 193 Candidus met Aemilianus in battle at Cyzicus resulting in Nigers forces being defeated as well as the capture and death of Aemilianus.18 Byzantium was now placed under siege forcing Niger to abandon the city and retreat to Nicaea.17 The city remained loyal to Pescennius Niger and it would take Severus until the end of 195 to finally capture Byzantium.19 Another battle took place outside Nicaea in later December 193 which also resulted in a defeat for Niger. Nevertheless Niger was able to withdraw the bulk of his army intact to the Taurus Mountains where he held the passes for a few months while he returned to Antioch.20 However Nigers support in Asia was falling. Some previously loyal cities changed their allegiance in particular Laodicea and Tyre.19 By February 13 194 Egypt had declared for Severus as had the imperial legate of Arabia further diminishing Nigers chances.21 After Severus had replaced Candidus with another general Publius Cornelius Anullinus Niger met Anullinus in battle at Issus in May 194 where after a long and hardfought struggle Niger was decisively defeated.18 Forced to retreat to Antioch Niger was captured while attempting to flee to Parthia.22 Niger was beheaded and his severed head was taken to Byzantium but the city refused to surrender. Eventually Severus stormed and completely destroyed Byzantium before he had it rebuilt.19 Nigers head eventually found its way to Rome where it was displayed.16 After his victory in the east Severus punished Nigers supporters.23 He had Nigers wife and children put to death while his estates were confiscated.
24 However according to Roman scholar Geoffrey Turton Septimius refrained from vindictive reprisals. After Nigers death his wife and children served no use as hostages and were allowed to live in retiremnt where it was supposed they would play no further part in public affairs. Given the unreliability of the Historia Augusta which often served as a propaganda vehicle for succeeding emperors this is almost certainly the more likely outcome 25. Nameedit The name Pescennius Niger means black Pescennius which incidentally contrasts him with one of his rivals for the throne in 194 Clodius Albinus whose name means white Clodius.26 Cassius Dios Roman History reports that when a priest of Jupiter saw in a dream a blackdark man    breaking into the emperors camp this was interpreted as referring to Pescennius Niger. According to Historia Augusta his father had the cognomen fuscus meaning brown and though his body was allegedly white and corpulent his face was dark red with a very black neck which was thought by many men to have been the origin of his cognomen Niger.27 Familyedit Pescennius is known to have been married and had children. The names of his children are not mentioned in any sources nor how many they were.28 In the past it has been supposed by some historians based on medals bearing the inscription Pescennia Plautiana Augusta that Niger was married to a woman named Plautiana or that he had a daughter named Pescennia Plautiana but the medals are said to be forgeries.29 Popular cultureedit In the film The Fall of The Roman Empire Niger is played by Douglas Wilmer and depicted as a scheming henchman of Commodus. At the end of the film Niger and Didius Julianus played by Eric Porter another crony of Commodus compete against each other in the auction for the throne of Rome. See alsoedit Abdsamiya Referencesedit  Syme Ronald 1971. The Historia Augusta A Call of Clarity. Vol. 8. R. Habelt. p. 79. ISBN 9783774911604.  CIL VI 2099 CIL VI 2101.  PIR vol. III p. 24.  Potter p. 101 Meckler Pescennius Niger Cassius Dio 7561  a b Potter p. 101  a b c d e Meckler Pescennius Niger  Meckler Pescennius Niger Southern p. 28  Bowman p. 2 Meckler Pescennius Niger  Meckler Pescennius Niger Potter p. 101 Bowman p. 2  a b Potter p. 99  Southern p. 28 Bowman p. 2  Bowman p. 4 Meckler Pescennius Niger  a b Potter p. 103  Southern p. 32 Meckler Pescennius Niger  Southern p. 32  a b Potter p. 104  a b c Bowman p. 4  a b Bowman p. 4 Potter p. 104 Southern p. 33  a b c Southern p. 33  Meckler Pescennius Niger Bowman p. 4 Potter p. 104  Bowman p. 4 Potter p. 104  Meckler Pescennius Niger Southern p. 33  Potter p. 106  Historia Augusta Life of Pescennius Niger 61  Turton The Syrian Princesses p. 44  Southern p. 28  Historian Augusta Life of Pescennius Niger 66  Smyth William Henry 1834. Descriptive Catalogue of a Cabinet of Roman Imperial Largebrass Medals by Captain William Henry Smyth. Webb. p. 176.  The Numismatic Chronicle and Journal of the Royal Numismatic Society. Vol. 1516. Royal Numismatic Society. 1875. pp. 3440. Sourcesedit Primary sourcesedit Cassius Dio Roman History Books 74  75 Herodian Roman History Books 2  3 Archived 20150708 at the Wayback Machine Historia Augusta Life of Pescennius Niger Secondary sourcesedit Southern Pat. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine Routledge 2001 Potter David Stone The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395 Routledge 2004 Bowman Alan K. The Cambridge Ancient History The Crisis of Empire A.D. 193337 Cambridge University Press 2005 httpwww.romanemperors.orgpniger.htm Archived 20120128 at the Wayback Machine Meckler Michael L Pescennius Niger 193194 A.D. De Imperatoribus Romanis 1998 External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pescennius Niger. Herbermann Charles ed. 1913. Pescennius Niger . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York Robert Appleton Company. Pescennius Niger at Livius.Org Archived 20141123 at the Wayback Machine Regnal titles Preceded by Didius Julianus Roman Emperor 193 in competition with Septimius Severus and Clodius Albinus Succeeded by Septimius Severus v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 3 National France BnF data Germany Belgium United States Croatia Netherlands Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePescenniusNigeroldid1222866383 Categories 
2 ndcentury Roman governors of Syria People from Roman Anatolia Roman governors of Syria Suffect consuls of Imperial Rome Deaths by decapitation Annii 
2 ndcentury births 194 deaths 
2 ndcentury Roman emperors Roman pharaohs Hidden categories CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 8 May 2024 at 1155 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width