Pertinax - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Emperor 
3 Aftermath 
4 Historical reputation 
5 In popular culture 
6 References 
7 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
7.1 Primary sources 
7.2 Secondary sources 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Pertinax 74 languages Afrikaans nglisc  Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar     Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontis Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 193 For other uses see Pertinax disambiguation. Pertinax Bust Galleria degli Uffizi Florence1 Roman emperor Reign 1 January 193  28 March 193 Predecessor Commodus Successor Didius Julianus Born 1 August 126 Alba Pompeia Italy Died 28 March 193 aged 66 Rome Italy Burial Rome Spouse Flavia Titiana Issue Helvius Pertinax caesar2 Helvia3 Names Publius Helvius Pertinax Regnal name Imperator Caesar Publius Helvius Pertinax Augustus4 Father Helvius Successus Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Five Emperors AD 193 Chronology Pertinax 193 Didius Julianus 193 Pescennius Niger 193194 Clodius Albinus 193197 Septimius Severus 193211 Succession Preceded by NervaAntonine dynasty Followed by Severan dynasty v t e Publius Helvius Pertinax prtnks PERtinax 1 August 126  28 March 193 was Roman emperor for the first three months of 193. He succeeded Commodus to become the first emperor during the tumultuous Year of the Five Emperors. Born the son of a freed slave Pertinax became an officer in the army. He fought in the RomanParthian War of 161166 where his success led to higher positions in both the military and political spheres. He achieved the rank of provincial governor and urban prefect. He was a member of the Roman Senate serving at the same time as the historian Cassius Dio. Following the death of Commodus Pertinax was proclaimed emperor. He instituted several shortlived reform measures including the restoration of discipline among the Praetorian Guard. This led to resistance that culminated in Pertinaxs assassination by the Guard. Pertinax would later be deified by the emperor Septimius Severus. His historical reputation has been largely positive in line with Cassius Dios assessment. Early lifeedit His career before becoming emperor is documented in the Historia Augusta and confirmed in many places by existing inscriptions. He was born in Alba Pompeia in Italy5 the son of freedman Helvius Successus.6 Pertinax through the help of patronage was commissioned an officer in a cohort.7 In the Parthian War that followed8 he distinguished himself which resulted in a string of promotions and after postings in Britain as military tribune of the Legio VI Victrix9 and along the Danube he served as a procurator in Dacia.10 He suffered a setback as a victim of court intrigues during the reign of Marcus Aurelius but shortly afterwards he was recalled to assist Claudius Pompeianus in the Marcomannic Wars.5 In 175 he received the honour of a suffect consulship11 and until 185 Pertinax was governor of the provinces of Upper and Lower Moesia Dacia Syria and finally governor of Britain.9 During the 1
80 s Pertinax took a pivotal role in the Roman Senate until the praetorian prefect Sextus Tigidius Perennis forced him out of public life.12 He was recalled after three years to Britain where the Roman army was in a state of mutiny.13 He tried to quell the unruly soldiers there but one legion attacked his bodyguard leaving Pertinax for dead.14 When he was forced to resign in 187 the reason given was that the legions had grown hostile to him because of his harsh rule.15 He served as proconsul of Africa from 188 to 18916 and followed this term of service with the urban prefecture of Rome17 and a second consulship as ordinarius with the emperor Commodus as his colleague.14 Emperoredit Roman aureus struck under the rule of Pertinax. Inscription IMP. CAES. P. HELV. PERTIN. AVG.  PROVIDentia DEORum COnSul II When Commodus actions became increasingly erratic in the early 1
90 s a conspiracy led to his assassination on 31 December 192. The plot was carried out by the Praetorian prefect Quintus Aemilius Laetus Commodus mistress Marcia and his chamberlain Eclectus.18 After the murder had been carried out Pertinax who was serving as urban prefect at this time was hurried to the Praetorian Camp and proclaimed emperor.19 His short reign of 87 days20 was an uneasy one. He attempted to emulate the restrained practices of Marcus Aurelius and made an effort to reform the alimenta but he faced antagonism from many quarters.21 Ancient writers detail how the Praetorian Guard expected a generous donativum on his ascension and when they were disappointed agitated until he produced the money selling off Commodus property22 including the concubines and youths Commodus kept for his sexual pleasures.2324 He reformed the Roman currency dramatically increasing the silver purity of the denarius from 74 to 87  the actual silver weight increasing from 
2.2 2 grams to 
2.7 5 grams.25 Pertinax attempted to impose stricter military discipline upon the pampered Praetorians.26 In early March he narrowly averted one conspiracy by a group to replace him with the consul Quintus Sosius Falco while he was in Ostia inspecting the arrangements for grain shipments.27 The plot was betrayed Falco himself was pardoned but several of the officers behind the coup were executed.28 On 28 March 193 Pertinax was at his palace when according to the Historia Augusta a contingent of some three hundred soldiers of the Praetorian Guard rushed the gates29 two hundred according to Cassius Dio.30 Ancient sources suggest that they had received only half their promised pay.27 Neither the guards on duty nor the palace officials chose to resist them. Pertinax sent Laetus to meet them but he chose to side with the insurgents instead and deserted the emperor.31 Although advised to flee Pertinax then attempted to reason with the insurgents and was almost successful before being struck down by one of the soldiers.32 Pertinax must have been aware of the danger he faced by assuming the purple for he refused to use imperial titles for either his wife or son thereby protecting them from the aftermath of his own assassination.18 Aftermathedit Coin of Pertinax son with the legend KAICAP  Caesar Pertinax After Pertinaxs death the Praetorians auctioned off the imperial title the winner was the wealthy senator Didius Julianus whose reign would end mere weeks later with his assassination on 1 June 1
93.3 3 Julianus was succeeded by Septimius Severus.34 After he entered Rome Septimius recognized Pertinax as a legitimate emperor executed the soldiers who had killed him and not only pressured the Senate to deify him and provide him a state funeral35 but also adopted his cognomen of Pertinax as part of his own name.36 For some time he held games on the anniversary of Pertinaxs ascension and on his birthday.37 Historical reputationedit Pertinaxs historical reputation is largely a positive one beginning with the assessment of Cassius Dio a historian and senator who was a colleague of Pertinax. Dio refers to him as an excellent and upright man38 who displayed not only humaneness and integrity in the imperial administrations but also the most economical management and the most careful consideration for the public welfare.23 Dios approval is not unqualified however. He acknowledges that while some would call Pertinaxs decision to confront the soldiers that would wind up killing him noble others would call it senseless.30 He is also critical of Pertinaxs judgment when it came to the speed with which he tried to reform the excesses of the reign of Commodus by suggesting that a more tempered approach would have been less likely to result in his murder.39 Pertinax is discussed in The Prince by Niccol Machiavelli. Discussing the importance of a prince not being hated Machiavelli provides Pertinax as an example of how it is as easy for a ruler to be hated for good actions as for bad ones. Though describing him as a good man Machiavelli considered Pertinaxs attempt to reform a soldiery that had become accustomed to live licentiously a mistake as it inspired their hatred of him which led to his overthrow and death.40 Pertinax is described in David Humes essay Of the Original Contract as an excellent prince possessing an implied modesty when on the arrival of soldiers who had come to proclaim him emperor he believed that Commodus had ordered his death.41 During the debate over ratification of the United States Constitution Virginia politician John Dawson at his states ratifying convention in 1788 spoke of the atrocious murder of Pertinax by the Praetorian Guard as an example of the danger of establishing a standing army.4243 In popular cultureedit Pertinax was the pseudonym of the French journalist Andr Graud 188219
74.4 4 In Romanitas a fictional alternate history novel by Sophia McDougall Pertinaxs reign is the point of divergence. In the history as established by the novel the plot against Pertinax was thwarted and Pertinax introduced a series of reforms that would consolidate the Roman Empire to such a degree that it would still be a major power in the 
21 st century.45 Referencesedit  Pertinax Inv. 1914 n. 202. Uffizi Digitization Project.  Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae 5842 5845.  Elliott Simon 2020. Pertinax The Son of a Slave Who Became Roman Emperor. Greenhill Books. p. 115. ISBN 9781784385262.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 494. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b Dio 743  Historia Augusta Pertinax 11  Historia Augusta Pertinax 16  Historia Augusta Pertinax 21  a b Birley 2005 p. 173.  Historia Augusta Pertinax 24  Meckler 1997.  Historia Augusta Pertinax 33  Dio 744  a b Birley 2005 p. 174.  Historia Augusta Pertinax 310  Historia Augusta Pertinax 41  Victor 182  a b Campbell 2005 p. 1.  Historia Augusta Pertinax 45  Dio 746  Gibbon 1788 chapter 4.  Campbell 2005 p. 2.  a b Dio 745  Historia Augusta Pertinax 78  Kenneth W. Harl 1999. Roman Currency of the Principate. Tulane University. Archived from the original on 1 November 2008. Retrieved 1 December 2015.  Zosimus 18  a b Dio 748  Historia Augusta Pertinax 104  Historia Augusta Pertinax 111  a b Dio 749  Historia Augusta Pertinax 117  Dio 7410  Glay Marcel le Voisin JeanLouis Bohec Yann le 2001. A History of Rome. Translated by Nevill Antonia Third ed.. Oxford UK Blackwell Publishing. pp. 369372. ISBN 1405110
83 X.  Dio 74174  Historia Augusta Pertinax 151  Historia Augusta Pertinax 152  Historia Augusta Pertinax 155  Dio 741  Dio 7410. He failed to comprehend though a man of wide practical experience that one cannot with safety reform everything at once and that the restoration of a state in particular requires both time and wisdom.  Machiavelli  The Prince Ch. XIX. Pertinax Marcus Aurelius and Severus Alexander are described as men of modest life lovers of justice enemies to cruelty humane and benignant. However Machiavelli considers that Roman soldiers being accustomed to live licentiously under Commodus could not endure the honest life to which Pertinax wished to reduce them.  Hume  Essays Moral Political and Literary II.XII.41  Graham John Remington 2009. Free Sovereign and Independent States The Intended Meaning of the American Constitution. United States Pelican Publishing. p. 139. ISBN 9781589805897.  Richard Carl J. 1994. The Founders and the Classics Greece Rome and the American Enlightenment. United States Harvard University Press. p. 103. ISBN 0674314263.  The Press Pertinax Goes Home. Time. 15 October 1945. ISSN 00407
81 X. Retrieved 26 March 2018.subscription required  McDougall Sophia. A Short History of the Roman Empire. Romanitas. Retrieved 26 March 2018.permanent dead link Sourcesedit Primary sourcesedit Historia Augusta Life of Pertinax English translation at Lacus Curtius Herodian History of the Roman Empire English translation at Lacus Curtius Cassius Dio Roman History Book 74 English translation at The Tertullian Project Aurelius Victor Epitome de Caesaribus English translation at De Imperatoribus Romanis Zosimus Historia Nova English translation at The Tertullian Project Secondary sourcesedit Birley Anthony 2005. The Roman Government of Britain. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199252374. Campbell Brian 2005. The Severan dynasty. In Alan K. Bowman Peter Garnsey  Averil Cameron eds.. The Cambridge Ancient History XII The Crisis of Empire A.D. 193337 
2 nd ed.. Cambridge University Press. Elliot Simon 2020. Pertinax The Son of a Slave Who Became Roman. Greenhill Books. ISBN 9781784385255. Gibbon Edward 1788. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Meckler Michael L. 1997. Pertinax 193 A.D.. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Retrieved 1 December 2015. Pococke Edward 1853. The History of the Roman Empire from the Time of Vespasian to the Extinction of the Western Empire. London.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pertinax. Pertinax at Livius.Org Herbermann Charles ed. 1913. Publius Helvius Pertinax . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York Robert Appleton Company. Pertinax at romanemperors.org Political offices Preceded by L. Calpurnius Piso P. Salvius Julianus Roman consul 175 suffect With Didius Julianus Succeeded by T. Vitrasius Pollio M. Flavius Aper II Preceded by Ulpius Marcellus Governor of Britain c. 185  187 Succeeded by Unknown then Clodius Albinus Preceded by Popilius Pedo Apronianus M. Valerius Bradua Mauricus Roman consul 192 With Commodus VII Succeeded by Q. Pompeius Sosius Falco G. Julius Erucius Clarus Vibianus Regnal titles Preceded by Commodus Roman emperor 193 Succeeded by Didius Julianus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Israel Belgium United States Croatia Netherlands Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePertinaxoldid1223062136 Categories 126 births 193 deaths 
2 ndcentury births 
2 ndcentury deaths 
2 ndcentury murdered monarchs 
2 ndcentury Roman emperors 
2 ndcentury Roman governors of Syria Assassinated ancient Roman politicians Deified Roman emperors Helvii Romans 
2 ndcentury Roman consuls People from Alba Piedmont Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard Roman governors of Britain Roman governors of Dacia Roman governors of Lower Moesia Roman governors of Syria Roman pharaohs Hidden categories Pages containing links to subscriptiononly content All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Use dmy dates from March 2023 CS1 maint location missing publisher Commons link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Saft after parameter includes the word unknown Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 1707 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width