Diadumenian - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History 
2 Numismatics 
3 References Toggle References subsection 
3.1 Citations 
3.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Diadumenian 55 languages     Bosanski Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Euskara  Franais Frysk   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Kiswahili Kongo Kurd Latina Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 218 Diadumenian An aureus bearing the image of Diadumenian. The inscription reads m opel ant diadvmenian caes. Roman emperor Augustus May  June 218 Predecessor Macrinus coemperor Successor Elagabalus Caesar May 217  May 218 Born 14 September 208 AD Died June 218 AD aged 9 Zeugma Names Marcus Opellius Diadumenianus birth Marcus Opellius Antoninus Diadumenianus 2171 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Opellius Antoninus Diadumenianus1 Father Macrinus Mother Nonia Celsa Diadumenian dadminin dyADuuMEEneen Latin Marcus Opellius Antoninus Diadumenianus 14 September 208  June 218 was the son of the Roman emperor Macrinus and served as his coruler for a brief time in 218. His mother Macrinus wife is called Nonia Celsa in the unreliable Historia Augusta though this name may have been fictional. Diadumenian became caesar in May 217 shortly after his fathers accession to the imperial throne. Elagabalus a relative of the recently deceased Caracalla revolted in May of the following year and Diadumenian was elevated to coemperor. After Macrinus was defeated in the Battle of Antioch on 8 June 218 Diadumenian was sent to the court of Artabanus IV of Parthia to ensure his safety however he was captured and executed along the way. After his death and that of his father the Senate declared both of them enemies of Rome and had their names struck from records and their images destroyed  a process known in modern scholarship as damnatio memoriae. Historyedit Diadumenian was born on 14 September 2082 named Marcus Opellius Diadumenianus to Macrinus the praetorian prefect and future emperor of Berber origin.3 The unreliable Historia Augusta a collection of biographies of Roman emperors and usurpers mistakenly names Diadumenian as Diadumenus.4 The same source also states that Diadumenians mother Macrinus wife was called Nonia Celsa though this name may have been invented by the author of the text.5 Little information survives about Diadumenian although the details of his physical appearance can be deduced from coinage and a description from the Historia Augusta which relates that he was beautiful beyond all others somewhat tall of stature with golden hair black eyes and an aquiline nose his chin was wholly lovely in its molding his mouth designed for a kiss and he was by nature strong and by training graceful.6 Having served as praetorian prefect under Caracalla Macrinus participated in a plot to have the Emperor assassinated and exploited the resulting power vacuum to seize the throne for himself on 11 April 217 three days after Caracallas death.7 Shortly after the eightyearold Diadumenian was elevated to caesar  formalising his position as heir to the throne  at Zeugma while his guard was escorting him from Antioch to Mesopotamia to join his father. He was also given the name Antoninus in honour of the Antonine dynasty at this time.68 On 16 May 218 a revolt against him and his father was launched in Emesa by Elagabalus whose mother Julia Soaemias was Caracallas cousin. In order to put down the revolt Macrinus led his legions to a fort at Apamea. There Macrinus elevated Diadumenian to augustus making him coemperor. After Macrinus was defeated by Elagabalus on 8 June 218 at the Battle of Antioch Macrinus fled north and then to the Bosporus. Before fleeing he entrusted Diadumenian to loyal servants instructing them to take him into the Parthian Empire to the court of Artabanus IV to ensure his safety. Diadumenian was captured en route in Zeugma and executed in late June.910 His head was brought to Elagabalus and reportedly kept as a trophy.11 Following the demise of both Macrinus and Diadumenian the Roman Senate quickly proclaimed their support for Elagabalus declaring the former emperors to be enemies of the state. They were subject to a process known in modern scholarship as damnatio memoriae with their images and mentions in inscriptions and papyri being destroyed during the reign of Elagabalus.12 In an attempt to wipe out all traces of Diadumenian and his father Elagabalus dated his own reign to the end of that of Caracalla.4 Surviving busts of Diadumenian are mangled with the facial features barely being discernible.13 Numismaticsedit Aureus of Macrinus which features Diadumenian on the reverse seated on a platform alongside his father with the allegory of Liberalitas before them.14 Aureus of Diadumenian. The reverse depicts him as princeps iuventutis official heir between military standards.15 A very rare denarius of Diadumenian as augustus minted in the last weeks of his life between late April and early June 2
18.1 6 While caesar a large number of coins were struck for Diadumenian although fewer than the amount struck for his father. Coins in which he is depicted as augustus are extremely limited and the only known coins from this time are denarii. This has led to the suggestion first proposed by the ancient numismatist Curtis Clay that a large issue of coins was being made for Diadumenian however they were quickly melted down when the news of Macrinus defeat spread. Some eastern provincial coins from the period exist which give Diadumenian the title sebastos at the time the Greek equivalent of the Roman augustus.9 In terms of gold coins Diadumenian has one known style of aureus bearing his image on the obverse and displaying Spes standing on the reverse and one known style of halfaureus bearing his image on the obverse and displaying himself holding a sceptre and standard.17 Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Diadumenianus. Citationsedit  a b Cooley p. 496.  Varner 2004 p. 185.  Potter 2004 p. 146.  a b Scott 2018 p. 34.  Vagi 2000 pp. 289290.  a b Vagi 2000 p. 289.  Bowman Garnsey  Cameron 2005 pp. 1920.  Scott 2018 p. 60.  a b Vagi 2000 p. 290.  Bdoyre 2017 p. 236.  Bunson 1991 p. 130.  Varner 2004 pp. 187188.  Varner 2004 p. 278.  Mattingly et al. Roman Imperial Coinage IV part II p. 11.  Mattingly et al. Roman Imperial Coinage IV part II p. 13.  Mattingly et al. Roman Imperial Coinage IV part II pp. 3 14.  Friedberg Friedberg  Friedberg 2017 p. 45. Bibliographyedit Bdoyre Guy de la 2017. Praetorian The Rise and Fall of Romes Imperial Bodyguard. Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300226270. Bowman Alan Garnsey Peter Cameron Averil 2005. The Cambridge Ancient History Volume 12 2 ed.. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521850735. Bunson Matthew 1991. Encyclopedia of the Roman Empire. Facts On File. ISBN 9781438110271. Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521840262. Friedberg Arthur L. Friedberg Ira S. Friedberg Robert 2017. Gold Coins of the World  
9 th edition From Ancient Times to the Present. An Illustrated Standard Catlaog with Valuations. Coin  Currency Institute. ISBN 9780871840097. Harold Mattingly Edward A. Sydenham C. H. V. Sutherland Roman Imperial Coinage volume IV part II Macrinus to Pupienus London Spink 1938. Potter David 2004. The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395. Routledge. ISBN 9780415100571. Scott Andrew G. 2018. Emperors and Usurpers An Historical Commentary on Cassius Dios Roman History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780190879594. Vagi David L. 2000. Coinage and History of the Roman Empire c. 82 B.C. A.D. 480. Fitzroy Dearborn. ISBN 9781579583163. Varner Eric R. 2004. Mutilation and Transformation Damnatio Memoriae and Roman Imperial Portraiture. Brill. ISBN 9004135774. Regnal titles Preceded by Macrinus as sole emperor Roman emperor 218 Served alongside Macrinus Succeeded by Elagabalus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States Netherlands Poland Artists Te Papa New Zealand Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDiadumenianoldid1220791224 Categories 208 births 218 deaths 
3 rdcentury Berber people 
3 rdcentury executions 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Berber monarchs Severan dynasty Opellii Executed Roman emperors Ancient child monarchs Monarchs who died as children People executed by the Roman Empire Executed children Sons of Roman emperors Sons of emperors Roman pharaohs Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use shortened footnotes from August 2023 Use dmy dates from August 2022 Use British English from August 2023 Good articles Articles containing Latinlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 25 April 2024 at 2256 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width