Trebonianus Gallus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Rise to power 
3 Death 
4 Notes 
5 References Toggle the table of contents Trebonianus Gallus 60 languages  Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Kiswahili Latina Lombard Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 251 to 253 Trebonianus Gallus Possible bust in Antakya museum1 Roman emperor Reign c. June 251  August 2532 Predecessor Decius Successor Aemilianus Coemperors Hostilianus 251 Volusianus 251253 Born c. 206 Italy Died c. August 253 aged 47 Interamna Spouse Afinia Gemina Baebiana Issue Volusianus and Vibia Galla Names Gaius Vibius Trebonianus Gallus Regnal name Imperator Caesar Gaius Vibius Trebonianus Gallus Augustus Gaius Vibius Trebonianus Gallus3 c. 206  August 2532 was Roman emperor from June 251 to August 253 in a joint rule with his son Volusianus. Early lifeedit Gallus was born in Italy in a respected senatorial family with Etruscan ancestry. He had two children in his marriage with Afinia Gemina Baebiana Gaius Vibius Volusianus later emperor and a daughter Vibia Galla. His early career was a typical cursus honorum with several appointments both political and military. He was suffect consul and in 250 was made governor of the Roman province of Moesia Superior an appointment that showed the confidence of Emperor Decius in him. Rise to poweredit In June 251 Decius and his coemperor and son Herennius Etruscus died in the Battle of Abrittus at the hands of the Goths they were supposed to punish for raids into the empire. According to rumours supported by Dexippus a contemporary Greek historian and the thirteenth Sibylline Oracle Decius failure was largely owing to Gallus who had conspired with the invaders. In any case when the army heard the news the soldiers proclaimed Gallus emperor despite Hostilianus Decius surviving son ascending the imperial throne in Rome. This action of the army and the fact that Gallus seems to have been on good terms with Decius family makes Dexippus allegation improbable.4 Gallus did not back down from his intention to become emperor but accepted Hostilian as coemperor perhaps to avoid the damage of another civil war. Statue traditionally identified as Gallus the only nearcomplete fullsize Roman bronze to survive from the 
3 rd century Metropolitan Museum56 Anxious to secure his position at Rome and stabilize the situation on the Danube frontier Gallus made peace with the Goths. Peace terms allowed the Goths to leave Roman territory while keeping their captives and plunder. In addition it was agreed that they would be paid an annual subsidy.7 Reaching Rome Gallus proclamation was formally confirmed by the Senate with his son Volusian being appointed Caesar. On 24 June 251 Decius was deified but by November Hostilian disappears from historyhe may have died in an outbreak of plague.8 Gallus may have also ordered a localized and uncoordinated persecution of Christians.9 However only two incidents are known to us the exile of Pope Cornelius to Centumcellae where he died in 253 and the exile of his successor Pope Lucius right after his election. The latter was recalled to Rome during the reign of Valerian.10 Aureus of Gallus. Legend IMP CAE C VIB TREB GALLVS AVG Like his predecessors Gallus did not have an easy reign. In the East an Antiochene nobleman Mariades revolted and began ravaging Syria and Cappadocia then fled to the Persians. Gallus ordered his troops to attack the Persians but Persian Emperor Shapur I invaded Armenia and destroyed a large Roman army taking it by surprise at Barbalissos in 253. Shapur I then invaded the defenseless Syrian provinces capturing all of their legionary posts and ravaging their cities including Antioch without any response.11 Persian invasions were repeated in the following year but now Uranius Antoninus a priest originally called Sampsiceramus a descendant of the royal house of Emesa confronted Shapur and forced him to retreat. Uranius proclaimed himself emperor9 however and minted coins with his image upon them.12 On the Danube Scythian tribes were once again on the loose despite the peace treaty signed in 251. They invaded Asia Minor by sea burned the great Temple of Artemis at Ephesus and returned home with plunder. Lower Moesia was also invaded in early 2
53.1 3 Aemilian governor of Moesia Superior and Pannonia took the initiative and defeated the invaders. Deathedit Trebonianus Gallus. Legend . . . VIB. T. . CEB.  . CIAC Y.  S C . Greek inscription for IMP C VIB TREB GALLO AVG  MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY CONSUL I Senatus Consulto III Since the army was no longer pleased with the Emperor the soldiers proclaimed Aemilian emperor. With a usurper supported by Pauloctus threatening the throne Gallus prepared for a fight. He recalled several legions and ordered reinforcements to return to Rome from Gaul under the command of the future emperor Publius Licinius Valerianus. Despite these dispositions Aemilian marched onto Italy ready to fight for his claim and caught Gallus at Interamna modern Terni before the arrival of Valerian. What exactly happened there is not clear as sources do not agree with each other.14 Later sources claim that after an initial defeat Gallus and Volusian were murdered by their own troops13 or Gallus did not have the chance to face Aemilian at all because his army went over to the usurper.15 In any case both Gallus and Volusian were killed in August 2
53.1 4 Notesedit  J. Lenaghan 2012. Portrait bust of man in armour made from disparate elements. Antioch on the Orontes Syria. Late third to early fourth century. Last Statues of Antiquity. LSA254.  a b Kienast Dietmar Werner Eck  Matthus Heil 2017 1990. Rmische Kaisertabelle. WBG. pp. 200201. ISBN 9783534267248.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 498. ISBN 9780521840262.  Potter 2004 pp. 247248.  Bronze statue of the emperor Trebonianus Gallus. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 8 September 2023.  Zanker Paul 2016. 30. OverLifesize Statue of Trebonianus Gallus. Roman Portraits. Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 9498. ISBN 9781588395993. None of the identifications of specific emperors proposed to date are truly convincing... The highly divergent coinage of the emperors of this period lends credibility to the possibility that the subject is in fact Trebonianus Gallus.  Bowman Garnsey  Cameron 2005 pp. 3940.  Potter 2004 p. 248.  a b Bowman Garnsey  Cameron 2005 p. 40.  Bowman Garnsey  Cameron 2005 p. 636.  Potter 2004 pp. 248249.  Potter 2004 pp. 249250.  a b Potter 2004 p. 252.  a b Bray 1997 p. 38.  Bowman Garnsey  Cameron 2005 p. 41. Referencesedit Bray John 1997. Gallienus A study in reformist and sexual politics. Kent Town S. Australia Wakefield Press. p. 20. ISBN 1862543372. Bowman Alan K. Garnsey Peter Cameron Averil eds. 2005. The Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. XII The Crisis of Empire A.D. 193337. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521301998. Potter David S. 2004. The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395. Routledge. ISBN 0415100585.. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Trebonianus Gallus. Regnal titles Preceded by Decius Roman Emperor 251253 Served alongside Hostilian 251 and Volusian 251253 Succeeded by Aemilian Political offices Preceded by Decius with Herennius Etruscus Roman consul 252 with Volusianus Succeeded by Volusianus L. Valerius Poplicola Balbinus Maximus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany Vatican Artists Te Papa New Zealand People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTrebonianusGallusoldid1220539220 Categories 206 births 253 deaths 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Crisis of the Third Century Vibii Murdered Roman emperors Romans from Moesia Roman pharaohs Temple of Artemis Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 CS1 long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 24 April 2024 at 1231 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width