Balbinus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Origins and career 
2 Reign 
3 Sarcophagus 
4 Family tree 
5 Gallery 
6 References 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Balbinus 60 languages     Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Hakkng   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano    Kiswahili Latina Lietuvi Magyar    Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Sicilianu Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 238 Balbinus Bust Hermitage Museum Roman emperor Reign AprilMay  JulyAugust 2381 Predecessor Gordian I and II Successor Gordian III Coemperor Pupienus Rival Maximinus until June Born c. 1782 Died 238 aged approx. 60 Rome Italy Names Decimus Caelius Calvinus Balbinus Regnal name Imperator Caesar Decimus Caelius Calvinus Balbinus Pius Augustus Part of a series on Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Six Emperors AD 238 Maximinus Thrax Gordian I and Gordian II Pupienus and Balbinus Gordian III v t e Decimus Caelius Calvinus Balbinus3 died 238 AD was Roman emperor with Pupienus for three months in 238 the Year of the Six Emperors. Origins and careeredit Not much is known about Balbinus before his elevation to emperor. It has been conjectured that he descended from Publius Coelius Balbinus Vibullius Pius the consul ordinarius of 137 and wife Aquilia. If this were true he was also related to the family of Q. Pompeius Falco which supplied many politicians of consular rank throughout the 
3 rd century and to the 
1 stcentury politician engineer and author Julius Frontinus. He was born around 1
78.4  He was a patrician from birth and was the son either by birth or adoption of Caelius Calvinus who was legate of Cappadocia in 184. He was one of the Salii priests of Mars.5 According to Herodian he had governed provinces but the list of seven provinces given in the unreliable Historia Augusta as well as the statement that Balbinus had been both Proconsul of Asia and of Africa are likely to be mere invention.citation needed He had certainly been twice consul his first consulate is not certainly known but is believed to have been about 203 or in July 211 he was consul for the second time in 213 as colleague of Caracalla which suggests he enjoyed that emperors favour. Reignedit According to Edward Gibbon drawing upon the narratives of Herodian and the Historia Augusta Balbinus was an admired orator a poet of distinguished fame and a wise magistrate who had exercised with innocence and applause the civil jurisdiction in almost all the interior provinces of the empire. His birth was noble his fortune affluent his manners liberal and affable. In him the love of pleasure was corrected by a sense of dignity nor had the habits of ease deprived him of a capacity for business. ... The two colleagues Pupienus and Balbinus had both been consul Balbinus had twice enjoyed that honourable office both had been named among the twenty lieutenants of the senate and since the one was sixty and the other seventyfour years old they had both attained the full maturity of age and experience.6 On the news of the Gordians defeat the Senate voted Pupienus and Balbinus as coemperors in April 238 though they were soon forced to coopt the child Gordian III as a colleague.4 Unlike the situation in 161 both emperors were elected as pontifices maximi chief priests of the official cults.7 This would be unthinkable in Republican times. Balbinus was probably in his early seventies his qualifications for rule are unknown except presumably that he was a senior senator rich and wellconnected. While Pupienus marched to Ravenna where he oversaw the campaign against Maximinus Balbinus remained in Rome but failed to keep public order. The sources suggest that after Pupienuss victorious return following Maximinus death Balbinus and Pupienus began to distrust each other. They were soon assassinated by disaffected elements of the Praetorian Guard Pupienus attempted to warn Balbinus of the plot but the latter thought that the guard would instead secure the throne for himself.8 Sarcophagusedit The sarcophagus of Balbinus has earned this Emperor a niche in the history of Roman Imperial art. Presumably while holding the title of Emperor Balbinus had a marble sarcophagus made for himself and his wife whose name is unknown. Discovered in fragments near the Via Appia and restored this is the only example of a Roman Imperial sarcophagus of this type to have survived. On the lid are reclining figures of Balbinus and his wife the figure of the Emperor also being a fine portrait of him. The sarcophagus is held in collection at the Museo di Pretastato at the catacombs of Praetextatus in the Park of the Caffarella near the Appian Way at Rome. Although in accounts of their joint reign Balbinus is emphasized as the civilian as against Pupienus the military man on the side of the sarcophagus he is portrayed in full military dress. Family treeedit Maximinus Thrax Roman Emperor 235238 Gordian I Roman Emperor 238 Pupienus Roman Emperor 238 Philip the Arab Roman Emperor 244249 Gaius Julius Verus Maximus caesar Gordian II coemperor 238 Antonia Gordiana Balbinus Roman Emperor 238 Philip II coemperor 247249 Gordian III Roman Emperor 238244 Galleryedit Portrait of the Roman Emperor Balbinus dated AD 200300 from the collection of the Cleveland Museum of Art. Sestertius of Balbinus. Inscription IMP. CAES. D. CAEL. BALBINVS AVG. Statue of Balbinus Archaeological Museum of Piraeus Greece. Referencesedit  For length stimations see Rea J.R. 1972. O. Leid. 144 and the Chronology of A.D. 238. ZPE 9 119. No contemporary or later sources give any definitive conclusion.  Zonaras c. 1120 Epitome xvii.17. Pupienus Maximus was seventyfour years old Albinus sixty. According to some they reigned about twentytwo days referring to Gordian I and Gordian II but according to others not quite three months.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 497. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b Adkins Lesley Adkins Roy A. 1994. Handbook to Life in Ancient Rome. New York Oxford University Press. p. 26.  Michael GrantThe Roman Emperors  Gibbon Edward Milman Henry Hart 7 June 2008. Widger David ed.. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman EmpireTable of Contents with links in the HTML file to the two Project Gutenberg editions 12 volumes. Vol. I. p. 225.  Christer Bruun J. C. Edmondson 2015. The Oxford Handbook of Roman Epigraphy. Oxford University Press. p. 191. ISBN 9780195336467.  HA Life of Maximus and Balbinus Herodian 

8.8.4  External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Balbinus. portrait head from the sarcophagus as an example of Roman pathetic stylepermanent dead link Livius.org Balbinus last accessed 22 September 2020 Regnal titles Preceded by Gordian I Gordian II Maximinus Thrax Roman emperor 238 With Pupienus Succeeded by Gordian III Political offices Preceded by Gn. Claudius  Severanus Tib. Claudius  Pompeianus Roman consul 213 with Caracalla Succeeded by L. Valerius Messalla Apollinaris C. Octavius Appius Suetrius Sabinus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National France BnF data Germany People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleBalbinusoldid1214054754 Categories 1
70 s births 238 deaths 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Caelii Crisis of the Third Century 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard Ancient Roman poets Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 Commons category link from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 16 March 2024 at 1753 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width