Gordian I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family and background 
2 Early life 
3 Rise to power 
4 Legacy 
5 Family tree 
6 References 
7 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
7.1 Ancient sources 
7.2 Modern sources 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Gordian I 62 languages     Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego Hakkng   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Magyar    Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 238 Gordian I Bust Capitoline Museums Rome1 Roman emperor Reign c. March  April 2382 Predecessor Maximinus Thrax Successor Pupienus and Balbinus Coemperor Gordian II Born c. 158 possibly Phrygia Died April 238 aged about 80 Carthage Africa Proconsularis Spouse Unknown possibly Fabia Orestilla3 Issue Gordian II Antonia Gordiana Names Marcus Antonius Gordianus Sempronianus Romanus4 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Antonius Gordianus Sempronianus Romanus Africanus Augustus5 Dynasty Gordian Father Unknown possibly Maecius Marullus6 or Marcus Antonius7 Mother Unknown possibly Ulpia Gordiana6 or Sempronia Romana7 Part of a series on Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Six Emperors AD 238 Maximinus Thrax Gordian I and Gordian II Pupienus and Balbinus Gordian III v t e Gordian I Latin Marcus Antonius Gordianus Sempronianus Romanus c. 158  April 238 AD was Roman emperor for 22 days with his son Gordian II in 238 the Year of the Six Emperors. Caught up in a rebellion against the Emperor Maximinus Thrax he was defeated by forces loyal to Maximinus and he committed suicide after the death of his son. Family and backgroundedit Little is known about the early life and family background of Gordian I. There is no reliable evidence on his family origins.8 Gordian I was said to be related to prominent senators of his time.9 His praenomen and nomen Marcus Antonius suggested that his paternal ancestors received Roman citizenship under the triumvir Mark Antony or one of his daughters during the late Roman Republic.9 Gordians cognomen Gordianus also indicates that his family origins were from Anatolia more specifically Galatia or Cappadocia.10 According to the Historia Augusta his mother was a Roman woman called Ulpia Gordiana and his father was the senator Maecius Marullus.6 While modern historians have dismissed his fathers name as false there may be some truth behind the identity of his mother. Gordians family history can be guessed through inscriptions. The name Sempronianus in his name for instance may indicate a connection to his mother or grandmother. In Ankara Turkey a funeral inscription has been found that names a Sempronia Romana daughter of a named Sempronius Aquila an imperial secretary.9 Romana erected this undated funeral inscription to her husband whose name is lost who died as a praetordesignate.8 French historian Christian Settipani identified Gordian Is parents as Marcus Antonius b. ca 135 tr. pl. praet. des. and wife Sempronia Romana b. ca 140 daughter of Titus Flavius Sempronius Aquila b. ca 115 Secretarius ab epistulis Graecis and wife Claudia b. ca 120 daughter of an unknown father and his wife Claudia Tisamenis b. ca 100 sister of Herodes Atticus.7 It appears in this family tree that the person who was related to Herodes Atticus was Gordian Is mother or grandmother and not his wife.9 Also according to the Historia the wife of Gordian I was a Roman woman called Fabia Orestilla3 born circa 165 whom the Historia Augusta claims was a descendant of emperors Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius through her father Fulvus Antoninus.311 Modern historians have dismissed this name and her information as false.8 With his wife Gordian I had at least two children a son of the same name 12 and a daughter Antonia Gordiana who was the mother of the future Emperor Gordian III.13 His wife died before 238 AD. Christian Settipani identified her parents as Marcus Annius Severus who was a Suffect Consul and his wife Silvana born circa 140 AD who was the daughter of Lucius Plautius Lamia Silvanus and his wife Aurelia Fadilla the daughter of Antoninus Pius and wife Annia Galeria Faustina or Faustina the Elder.7 Early lifeedit Gordian steadily climbed the Roman imperial hierarchy when he became part of the Roman Senate. His political career started relatively late in his life8 and his early years were probably spent in rhetoric and literary studies.99 As a military man Gordian commanded the Legio IV Scythica when the legion was stationed in Syria.9 He served as governor of Roman Britain in 216 AD and was a Suffect Consul sometime during the reign of Elagabalus.8 Inscriptions in Roman Britain bearing his name were partially erased suggesting some form of imperial displeasure during this role.14 While he gained unbounded popularity on account of the magnificent games and shows he produced as aedile15 his prudent and retired life did not excite the suspicion of Caracalla in whose honor he wrote a long epic poem called Antoninias.161718 Gordian certainly retained his wealth and political clout during the chaotic times of the Severan dynasty which suggests a personal dislike for intrigue. Philostratus dedicated his work Lives of the Sophists to either him or his son Gordian II.19 Rise to poweredit Gordian I on a coin bearing the title AFR Africanus. Inscription IMP. CAES. M. ANT. GORDIANVS AFR. AVG.  VICTORIA AVGG. S C. During the reign of Alexander Severus Gordian I who was by then in his late sixties after serving his Suffect Consulship prior to 223 drew lots for the proconsular governorship of the province of Africa Proconsularis820 which he assumed in 2
37.2 1 However prior to the commencement of his promagistrature Maximinus Thrax killed Alexander Severus at Moguntiacum in Germania Inferior and assumed the throne.22 Maximinus was not a popular emperor and universal discontent increased due to his oppressive rule.23 It culminated in a revolt in Africa in 238 AD the exact month is unknown.24 After Maximinus fiscal curator was murdered in a riot people turned to Gordian and demanded that he accept the dangerous honor of the imperial throne.4 Gordian who was about 80 years according to Herodian eventually yielded to the popular clamour and assumed both the purple and the cognomen Africanus.20 According to Edward Gibbon An iniquitous sentence had been pronounced against some opulent youths of Africa the execution of which would have stripped them of far the greater part of their patrimony. ... A respite of three days obtained with difficulty from the rapacious treasurer was employed in collecting from their estates a great number of slaves and peasants blindly devoted to the commands of their lords and armed with the rustic weapons of clubs and axes. The leaders of the conspiracy as they were admitted to the audience of the procurator stabbed him with the daggers concealed under their garments and by the assistance of their tumultuary train seized on the little town of Thysdrus and erected the standard of rebellion against the sovereign of the Roman empire. ... Gordianus their proconsul and the object of their choice as emperor refused with unfeigned reluctance the dangerous honour and begged with tears that they should suffer him to terminate in peace a long and innocent life without staining his feeble age with civil blood. Their menaces compelled him to accept the Imperial purple his only refuge indeed against the jealous cruelty of Maximin ....25 Due to his advanced age he insisted that his son be associated with him. A few days later Gordian entered the city of Carthage with the overwhelming support of the population and local political leaders.26 Gordian I sent assassins to kill Maximinus praetorian prefect Publius Aelius Vitalianus27 and the rebellion seemed to be successful.28 Gordian in the meantime had sent an embassy to Rome under the leadership of Publius Licinius Valerianus29 to obtain the Senates support for his rebellion.28 The Senate confirmed the new emperor and many of the provinces gladly sided with Gordian.30 This event is sometimes dated to 2 April but this is only based on a passage of the Historia Augusta nowadays considered highly unreliable that told about an eclipse presaging the imminent fall of the Gordians.2 Opposition came from the neighboring province of Numidia.4 Capelianus governor of Numidia and a loyal supporter of Maximinus Thrax held a grudge against Gordian30 and invaded the African province with the only legion stationed in the region III Augusta and other veteran units.31 Gordian II at the head of a militia army of untrained soldiers lost the Battle of Carthage and was killed30 and Gordian I killed himself by hanging himself with his belt.32 The Gordians had ruled only 22 days the shortest reign of any Roman emperor.333435 Gordian was the first emperor to commit suicide since Otho in 69 during the Year of the Four Emperors. Legacyedit Gordians positive reputation can be attributed to his reportedly amiable character. Both he and his son were said to be fond of literature even publishing their own voluminous works.25 While they were strongly interested in intellectual pursuits they possessed neither the necessary skills nor resources to be considered able statesmen or powerful rulers. Having embraced the cause of Gordian the Senate was obliged to continue the revolt against Maximinus following Gordians death appointing Pupienus and Balbinus as joint emperors.36 Nevertheless by the end of 238 the recognised emperor would be Gordian III Gordians grandson.36 Family treeedit previous Maximinus Thrax Emperor 235238 Pupienus Emperor 238 Gordian I Emperor 238   Fabia Orestilla Balbinus Emperor 238 Gordian II coemperor 238 Antonia Gordiana doubted Junius Licinius Balbus consul suffectus Timesitheus praetorian prefect next Philip the Arab Emperor 244249 Gordian III Emperor 238 Tranquillina Philip II coemperor 247249 Referencesedit  This bust was made about a decade before his accession to the throne.  a b The exact chronology of events is unknown. See Rea J. 1972. O. Leid. 144 and the Chronology of A.D. 238. ZPE 9 119.  a b c Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 174  a b c Southern p. 86.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 497. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b c Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 22  a b c d Settipani 2001 Continuit gentilice et continuit snatoriale dans les familles snatoriales romaines  lpoque impriale  a b c d e f Meckler 2001.  a b c d e f g Birley 2005 p. 340.  Peuch Bernadette Orateurs et sophistes grecs dans les inscriptions dpoque impriale 2002 pg. 128  Krawczuk Aleksander 1998. Poczet cesarzowych Rzymu. Warszawa Iskry. p. 147. ISBN 8324400214. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2018.  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 171  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 42  Birley 2005 p. 339.  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 35  Chisholm 1911.  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 33  Kemezis Adam M 2014. Greek Narratives of the Roman Empire Under the Severans Cassius Dio Philostratus and Herodian. Cambridge University Press.  Grant Michael 1985. The Roman Emperors A Biographical Guide to the Rulers of Imperial Rome 31 BCAD 476. New York Charles Scribners Sons. p. 140. ISBN 0684183889.  a b Herodian 75  Birley 2005 p. 333.  Potter pg. 167  Cope Geoffrey. Gordian I 2  3 2
38 AD2
44 AD.  Herodian 74. After Maximinus had completed three years as emperor after 22 March 238 the people of Africa first took up arms and touched off a serious revolt for one of those trivial reasons which often prove fatal to a tyrant.  a b Gibbon Vol. I Ch. 7  Herodian 762  Laale Hans Willer 2011. Ephesus Ephesos An Abbreviated History from Androclus to Constantine X. WestBow Press. ISBN 9781449716189.  a b Potter pg. 169  Zosimus 111  a b c Potter pg. 170  Herodian 

7.9.3   DEpiro Peter 2010. The Book of Firsts 150 WorldChanging People and Events from Caesar Augustus to the Internet. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 9780307476661.  Filocalus Chronograph of 354 Part 16 The two Gordians ruled for 20 days. They died in Africa.  Laterculus Imperatorum Malalianus 
7 th century Gordian ruled 22 days.  Zonaras c. 1120 Epitome xvii.17 According to some they reigned about twentytwo days but according to others not quite three months. A confusion with Balbinus and Pupienus cf. Symeon Logothete Chronographia CSHB 75  a b Southern p. 87. Sourcesedit Ancient sourcesedit Herodian Roman History Book 7 Historia Augusta The Three Gordians Aurelius Victor Epitome de Caesaribus Joannes Zonaras Compendium of History extract Zonaras Alexander Severus to Diocletian 222284 Zosimus Historia Nova Modern sourcesedit Birley Anthony 2005 The Roman Government in Britain Oxford University Press ISBN 9780199252374 Gibbon Edward Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 1888 Grasby K.D. 1975. The Age Ancestry and Career of Gordian I. Classical Quarterly. 25 1 123130. doi
10.1 0
17 S0009838800032
95 X. JSTOR 638250. S
2 CID 170082548. Meckler David Stone 2001. Gordian I 238 A.D.. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Potter David Stone The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395 Routledge 2004 Southern Pat 2015 2001. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine 
2 nd ed.. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415738071. Syme Ronald Emperors and Biography Oxford University Press 1971 External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gordianus I. This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Gordian. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 12 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 247. Regnal titles Preceded by Maximinus Thrax Roman emperor 238 With Gordian II Succeeded by Pupienus Balbinus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National France BnF data Germany United States Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleGordianIoldid1207903039 Categories 159 births 238 deaths 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Crisis of the Third Century Suffect consuls of Imperial Rome Roman governors of Britain Deified Roman emperors Heads of state who died by suicide Suicides in Ancient Rome Suicides by hanging in Tunisia Antonii Gordian dynasty Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles containing Latinlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 16 February 2024 at 0101 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width