Gordian II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Revolt against Maximinus Thrax 
3 Family tree 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
6.1 Primary sources 
6.2 Secondary sources 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gordian II 59 languages     Bnlmg   Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Hakkng   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Magyar    Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 238 Gordian II Sestertius featuring Gordian II. The inscription reads imp caes m ant gordianvs afr avg. Roman emperor Reign c. March  April 2381 Predecessor Maximinus Thrax Successor Pupienus and Balbinus Coemperor Gordian I Born c. 192 Died April 238 aged c. 46 Carthage Africa Proconsularis Names Marcus Antonius Gordianus2 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Antonius Gordianus Sempronianus Romanus Africanus Augustus3 Dynasty Gordian Father Gordian I Mother Unknown possibly Fabia Orestilla4 Part of a series on Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Six Emperors AD 238 Maximinus Thrax Gordian I and Gordian II Pupienus and Balbinus Gordian III v t e Gordian II Latin Marcus Antonius Gordianus Sempronianus Romanus c. 192  April 238 was Roman emperor with his father Gordian I in 238 AD the Year of the Six Emperors. Seeking to overthrow Maximinus Thrax he died in battle outside Carthage. Since he died before his father Gordian II likely had the shortest reign of any Roman emperor at 22 days possibly second only to Quintillus who according to some sources reigned for just 17 days. Early lifeedit Born c. 192 Gordian II was the only known son of Gordian I who was said to be related to prominent senators.5 His praenomen and nomen Marcus Antonius suggest that his paternal ancestors received Roman citizenship under the triumvir Mark Antony or one of his daughters during the late Roman Republic.5 Gordians cognomen Gordianus suggests that his family origins were from Anatolia especially Galatia and Cappadocia.6 According to the notoriously unreliable Historia Augusta his mother was a Roman woman called Fabia Orestilla4 born circa 165 who the Historia claims was a descendant of emperors Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius through her father Fulvus Antoninus.4 Modern historians have dismissed this name and her information as false.7 There is some evidence to suggest that Gordians mother might have been the granddaughter of the Greek Sophist consul and tutor Herodes Atticus.8 His younger sister was Antonia Gordiana who was the mother of Emperor Gordian III. Although the memory of the Gordians would have been cherished by the Senate and thus appear sympathetic in any senatorial documentation of the period the only account of Gordians early career that has survived is contained within the Historia Augusta and it cannot be taken as an accurate or reliable description of his life story prior to his elevation to the purple in 2
38.9  According to this source Gordian served as quaestor in Elagabalus reign10 and as praetor and consul suffect with Emperor Severus Alexander.1112 In 237 or 238 Gordian went to the province of Africa Proconsularis as a legatus under his father who served as proconsular governor.13 Revolt against Maximinus Thraxedit Early in 235 Emperor Alexander Severus and his mother Julia Avita Mamaea were assassinated by mutinous troops at Moguntiacum now Mainz in Germania Inferior.14 The leader of the rebellion Maximinus Thrax became Emperor despite his lowborn background and the disapproval of the Roman Senate.15 Confronted by a local elite that had just killed Maximinuss procurator16 Gordians father was forced to participate in a fullscale revolt against Maximinus in 238 probably at the end of March.8 Due to Gordian Is advanced age the younger Gordian said to be 46 years old17 was attached to the imperial throne and acclaimed augustus too. Like his father he too was awarded the cognomen Africanus.8 Father and son saw their claim to the throne ratified both by the Senate18 and most of the other provinces due to Maximinus unpopularity.19 Opposition would come from the neighbouring province of Numidia.19 Capelianus governor of Numidia a loyal supporter of Maximinus Thrax and who held a grudge against Gordian19 renewed his allegiance to the reigning emperor16 and invaded Africa province with the only legion stationed in the region III Augusta and other veteran units.20 Gordian II at the head of a militia army of untrained soldiers lost the Battle of Carthage and was killed.8 According to the Historia Augusta his body was never recovered.21 Hearing the news his father killed himself.8 The Gordians ruled only 22 days.222324 This first rebellion against Maximinus Thrax was unsuccessful but by the end of 238 Gordian IIs nephew Gordian III would be recognised as emperor by the whole Roman world.25 According to Edward Gibbon in the first volume of The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 177689 Twentytwo acknowledged concubines and a library of sixtytwo thousand volumes attested to the variety of Gordians inclinations and from the productions that he left behind him it appears that the former as well as the latter were designed for use rather than ostentation.26 Family treeedit v t e GORDIAN DYNASTY family tree previous Maximinus Thrax Roman Emperor 235238 Pupienus Roman Emperor 238 Gordian I Roman Emperor 238   Fabia Orestilla Balbinus Roman Emperor 238 Gordian II coemperor 238 Antonia Gordiana doubted Junius Licinius Balbus consul suffectus Gaius Furius Sabinius Aquila Timesitheus praetorian prefect next Philip the Arab Roman Emperor 244249 Gordian III Roman Emperor 238244 Furia Sabinia Tranquillina Philip II Roman Emperor coemperor 247249 See alsoedit Villa Gordiani Referencesedit  The exact chronology of events is unknown. See Rea J. 1972. O. Leid. 144 and the Chronology of A.D. 238. ZPE 9 119.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 497. ISBN 9780521840262.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 497. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b c Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 174  a b Birley 2005 p. 340.  Peuch Bernadette Orateurs et sophistes grecs dans les inscriptions dpoque impriale 2002 pg. 128  Syme 1971 pp. 100101.  a b c d e Meckler 2001.  Syme 1971 pp. 116.  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 184  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 185  Birley 2005 p. 341. An inscription confirming this fact has been found at Caesarea in Palestine..  Barnes Timothy D. September 1968. Philostratus and Gordian. Latomus. 27 587 590.  Potter 2004 p. 167.  Southern p. 83.  a b Southern p. 86.  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 152  Herodian 772  a b c Potter 2004 p. 170.  Herodian 793  Historia Augusta The Three Gordians 161  Filocalus Chronograph of 354 Part 16 The two Gordians ruled for 20 days. They died in Africa.  Laterculus Imperatorum Malalianus 
7 th century Gordian ruled 22 days.  Zonaras c. 1120 Epitome xvii.17 According to some they reigned about twentytwo days but according to others not quite three months. He confuses the Gordians with Balbinus and Pupienus.  Southern p. 87.  Quoted in From the Editor. Ambition Style and Sacrifices History Today June 2017 p. 3. Sourcesedit Primary sourcesedit Aurelius Victor Epitome de Caesaribus Herodian Roman History Book 7 Historia Augusta The Three Gordians Joannes Zonaras Compendium of History Zosimus Historia Nova Secondary sourcesedit Birley Anthony 2005. The Roman Government in Britain. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199252374. Gibbon Edward 1888. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire Meckler David Stone 2001. Gordian II 238 A.D.. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Potter David Stone 2004. The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395. Routledge. Southern Pat 2015 2001. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine 
2 nd ed.. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415738071. Syme Ronald 1971. Emperors and Biography. Oxford University Press. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gordianus II. Gordian II coinage Regnal titles Preceded by Maximinus Thrax Roman emperor 238 With Gordian I Succeeded by Pupienus Balbinus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleGordianIIoldid1220560286 Categories 192 births 238 deaths 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Crisis of the Third Century Roman emperors killed in battle Deified Roman emperors Antonii Gordian dynasty Sons of Roman emperors Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles containing Latinlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 24 April 2024 at 1533 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width