Pupienus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Origins and early career 
2 Reign 
3 Family 
4 References 
5 Sources 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pupienus 61 languages     Bnlmg     Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Hakkng   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Magyar    Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 238 Pupienus Roman emperor Reign AprilMay  JulyAugust 2381 Predecessor Gordian I and II Successor Gordian III Coemperor Balbinus Rival Maximinus until June Born c. 1642 Died 238 aged approx. 74 Rome Italy Issue Detail Titus Clodius Pupienus Pulcher Maximus Marcus Pupienus Africanus Maximus Pupiena Sextia Paulina Cethegilla Names Marcus Clodius Pupienus Maximus3 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Clodius Pupienus Maximus Augustus3 Father  Marcus Pupienus Maximus Mother  Clodia Pulchra Part of a series on Roman imperial dynasties Year of the Six Emperors AD 238 Maximinus Thrax Gordian I and Gordian II Pupienus and Balbinus Gordian III v t e Marcus Clodius Pupienus Maximus c. 164  238 was Roman emperor with Balbinus for 99 days in 238 during the Year of the Six Emperors. The sources for this period are scant and thus knowledge of the emperor is limited. In most contemporary texts he is referred to by his cognomen Maximus rather than by his second nomen family name Pupienus  Classical Latin pupiens.45 Origins and early careeredit The Historia Augusta whose testimony is not to be trusted unreservedly paints Pupienus as an example of advancement through the cursus honorum due to military success. It claims he was the son of a blacksmith was adopted by one Pescennia Marcellina otherwise unknown and who started his career as a Centurio primus pilus before becoming a tribunus militum and then a praetor. Pupienuss career was allegedly impressive serving a number of important posts during the reign of the Severan dynasty throughout the late 
2 nd and early 
3 rd centuries. This included assignment as Proconsul of the senatorial propraetorial provinces of Bithynia et Pontus Achaea and Gallia Narbonensis.6 In fact Pupienus was part of the aristocracy albeit a minor member and his family had possibly been elevated only recently.7 Hailing from the Etruscan city of Volterra8 it has been speculated that Pupienus was the son of Marcus Pupienus Maximus a senator who was the first member of his family to enter the Senate and wife Clodia Pulchra.9 The claim in the Historia Augusta that Pupienus held three praetorian proconsular governorships is unlikely. For one thing as Bernard Rmy points out during Pupienus lifetime the province of Bithynia et Pontus was an imperial one governed by an imperial legatus. Remy points out another problem that being awarded three praetorian proconsular governorships violates what is known of Roman practice and lacks any similar cases. Remy pointedly quotes the opinion of Andr Chastagnol who recommended to admit an information provided by the Augustan History only if it is confirmed by another document and considers that faced with such an unreliable source one must permit methodical doubt and hypercritical attitude to prevail.10 After his consulship around the year 222 his cursus honorum is much more reliable. Pupienus was later assigned as imperial legate to one of the German provinces most probably after his first suffect consulship circa 207 AD.11 While governor he scored military victories over the Sarmatians and German tribes. At some point after he concluded his duties in the German province the sortition awarded him proconsular governorship of Asia.12 In 234 during the last years of Severus Alexanders reign he was installed as consul for the second time. In that same year he was also appointed Urban Prefect of Rome and gained a reputation for severity to the extent that he became unpopular with the Roman mob.13 Reignedit When Gordian I and his son were proclaimed emperors in Africa the Senate appointed a committee of twenty men including the elderly senator Pupienus to coordinate operations against Maximinus Thrax until the arrival of the Gordians.14 On the news of the Gordians defeat and deaths however the Senate met in closed session in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus and voted for two members of the committee to be installed as coemperors Pupienus and Balbinus.11 Unlike the situation in 161 both emperors were elected as pontifices maximi chief priests of the official cults.15 According to Edward Gibbon drawing on the narratives of Herodian and the Historia Augusta the choice was sensible as the mind of Maximus Pupienus was formed in a rougher mould than that of Balbinus. By his valour and abilities he had raised himself from the meanest origin to the first employments of the state and army. His victories over the Sarmatians and the Germans the austerity of his life and the rigid impartiality of his justice whilst he was prefect of the city commanded the esteem of a people whose affections were engaged in favour of the more amiable Balbinus. The two colleagues had both been consul... and since the one was sixty and the other seventyfour years old they had both attained the full maturity of age and experience.16 Denarius of Pupienus. Inscription IMP C M CLOD PUPIENUS AUG However factions within the Senate who had hoped to profit from the accession of the Gordians manipulated the people and the Praetorian Guard to agitate for the elevation of Gordian III as their imperial colleague.17 Leaving his senior colleague Balbinus in charge of the civil administration at Rome sometime during late April Pupienus marched to Ravenna where he oversaw the campaign against Maximinus recruiting German auxiliary troops who had served under him whilst he was in Germania.11 After Maximinus was assassinated by his soldiers just outside Aquileia Pupienus dispatched both Maximinus troops and his own back to their provinces along with a considerable donative and returned to Rome with his newly acquired German bodyguard.18 Balbinus in the meantime had failed to keep public order in the capital. The sources suggest that Balbinus suspected Pupienus of using his German bodyguard to supplant him and they were soon living in different parts of the Imperial palace.19 This meant that they were at the mercy of disaffected elements in the Praetorian Guard who resented serving under Senateappointed emperors and now plotted to kill them.20 Pupienus becoming aware of the threat begged Balbinus to call for the German bodyguard. Balbinus believing that this news was part of a plot by Pupienus to have him assassinated refused and the two began to argue just as the Praetorians burst into the room. Both emperors were seized and dragged back to the Praetorian barracks where they were tortured and hacked to death in the bath house.11 They only ruled 99 days.212223 Familyedit Three individuals have been identified as his children. Titus Clodius Pupienus Pulcher Maximus consul suffectus c. 235 and patron of the town of Tibur outside Rome has been identified as his oldest son.24 Marcus Pupienus Africanus Maximus consul ordinarius in 236 as the colleague of the Emperor Maximinus Thrax has been identified as his youngest son.25 These consulships in the family across the reigns of Severus Alexander and Maximinus Thrax suggest that the family was influential and in high favour. Pupienus also had a daughter named Pupiena Sextia Paulina Cethegilla wife of Marcus Ulpius Eubiotus Leurus.26 Quintus Tineius Sacerdos Clemens consul ordinarius Marcus Pupienus Maximus Quintus Tineius Clemens consul ordinarius Quintius Tineius Rufus consul 182 Quintus Tineius Sacerdos consul suffectus  Volusia Laodice Pupienus Roman Emperor 238  Sextia Cethegilla Marcus Ulpius Leurus senator Maximinus Thrax Roman Emperor 235238  Caecilia Paulina Gordian I Roman Emperor 238 Tineia Titus Clodius Pupienus Pulcher Maximus consul suffectus Marcus Pupienus Africanus Maximus consul ordinarius  Cornelia Marullina Pupiena Sextia Paulina Cethegilla Marcus Ulpius Eubiotus Leurus suffect consul Gaius Julius Verus Maximus caesar Gordian II Roman emperor 238 Antonia Gordiana Lucius Clodius Tineius Pupienus Bassus proconsul  Ovinia Paterna Balbinus Roman emperor 238 Gordian III Roman Emperor 238244 Referencesedit  For length stimations see Rea J.R. 1972. O. Leid. 144 and the Chronology of A.D. 238. ZPE 9 119. No contemporary or later sources give any definitive conclusion.  Zonaras c. 1120 Epitome xvii.17. Pupienus Maximus was seventyfour years old Albinus sixty. According to some they reigned about twentytwo days referring to Gordian I and Gordian II but according to others not quite three months.  a b Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 497. ISBN 9780521840262.  Association American Philological 13 May 1940. Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association. Association  via Google Books.  Webster Noah 13 May 1852. A dictionary of the English language. To which are added a synopsis of words differently pronounced and Walkers Key to the classical pronunciation of Greek Latin and Scripture proper names. Revised and enlarged by C.A. Goodrich  via Google Books.  Historia Augusta Maximus and Balbinus 518  John Drinkwater Maximinus to Diocletian and the crisis in The Cambridge ancient history The crisis of empire A.D. 193337 ed. Alan K. Bowman Peter Garnsey Averil Cameron 2005 p. 32  Michel Christol Lempire romain du IIIe sicle histoire politique 1997 p. 114  Christian Settipani Continuit gentilice et continuit familiale dans les familles snatoriales romaines  lpoque impriale mythe et ralit 2000 pg. 120  Note that this speculation is based upon onomastic similarities and probabilities  Bernard Rmy Les carrires snatoriales dans les provinces romaines dAnatolie au HautEmpire 31 av. J.C.  284 ap. J.C. Istanbul Institut Franais dtudes AnatoliennesGeorges Dumzil 1989 p. 120  a b c d McMahon Pupienus 238 A.D. and Balbinus 238 A.D.  Paul M. M. Leunissen Konsuln und Konsulare in der Zeit von Commodus bis Severus Alexander Amsterdam J.C. Gieben 1989 p. 227  Christopher S. Mackay Ancient Rome a military and political history 2004 pg. 268  Potter pg. 169  Christer Bruun J. C. Edmondson 2015. The Oxford Handbook of Roman Epigraphy. Oxford University Press. p. 191. ISBN 9780195336467.  Gibbon Edward Milman Henry Hart 7 June 2008. VII Tyranny Of Maximin Rebellion Civil Wars Death Of Maximin  Part II. In Widger David ed.. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman EmpireTable of Contents with links in the HTML file to the two Project Gutenberg editions 12 volumes.  John Drinkwater Maximinus to Diocletian and the crisis in The Cambridge ancient history The crisis of empire A.D. 193337 ed. Alan K. Bowman Peter Garnsey Averil Cameron 2005 pgs. 33  McMahon Pupienus 238 A.D. and Balbinus 238 A.D. Southern pg. 67  Potter pg. 171  Michael Grant The collapse and recovery of the Roman Empire 1999 pgs. 56  Filocalus Chronograph of 354 Part 16 Pupienus and Balbinus ruled 99 days. They gave a largess of 250 denarii. They were killed at Rome.  Chronicon Paschale 
7 th century. s.a. 238. Publius Pupienus obtained the throne and was likewise slain after a hundred days.  Laterculus Imperatorum Malalianus 
7 th century Pulpius Pupienus reigned 3 months  Ronald Syme Historia Augusta papers 1983 pg. 194  Syme Emperors and biography studies in the Historia Augusta Oxford Clarendon Press 1971 p. 174  Syme Emperors and biography pp. 1
73 f Sourcesedit Meckler David Stone 2001. Pupienus 238 A.D. and Balbinus 238 A.D.. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Potter David S. 2004. The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395. Routledge. ISBN 0415100585.. Southern Pat 2001. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine. London New York Routledge. ISBN 9780415239431. OCLC 46421874. External linksedit Listen to this article 7 minutes This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 4 September 2023 20230904 and does not reflect subsequent edits. Audio help  More spoken articles Media related to Pupienus at Wikimedia Commons Regnal titles Preceded by Gordian I Gordian II Maximinus Thrax Roman emperor 238 With Balbinus Succeeded by Gordian III Political offices Preceded by L. Valerius Maximus Gnaeus Cornelius Paternus Roman consul 234 with Marcus Munatius Sulla Urbanus Succeeded by Gnaeus Claudius Severus Lucius Titus Claudius Quintianus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePupienusoldid1221516654 Categories 1
60 s births 238 deaths Clodii Crisis of the Third Century 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Imperial Roman praetors Pupieni Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Pages with Classical Latin IPA Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 30 April 2024 at 1156 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width