Decius - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life and rise to power 
2 Political and monumental initiatives Toggle Political and monumental initiatives subsection 
2.1 Reviving the censorship 
2.2 Baths of Decius 
3 Persecution of Christians 
4 Fighting the Goths and death Toggle Fighting the Goths and death subsection 
4.1 The Goths enter the Balkans 
4.2 Battle of Abritus 
5 Legacy 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 Sources 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Decius 70 languages  Aragons Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego Hakkng  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Latvieu Magyar  Malagasy   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan  Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 249 to 251 This article is about the Roman emperor. For other uses see Decius. Not to be confused with Decentius. Decius Roman emperor Reign September 249  June 251 Predecessor Philip the Arab Successor Trebonianus Gallus Coemperor Herennius Etruscus Born c. 201 Budalia Illyricum modern day Serbia Died 251 aged 4950 Abrittus Moesia Inferior Spouse Herennia Etruscilla Issue Herennius Etruscus Hostilian Names Gaius Messius Quintus Decius Valerinus1 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Gaius Messius Quintus Traianus Decius Augustus Religion Ancient Roman religion Gaius Messius Quintus Trajanus Decius c. 201  June 251 known as Trajan Decius or simply Decius was Roman emperor from 249 to 251. A distinguished politician during the reign of Philip the Arab Decius was proclaimed emperor by his troops after putting down a rebellion in Moesia. In 249 he defeated and killed Philip near Verona and was recognized as emperor by the Senate afterwards. During his reign he attempted to strengthen the Roman state and its religion leading to the Decian persecution where a number of prominent Christians including Pope Fabian were put to death. In the last year of his reign Decius coruled with his son Herennius Etruscus until they were both killed by the Goths in the Battle of Abritus. Early life and rise to poweredit Antoninianus of Trajan Decius. Inscription IMP. C. M. Q. TRAIANVS DECIVS AVG. Trajanus Decius was born Gaius Messius Quintus Decius Valerinus at Budalia Illyricum near Sirmium in Pannonia Inferior.2 Decius was one of the first among a long succession of Roman emperors Illyrian emperors to originate from the Danube provinces often referred to as Illyricum. Unlike some of his immediate imperial predecessors such as Philip the Arab or Maximinus Thrax who did not have extensive administrative experience before assuming the throne Decius was a distinguished senator who had served as suffect consul in 232 had been governor of Moesia and Germania Inferior soon afterwards served as governor of Hispania Tarraconensis between 235 and 238 and was urban prefect of Rome during the early reign of Emperor Philip the Arab.3 Around 245 Philip entrusted Decius with an important command on the Danube.4 By the end of 248 or 249 Decius was sent to quell the revolt of Pacatian and his troops in Moesia and Pannonia some modern historians see this rebellion as a reflection of emerging Balkan separatism.5 After the collapse of the revolt Decius let the troops proclaim him emperor. Philip advanced against him and was killed at Verona Italy in September 2
49.6  The Senate then recognized Decius as emperor giving him the attribute Traianus in reference to Emperor Trajan. According to the Byzantine historian Zosimus Decius was clothed in purple and forced to undertake the burdens of government despite his reluctance and unwillingness.7 Political and monumental initiativesedit Decius political program was focused on the restoration of the strength of the State both militarily opposing the external threats and restoring the public piety with a program of renovation of the state religion. Reviving the censorshipedit Either as a concession to the Senate or perhaps with the idea of improving public morality Decius endeavoured to revive the separate office and authority of the censor. The choice was left to the Senate who unanimously selected Valerian the future emperor. But Valerian well aware of the dangers and difficulties attached to the office at such a time declined the responsibility. The invasion of the Goths and Decius death put an end to the abortive attempt.8 Baths of Deciusedit Main article Baths of Decius During his reign he proceeded with several building projects in Rome including the Thermae Decianae Baths of Decius in the Aventine which were completed in 252 and survived through to the 
16 th century Decius also repaired the Colosseum which had been damaged by lightning strikes.3 Persecution of Christiansedit Main article Decian persecution Further information Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire  Decius A marble statue of Emperor Decius dressed as Hercules discovered on the 25 January 2023 during sewer repair works in Rome.9 In late 249 Decius had issued one of the most remarkable Roman imperial edicts. From the numerous surviving texts from Egypt recording the act of sacrifice it appears that the edict itself was fairly clear10 All the inhabitants of the empire were required to sacrifice before the magistrates of their community for the safety of the empire by a certain day the date would vary from place to place and the order may have been that the sacrifice had to be completed within a specified period after a community received the edict. When they sacrificed they would obtain a certificate libellus recording the fact that they had complied with the order. That is the certificate would testify the sacrificants loyalty to the ancestral gods and to the consumption of sacrificial food and drink as well as the names of the officials who were overseeing the sacrifice.10 D. S. Potter The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395 According to D. S. Potter Decius did not try to impose the superiority of the Roman pantheon over any other gods. It is very probable that the edict was an attempt to legitimize his position and to respond to a general unease provoked by the passing of the Roman millennium.11 While Decius himself may have intended the edict as a way to reaffirm his conservative vision of the Pax Romana and to reassure Romes citizens that the empire was still secure it nevertheless sparked a terrible crisis of authority as various Christian bishops and their flocks reacted to it in different ways.12 Measures were first taken demanding that the bishops and officers of the church make a sacrifice for the emperor. The sacrifice was on behalf of Latin pro the emperor not to the emperor since a living emperor was not considered divine. Certificates were issued to those who satisfied the commissioners during the persecution of Christians under Decius. Fortysix such certificates have been published all dating from 250 four of them from Oxyrhynchus.13 Anyone including Christian followers who refused to offer a sacrifice for the emperor and the Empires wellbeing by a specified date risked torture and execution.14 A number of prominent Christians did in fact refuse to make a sacrifice and were killed in the process including Pope Fabian himself in 250 and antiChristian feelings led to killings at Carthage and Alexandria.14 However towards the end of the second year of Decius reign the ferocity of the antiChristian persecution had eased off and the earlier tradition of tolerance had begun to reassert itself.14 Christians bore the brunt of the persecution and never forgot the reign of Decius whom they remembered as that fierce tyrant.14 In June 251 Decius died alongside his coemperor Herennius Etruscus in the Battle Abrittus against the Goths their successors Trebonianus Gallus and Hostilian rescinded Deciuss decree ending the persecution after approximately eighteen months. Bronze head of Decius from the former Colonia Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa. National Museum of Romanian History Bucharest. At this time there was a second outbreak of the Antonine Plague which at its height from 251 to 266 took the lives of 5000 daily in Rome. This outbreak is referred to as the Plague of Cyprian Cyprian was the bishop of Carthage where both the plague and the persecution of Christians were especially severe. Cyprians biographer Pontius gave a vivid picture of the demoralizing effects of the plague and Cyprian moralized the event in his essay De mortalitate. In Carthage the Decian persecution unleashed at the onset of the plague sought out Christian scapegoats. Decius edicts were renewed under Valerian in 253 and repealed under his son Gallienus in 260261. Fighting the Goths and deathedit The Gothic Invasions of 250251 AD See also Gothic War 248253 The Goths enter the Balkansedit The barbarian incursions into the Empire were becoming more daring and frequent whereas the Empire was facing a serious economic crisis in Decius time. During his brief reign Decius engaged in important operations against the Goths who crossed the Danube to raid districts of Moesia and Thrace.8 This is the first considerable occasion that the Goths  who would later come to play such an important role  appear in the historical record. The Goths under King Cniva were surprised by the emperor while besieging Nicopolis on the Danube the Goths fled through the difficult terrain of the Balkans but then doubled back and surprised the Romans near Bero modern Stara Zagora sacking their camp and dispersing the Roman troops Battle of Beroe. The Goths then moved to attack Philippopolis modern Plovdiv which fell into their hands.4 The governor of Thrace Titus Julius Priscus declared himself emperor under Gothic protection in opposition to Decius but Priscuss challenge was rendered moot when he was killed soon afterwards.3 Then the invaders began returning to their homeland laden with booty and captives among them many of senatorial rank.15 Battle of Abritusedit Main article Battle of Abritus Coin of Herennius Etruscus. Inscription HER. ETR. MES. DECIVS NOB. C.  CONCORDIA AVG. F In the meantime Decius had returned with his reorganized army accompanied by his son Herennius Etruscus and the general Trebonianus Gallus intending to defeat the invaders and recover the booty. The final engagement the battle of Abritus in which the Goths fought with the courage of despair under the command of Cniva took place during the second week of June 251 on swampy ground in the Ludogorie region in northeastern Bulgaria which merges with Dobruja plateau and the Danube Plain to the north near the small settlement of Abritus2 or Forum Terebronii modern Razgrad.4 Jordanes records that Decius son Herennius Etruscus was killed by an arrow early in the battle and to cheer his men Decius exclaimed Let no one mourn the death of one soldier is not a great loss to the republic. Nevertheless Decius army was entangled in the swamp and annihilated in this battle while he himself was killed on the field of battle.12 As the historian Aurelius Victor relates The Decii i.e. Decius and his son while pursuing the barbarians across the Danube died through treachery at Abritus after reigning two years. ... Very many report that the son had fallen in battle while pressing an attack too boldly that the father however has strenuously asserted that the loss of one soldier seemed to him too little to matter. And so he resumed the war and died in a similar manner while fighting vigorously.16 Aureus of Decius One literary tradition claims that Decius was betrayed by his successor Trebonianus Gallus who was involved in a secret alliance with the Goths but this cannot be substantiated and was most likely a later invention since Gallus felt compelled to adopt Decius younger son Gaius Valens Hostilianus as joint emperor even though the latter was too young to rule in his own right.1718 It is also unlikely that the shattered Roman legions would proclaim as emperor a traitor who was responsible for the loss of so many soldiers from their ranks.19 Decius was the first Roman emperor to die in battle against a foreign enemy.14 Legacyedit See also Seven Sleepers The Decian persecution was the first organized persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire and served as the basis for the Diocletianic Persecution the last major persecution of Christians in the Empire.2021 The later telling of the Seven Sleepers about seven Christian youths from Ephesus who fled the Decian persecution by hiding in a cave walled up by Decius and sleeping for almost 200 years emerged. The Quranic account captured in AlKahf The Cave surah chapter2223 has led to the Persian saying of ahde daqynus age of Decius or daqynus referring to ancient times or a person with outdated views. When something is old and outdated people say this belongs to the age of Decius.24 See alsoedit List of Roman emperors Referencesedit  Cooley p. 498.  a b Lesley Adkins Rot A. Adkins 2004. Handbook to life in ancient Rome. Infobase. p. 28  a b c Scarre 1995 p. 169  a b c Chisholm 1911.  Potter 2004 pp. 63435 n. 106  Potter 2004 pp. 24041  Zosimus New History I.22  a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Decius Gaius Messius Quintus Trajanus. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 7 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 913.  Statue of slain Roman emperor dressed as Hercules found near sewer in Rome  a b Potter 2004 p. 241  Potter 2004 p. 243  a b Decius 249251 AD University of Michigan. Retrieved March 30 2011  Ancient History Sourcebook. Archived from the original on 16 November 2014. Retrieved 26 September 2006.  a b c d e Scarre 1995 p. 170  Wolfram 1988 p. 46  Aurelius Victor Book of the Caesars 29  Scarre 1995 pp. 16869  Southern 2001 p. 308  Potter 2004 p. 247  Decius at the Encyclopdia Britannica  Diocletian. The Free Dictionary.  Allusions  Cultural Literary Biblical and Historical A Thematic Dictionary. The Gale Group. 2008.  Seven Sleepers. CollinsDictionary.com. HarperCollins.  Travel to the Age of Decius. Hamshahri Online in Persian. 13 February 2007. Retrieved 8 August 2019. Sourcesedit Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521840262. Potter David S. The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395 Routledge 2004. ISBN 0415100585 Scarre Chris Chronicle of the Roman Emperors the reignbyreign record of the rulers of Imperial Rome Thames  Hudson 1995. ISBN 0500050775 Southern Pat. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine Routledge 2001. ISBN 0415239435 Wolfram Herwig. History of the Goths transl. by Thomas J. Dunlap University of California Press 1988 ISBN 0520069838 External linksedit Decius at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Trajan Decius on romanemperors.org Regnal titles Preceded by Philip the Arab Roman emperor 249251 With Herennius Etruscus 251 Succeeded by Trebonianus Gallus and Hostilian Political offices Preceded by L. Fulvius Gavius Numisius Aemilianus L. Naevius Aquilinus Roman consul 250251 with Vettius Gratus Herennius Etruscus Succeeded by Trebonianus Gallus Volusianus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Illyrians Tribes Albani Amantes Amantini Ardiaei Docleatai Labeatae Atintanians Autariatae Azali Balaites Baridustae Bassanitae Breuci Bylliones Daesitiates Dalmatae Tariotes Daorsi Dardani Galabri Thuantai Dassaretii Enchelei Eneti Grabaei Iapodes Iapygians Dauni Messapi Peuceti Mazaei Narensi Osseriates Parthini Penestae Pirustae Sardiatae Siculotae Taulantii Abroi People Agron Anastasius I Dicorus Artas of Messapia Astius Audata Aurelian Ballaios Baraliris Bardylis Bardylis II Bato the Breucian Bato the Daesitiate Bato Dardani Bircenna Caeria Caius Caravantius Celer Cleitus Dardani Constantine the Great Constantius Chlorus Constantius II Cynane Dando Demetrius of Pharos Diocletian Eleutherius and Antia Epulon Etuta Flavianus Galaurus Gentius Glaucias of Taulantii Grabos I Grabos II Gratian Gratianus Funarius Irenaeus of Sirmium Jerome Jovian Justin I Justinian I Longarus Marcellinus Comes Monounios Monunius Mytilos Peter the Patrician Pinnes Plator Pleuratus I Pleuratus II Pleuratus III Pleurias Scerdilaidas Sirras Tacitus Teuta Triteuta Valens Valentinian I Valentinian II Political entities ArdiaeanLabeatan Autariatan Dardanian Kingdom Dassaretan Enchelean Illyrian kingdom Taulantian Geography citiessettlements Acruvium Kotor Ad Acroceraunia Ad Quintum Albanopolis Amantia Andetrium Antipatreia Apollonia Arduba Arnissa Aspalathos Split Aulon Bargulum Bassania Berat Bouthoe Brundisium Bushat Byllis Chinna Chrysondyon Creonion Damastion Daorson Lower Neretva Dardana Fortress Delminium Desilo Lower Neretva Dimale Doclea Doracium Dresnik Duboc Dukat DyrrhachiumEpidamnus Durrs Enkelana Epicaria Eugenium Gertus Hedum castellum Hija e Korbit Iader or Idassa Zadar Kinna Kodrion Kratul Lissus Lezh Lofknd Lychnidus Matohasanaj Meteon Mursa Osijek Nareste Nikadin Nikaia Klos Oneum Oria Oricum Palaeste Parthus Pelion Persqopi Petra Pituntium Pogradec Castle Pola Pula Poslishte Promona Rabije Ragusa Rhizon Romaj Runik Salona Salvia Scampa Elbasan Selc e Poshtme Sesarethus Setovia Scodra Shkodr Thronion Tilurium Tragurion Trogir Triport Tsangon Ugento Ulkinium Ulpiana Uscana Vendenis Zgrdhesh  Albanopolis Culture Central Bosnian cultural group Coinage Daunian stele Education Fibulae GlasinacMati culture Gradist beltplate Monte Saraceno woman Pileus Pottery Daunian Desilo Messapian Peucetian Soleto Map Spectacle brooch Tombs BokaPreva Selca e Poshtme Trebenita masks Vae BeltPlate Vae Situla Religion and mythology Religion Andinus Bindus Deipaturos Zojz En Medaurus Perndi Prende Tomorr Nymphaion Swastika Warfare and weaponry Illyrian invasion of Epirus Alexanders Balkan campaign Siege of Pelium DardanianBastarnic war Invasions of Epidamnus IllyroRoman Wars RomanMacedonian wars Battles Erigon Valley Lyncestis Paxos Pharos Phoenice RomanDalmatian wars Caesars civil war Battle of Dyrrhachium 48 BC Batonian War Desilo shipyard Helmet Lembus Liburna Sibyna Sica Sieges Issa Medion Oricum Language Illyrian Proposed vocabulary Roman period Illyrian emperors Dioceses Dacia Illyricum Macedonia Prefectures Illyricum Provinces Dardania Delmatia Epirus Nova Illyricum Macedonia Moesia Superior Pannonia Pannonia Inferior Pannonia Prima Pannonia Savia Pannonia Secunda Pannonia Superior Sirmium Other Illyrology Origin of the Albanians Albanian folk beliefs History of the Balkans Prehistory of Southeastern Europe Lists People Tribes Illyrian tribes Settlements Timeline Category Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Netherlands Poland Vatican Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDeciusoldid1218252256 Categories 201 births 251 deaths 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Decian dynasty Decii Deified Roman emperors 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Messii Roman emperors killed in battle Romans from Moesia Romans from Pannonia Roman governors of Germania Inferior Roman pharaohs Illyrian emperors Damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Articles with Encyclopdia Britannica links CS1 Persianlanguage sources fa Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 10 April 2024 at 1645 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width