Aemilianus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Origins 
2 Military career 
3 Rise 
4 Fall 
5 Notes 
6 References 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Aemilianus 61 languages     Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Hakkng  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Kiswahili Latina Lombard Magyar    Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 253 AD For other uses see Aemilianus disambiguation. Aemilianus Coin featuring Aemilian. Legend imp. aemilianvs pivs fel avg. Roman emperor Reign JuneSeptember 253 Predecessor Trebonianus Gallus and Volusianus Successor Valerian and Gallienus Born c.210 Girba Africa Died September 253 near Spoletium Italy aged approximately 43 Spouse Cornelia Supera Names Marcus Aemilius Aemilianus1 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Aemilius Aemilianus Augustus1 Marcus Aemilius Aemilianus c.210  September 253 also known as Aemilian was Roman emperor for three months in 253. Commander of the Moesian troops he obtained an important victory against the invading Goths and was for this reason acclaimed emperor by his army. He then moved quickly to Roman Italy where he defeated Emperor Trebonianus Gallus at the Battle of Interamna Nahars in August 253 only to be killed by his own men a month later when another general Valerian proclaimed himself emperor and moved against Aemilian with a larger army. Originsedit Cornelia Supera or Supra was the wife of Aemilianus. Legend CORNEL. SVPERA AVG.  VESTA Aemilian was born in the Roman province of Africa. According to the 
4 th century source Epitome de Caesaribus he was born at Girba modern Djerba an island off the coast of Tunisia and was a Moor2 a reference in the same source hints that he was born around 2
07.3  The 
12 thcentury historian Joannes Zonaras who calls him a Libyan rather than a Moor4 and another chronicle of the 
13 th century hold that he was forty at the time of his death in 2
53.5  Regarding his lineage there are two versions both exaggerated while Eutropius and his translator Paeanius probably defame a failed usurper when they say that he was from an insignificant family6 John of Antioch may refer to Aemilians propaganda when he says that the usurper used his ancestry to take power.7 His praenomen and nomen reinforced by his cognomen suggest a descent from a native African who obtained Roman citizenship during the Second Triumvirate in which his land was ruled by Lepidus. Aemilian married Cornelia Supera a woman of African origin the year of their marriage is unknown but since both were from the same place it is possible they married before Aemilian left Africa.8 Military careeredit During the reign of Trebonianus Gallus and his son Volusianus 251253 Aemilian was sent to the Balkans to command an army.9 His primary responsibility was to assure peace along the Danube frontier which had been subject to several attacks by the Goths led by king Cniva. Gallus secured the throne after the death of Emperor Decius at the hands of Cniva in the Battle of Abrittus 251 and later had to manage an outbreak of plague that devastated Rome. He was not popular with the army mainly due to humiliating treaties signed in 251 with the Goths and King Shapur I of Persia who attacked Syria. According to John of Antioch upon his appointment to the Moesian command Aemilian was already envious of Gallus and plotted treachery against him. He was also an opponent of the Roman Senate8 and his seditious plans are confirmed by Jerome and Jordanes.10 Riseedit In 253 the Goths led by king Cniva claimed they had not received the tribute due from the Romans according to the treaty of 251. They crossed the border and attacked Cappadocia Pessinus and Ephesus. Modern historians believe that this missing payment was not a change in Roman policy and the Goths were more likely trying to capitalize on their military prowess.8 Aemilian had command of the army assigned to defend the area but the recent defeat at the Battle of Abrittus put his troops on edge. Aemilian exhorted them reminding them of Roman honor according to Zosimus and promising tribute from the Goths according to Zonaras. The Romans took the Goths by surprise killing most of them followed by an invasion of Goth territory resulting in booty and the liberation of prisoners. The Roman soldiers gathered by Aemilian acclaimed him emperor.411 Jordanes claims however that Aemilians troops plundered Roman territory rather than keep the tribute of the Goths.12 The Flaminian Way here in purple divided into two branches next to modern Terni Aemilian who was descending from north upon Rome defeated Trebonianus Gallus on the eastern branch. With his few men Aemilian left his province unguarded and moved quickly towards Rome to meet the legitimate emperor Gallus before the latter could receive reinforcements. While Aemilian descended upon Rome along the Flaminian Way Gallus and Volusianus had him proclaimed enemy of the State by the Roman senate13 then exited Rome to meet the usurper. This strategy suggests that Aemilians army was smaller than theirs as they probably did not expect reinforcements to come in time but trusted their larger army to win the clash.8 The two armies met at the Battle of Interamna Nahars near modern Terni at the southern end of the eastern branch of the Flaminia and Aemilian won the battle14 Gallus and Volusianus fled to the north with a few followers probably as a delay tactic before the arrival of reinforcements but in August 253 at Forum Flaminii modern San Giovanni Profiamma on the western branch of the Flaminia they were killed by some of their own guards7 who thought that their betrayal could earn them a reward.15 Coin of Aemilian showing at the obverse the god of war Mars a reference to the military virtues of the emperor. Legend IMP. CAES. AEMILIANVS AVG. P. F. AVG.  MARTI PACIF. Aemilian continued towards Rome. The Roman senate after a short opposition16 decided to recognize him as emperor. According to some sources Aemilian then wrote to the Senate promising to fight for the Empire in Thrace and against Persia and to relinquish his power to the Senate of which he considered himself a general.517 Aemilian received the titles of Pius Felix and Pater Patriae the tribunicia potestas and was elevated to the rank of pontifex maximus he was not however elevated to consulate possibly a hint of his nonsenatorial birth.18 His coinage shows that his propaganda focused on his capability as a military commanderhe defeated the Goths when nobody thought this possible and thus he was the right man for the job of restoring the power of the Roman Empire.18 Falledit Valerian governor of the Rhine provinces was on his way south with an army which according to Zosimus had been called in as a reinforcement by Gallus.19 But modern historians believe this army possibly mobilized for an incumbent campaign in the East moved only after Gallus death to support Valerians bid for power.20 Emperor Aemilians men fearful of a civil war and Valerians larger force mutinied. They killed Aemilian at Spoletium21 or at the Sanguinarium bridge between Oriculum and Narnia halfway between Spoletium and Rome and recognized Valerian as the new emperor.22 After Aemilians death which happened between late July and midSeptember a damnatio memoriae against him was declared.81321 It is possible that the usurper Silbannacus was an officer left by Aemilian in Rome before moving against Valerian who later tried to become emperor but then was killed.23 The life and troubled administration of emperor Aemilian was summarized by the Roman historian Eutropius stating that Aemilianus came from an extremely insignificant family his reign was even more insignificant and he was slain in the third month.24 Notesedit  a b Cooley 2012 p. 499.  Epitome de Caesaribus 
31.1 2.  Epitome de Caesaribus 
31.3 .  a b Joannes Zonaras Epitome Historiarum 
12.2 1.  a b Joannes Zonaras Epitome Historiarum 
12.2 2.  Eutropius Breviariun ab Urbe condita 
9.6  Paeanius 
9.6 .  a b John of Antioch fr. 150.  a b c d e Banchich Thomas Marcus Aemilius Aemilianus ca. July  ca. September 253  John of Antioch says he was archon of Moesia fr. 150 Zosimus puts him at the head of the Pannonian units New History i.28 while Joannes Zonaras claims he was commander of the Moesian legions 
12.2 1.  Jerome Chronicon Ol. 258 Jordanes Romana 285.  Zosimus New History i.
28.1 2.  Jordanes Getica 105.  a b Varner 2004 p. 209.  Eutropius 
9.5  Paeanius 
9.5  p. 153 Aurelius Victor 
31.1   Aurelius Victor 
31.1   Aurelius Victor 
31.3 .  Anonymous Continuator of Cassius Dio fr. 2.  a b Richard Beale Roman Imperial Coins of 249253 A.D. Archived 20080720 at the Wayback Machine  Zosimus i.
28.3 .  Potter David S. Prophecy and History in the Crisis of the Roman Empire. Oxford Oxford University Press 1990 p. 322.  a b Potter 2004 p. 252.  Zonaras 
12.2 2 Epitome de Caesaribus 
31.2  Zosimus i.
29.1  Chronographer of 354. Only Aurelius Victor reports Aemilianus death by illness 
31.3 .  Estiot Sylviane Lempereur Silbannacus. Un second antoninien in Revue numismatique 151 1996 pp. 105117.  Eutropius Brevarium ab Urbe condita 
9.6  Referencesedit Banchich Thomas Marcus Aemilius Aemilianus ca. July  ca. September 253 De Imperatoribus Romanis Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521840262. Potter David S. 2004. The Roman Empire at Bay AD 180395. New York Routledge. ISBN 0415100577. Varner Eric R. 2004. Mutilation and Transformation Damnatio Memoriae and Roman Imperial Portraiture. Brill. ISBN 9004135774. External linksedit Media related to Aemilianus at Wikimedia Commons Regnal titles Preceded by Trebonianus Gallus Volusianus Roman emperor 253 Succeeded by Valerian v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Vatican Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAemilianusoldid1215958293 Categories 210 births 253 deaths 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs Crisis of the Third Century Murdered Roman emperors Romans from Africa 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Aemilii Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae Romans from Moesia Roman pharaohs Ancient assassinated people Damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Commons link from Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers This page was last edited on 28 March 2024 at 0509 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width