Carus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 
1.1 Campaign against the Sassanids and death 
2 Legacy 
3 Family tree 
4 See also 
5 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
5.1 Primary Sources 
5.2 Secondary Sources 
6 References 
7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Carus 56 languages     Bnlmg   Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Hakkng  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano    Kiswahili Latina Lombard Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Sicilianu Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 282 to 283 For other uses see Carus disambiguation. Carus Persicus Maximus Aureus of Carus Roman emperor Reign c. September 282  c. July 283 Predecessor Probus Successor Carinus and Numerian Coemperor Carinus 283 Born c. 222 Narbo Gallia Narbonensis Modern day France Died July or August 283 aged 61 Beyond the River Tigris Sasanian Empire Issue Carinus Numerian Paulina Names Marcus Aurelius Numerius Carus possibly1 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius Carus Augustus2 Marcus Aurelius Carus c. 222  July or August 283 was Roman emperor from 282 to 283. During his short reign Carus fought the Germanic tribes and Sarmatians along the Danube frontier with success. He died while campaigning against the Sassanid Empire and is believed to have died of unnatural causes. It was reported that he had been struck by lightning.3 He was succeeded by his sons Carinus and Numerian creating a dynasty which though shortlived provided further stability to the resurgent empire.4 Biographyedit Possible bust of Carus in the Museo Archeologico Ostiense.56 Carus whose name before the accession may have been Marcus Numerius Carus1 was born according to differing accounts either in Gaul Illyricum or Africa.7 Modern scholarship inclines to the former view placing his birth at Narbo modern Narbonne in Gallia Narbonensis89 though he was educated in Rome.10 Little can be said with certainty of his life and rule. Due to the decline of literature the arts and the want of any good historians of that age what is known is almost invariably involved in contradiction and doubt.11 He was apparently a senator12 and filled various posts both civil and military before being appointed praetorian prefect by the emperor Probus in 2
82.1 3 Two traditions surround his accession to the throne in August or September of 282. According to some mostly Latin sources he was proclaimed emperor by the soldiers after the murder of Probus by a mutiny at Sirmium.14 Greek sources however claim that he rose against Probus in Raetia in a usurpation and had him killed.15 Allegedly he initially refused the offer at first out of loyalty but soon accepted.16 The often unreliable Historia Augusta is aware of both traditions although it prefers the former.17 He does not seem to have returned to Rome after his accession contenting himself with an announcement to the Senate.18 This was a marked departure from the constitutionalism of his immediate predecessors Tacitus and Probus who at least outwardly respected the authority of the senate and was the precursor to the even more despotic military autocracy of Diocletian.19 Despite this he still sought to deify the emperor Probus.20 Campaign against the Sassanids and deathedit Panels at Naqshe Rustam symbolizing the supposed victories of Bahram II over Carus top and Hormizd I Kushanshah bottom.21 Carus bestowed the title of Caesar upon his sons Carinus and Numerian2223 then in the beginning of 283 he elevated Carinus to the rank of Augustus leaving him in charge of the western portion of the empire to look after some disturbances in Gaul24 and took Numerian with him on an expedition against the Persians which had been contemplated by Probus.25 During his first campaign as emperor he inflicted a severe defeat on the Quadi and Sarmatians on the Danube26 for which he was given the title Germanicus Maximus.27 Reportedly 16000 Quadi were killed with 20000 being taken prisoner.20 Carus then proceeded through Thrace and Asia Minor annexed Mesopotamia pressed on to Seleucia and Ctesiphon and marched his soldiers beyond the Tigris.2228 The Sassanid King Bahram II limited by internal opposition and his troops occupied with a campaign in modernday Afghanistan could not effectively defend his territory.27 The Sasanians faced with severe internal problems could not mount an effective coordinated defense at the time Carus and his army may have captured the Sasanian capital of Ctesiphon.3 The victories of Carus avenged all the previous defeats suffered by the Romans against the Sassanids and he received the title of Persicus Maximus.29 Romes hopes of further conquest however were cut short by his death Carus died in Sasanian territory probably of unnatural causes as he was reportedly struck by lightning.3 Alternate theories suggest that he died of illness or that a rival for power poisoned him. Another theory hints at the future emperor Diocletian being involved in the killing.20 However Leadbetter considered it unlikely for Carus to be assassinated as his army had just won a victory.30 Legacyedit Like the conquests of Trajan 160 years before Carus gains were immediately relinquished by his successor. His son Numerian naturally of an unwarlike disposition was forced by the army to retreat back over the Tigris.31 The report of the lightning strike was evidently widely accepted in the camp and the superstitious awe of the troops inclined them to ascribe Carus death to the wrath of the Gods. Rumors had been spread of dark oracles affixing the limits of the Empire on the Tigris and threatening destruction against the Roman who should presume beyond the river in arms. Persia was abandoned to her rightful possessors and not till Diocletian a decade later was the Persian contest decided in Romes favor by that emperors decisive victory. In the sphere of civil affairs Carus is remembered principally for the final suppression of the authority of the senate which had been partially restored under Tacitus and Probus. He declined to accept their ratification of his election informing them of the fact by a haughty and distant dispatch. He was the last emperor to have united a civil with a military education in that age when the two were increasingly detached Diocletian Imp. 284305 who succeeded Carus after the brief reign of the latters sons was to confirm and formalize the separation of professions and the autocratic foundation of the imperial rule.32 Though Carus was known throughout his life for his austere and virtuous manners the suspicion of his complicity in Probus death along with his haughty conduct towards the senate tarnished his reputation before his death and Julian as Gibbon observes conspicuously places him among the tyrants of Rome in his catalogue of The Caesars.33 Family treeedit previous Tacitus Roman Emperor 275276 Florianus Roman Emperor 276 Probus Roman Emperor 276282 Carus Roman Emperor 282283 next Diocletian Roman Emperor 284305  Prisca Carinus Roman Emperor 282284 Numerian coemperor 282284 Galeria Valeria See alsoedit Crisis of the Third Century Sourcesedit Primary Sourcesedit Aurelius Victor Epitome de Caesaribus Eutropius Breviarium ab urbe condita Historia Augusta Life of Carus Carinus and Numerian Joannes Zonaras Compendium of History extract Zonaras Alexander Severus to Diocletian 222284 Secondary Sourcesedit Leadbetter William Carus 282283 A.D. DIR Jones A.H.M. J.R. Martindale  J. Morris 1971. The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire Volume 1 A.D. 260395. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521072336. Potter David 2013. Constantine the Emperor. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199755868. Southern Pat. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine Routledge 2001 Gibbon Edward Decline  Fall of the Roman Empire 1888 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Carus Marcus Aurelius. Encyclopdia Britannica 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. Referencesedit  a b Jones pg. 183  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 501. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b c Potter 2013 p. 26.  Leadbetter Bill 2009. Galerius and the Will of Diocletian. London Routledge. p. 39. ISBN 9780203869284. OCLC 503449219.  Portraiture of Emperor Carus. rome101.com. Retrieved 26 March 2023.  Portraitbust of a man perhaps Carus. Ostia Atica. Retrieved 30 June 2023.  Edward Gibbon The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire The Modern Library 1932 ch. XII. p. 292  Victor 381  The tradition that he was one of the socalled Illyrian Emperors based on the unreliable vita Cari embedded in the Augustan History was accepted uncritically by Joseph Scaliger who assumed the other sources were wrong and followed by Edward Gibbon in The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Tom B. Jones A Note on Marcus Aurelius Carus Classical Philology 
37.2  April 1942 pp. 193194.  Historia Augusta Vita Cari 42  Gibbon ibid and ch. XIII. p. 340  Historia Augusta Vita Cari 54  Gibbon ch. XII. p. 292  Jerome Chron. s. a. 282  Zonaras 1229  C Franco 6 September 2020. Roman Emperor Carus  History Cooperative. Retrieved 25 January 2023.  Historia Augusta Vita Cari 61  Southern pg. 132  Gibbon p. 293 and ch. XIII. pp. 328 329  a b c Cavazzi Franco 16 December 2021. Emperor Carus. The Roman Empire. Retrieved 25 January 2023.  Encyclopedia Iranica  a b Zonaras 1230  Victor 382  Gibbon ch. XII. p. 293  Historia Augusta Vita Cari 71  Gibbon p. 294. Enemy casualties are given at over 36000.  a b Leadbetter www.romanemperors.orgcarus.htm  Chisholm 1911.  Southern pg. 133  William Leadbetter Carus 282283 A.D.  Gibbon p. 296  Gibbon ch. XIII. pp. 32833.  Gibbon ch. XII. p. 293 and note. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carus. Further readingedit Altmayer Klaus 2014. Die Herrschaft des Carus Numerianus und Carinus als Vorlufer der Tetrarchie. Historia Einzelschriften. Vol. 230. Stuttgart Franz Steiner. ISBN 9783515106214. Regnal titles Preceded by Probus Roman emperor 282283 With Carinus 283 Succeeded by Carinus Numerian Political offices Preceded by Probus Victorinus Roman consul 283 with Carinus Succeeded by Carinus Numerian v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Netherlands Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCarusoldid1203351327 Categories 222 births 283 deaths 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Crisis of the Third Century 
3 rdcentury praetorian prefects Deaths from lightning strikes Aurelii People of the RomanSasanian Wars Caran dynasty Damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Commons link from Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers This page was last edited on 4 February 2024 at 1813 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width