Aurelian - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Military service Toggle Military service subsection 
2.1 Ulpius Crinitus 
2.2 Under Gallienus 
2.3 Under Claudius 
3 Emperor Toggle Emperor subsection 
3.1 Rise to power 
3.2 The Roman Empire in the 2
70 s 
3.3 Reunification of the empire 

3.3.1 Defending Italy against the Juthungi 

3.3.2 Defeat of the Goths and abandonment of Dacia 

3.3.3 Conquest of the Palmyrene Empire 

3.3.4 Conquest of the Gallic Empire 
3.4 Reforms 

3.4.1 Religious reform 

3.4.2 Felicissimus rebellion and coinage reform 

3.4.3 Food distribution reforms 
4 Death 
5 Legacy 
6 Notes 
7 References Toggle References subsection 
7.1 Primary sources 
7.2 Secondary sources 
8 Further reading 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Aurelian 77 languages Afrikaans  Aragons     Bnlmg     Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego Hakkng   Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano    Kiswahili Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Lombard Magyar    Bahasa Melayu  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 270 to 275 This article is about the Roman emperor. For other uses see Aurelian disambiguation. Aurelian Bust of Aurelian1 formerly identified as Claudius Gothicus.2 Roman emperor Reign 270275 Predecessor Quintillus Successor Tacitus Born 9 September 214  Dacia Ripensis or Sirmium Pannonia Died c. November  275 aged 61 Caenophrurium Thracia Spouse Ulpia Severina Issue 1 daughter Names Lucius Domitius Aurelianusa Regnal name Imperator Caesar Lucius Domitius Aurelianus Augustus Religion Henotheist of Sol Invictus v t e Battles of Aurelian Under Gallienus and Claudius II Lake Benacus Naissus Italian Campaign Placentia Fano Pavia Palmyrene War Tyana Immae Emesa Gallic Campaign Chlons Aurelian Latin Lucius Domitius Aurelianus 9 September c. 214  c. November 275 was a Roman emperor who reigned from 270 to 275 during the Crisis of the Third Century. As emperor he won an unprecedented series of military victories which reunited the Roman Empire after it had nearly disintegrated under the pressure of barbarian invasions and internal revolts. Born in modest circumstances most likely in Moesia Superior he entered the Roman army in 235 and climbed up the ranks. He went on to lead the cavalry of the emperor Gallienus until Gallienus assassination in 268. Following that Claudius Gothicus became emperor until his own death in 270. Claudius brother Quintillus then ruled for three months before Aurelian took the empire for himself. During his reign he defeated the Alamanni after a devastating war. He also defeated the Goths Vandals Juthungi Sarmatians and Carpi. Aurelian restored the Empires eastern provinces after his conquest of the Palmyrene Empire in 273. The following year he conquered the Gallic Empire in the west reuniting the Empire in its entirety. He was also responsible for the construction of the Aurelian Walls in Rome the abandonment of the province of Dacia and monetary reforms attempting to curb the devaluation of the Roman currency. Although Domitian two centuries earlier was the first emperor who had demanded to be officially hailed as dominus et deus master and god these titles never occurred in written form on official documents until the reign of Aurelian.4 His successes were instrumental in ending the crisis earning him the title Restitutor Orbis Restorer of the World. Early lifeedit Many details about Aurelians early life come from the Historia Augusta and are considered unreliable. Comparative research with other sources from his era has rendered some details more secure than others. Aurelian was born on 9 September a date recorded in the Chronograph of 3
54.5  The 
6 thcentury chronicler John Malalas wrote that he died at the age of 61 implying a birth in 2
14.6  However his chronicle is often described as too frequently unreliable7 meaning that his statement may not be completely accurate. The Historia Augusta describes him both as a Pannonian from Sirmium and as a native of Dacia Ripensis which he founded so that he would have been a Moesian. PseudoVictor and John Xiphilinus place his birthplace in an area between Dacia Ripensis and Macedonia overlapping with Dacia Mediterranea. Modern research considers Dacia Ripensis as the more likely region. When he was born this region was part of Moesia Superior. Aurelian was an Illyrian like several other emperors of the late 
3 rd century Illyrian emperors all of whom shared a common military background.8 PseudoVictor describes his father as a colonus tenant farmer who worked the lands of a senator named Aurelius. Aurelians father was probably a veteran of the Roman army. He married the daughter of Aurelius from whom Aurelian received his name via his mother. The Historia Augusta describes her as priestess of Sol whose worship Aurelian promoted as Emperor Sol Invictus.9 These two propositions together with the tradition that the clan Aurelius had been entrusted with the maintenance of that deitys cult in Rome inspired the notion that this could explain the devotion to the sungod that Aurelian was to manifest as emperor. However it seems that this extrapolation of unverifiable facts is now generally accepted as being no more than just that.10 Military serviceedit It is commonly accepted that Aurelian probably joined the army in 235 at around age twenty.5 It is also generally assumed that as a member of the lowest rank of society  albeit a citizenb  he would have enlisted in the ranks of the legions. Saunders suggests that his career is more easily understood if it is assumed that his family was of Roman settler origins with a tradition of military service and that he enlisted as an equestrian.11 This would have opened up for him the tres militia  the three steps of the equestrian military career  one of the routes to higher equestrian office in the Imperial Service.c This could be a more expeditious route to senior military and procuratorial offices than that pursued by exrankers although not necessarily less laborious.d However although Saunderss conjecture as to Aurelians early career is not supported by any evidence other than his nomen which could indicate Italian settler ancestry  and even this is contested  his rise to the highest ranks is more easily understood if he did not have to start from the bottom. His suggestion has not been taken up by other academic authorities. Whatever his origins Aurelian certainly must have built up a very solid reputation for military competence during the tumultuous middecades of the century. To be sure the exploits detailed in the Historia Augusta vita Divi Aureliani while not always impossible are not supported by any independent evidence and one at least is demonstrably an invention typical of that author.12 However he was probably associated with Gallienuss cavalry army and shone as an officer of that elite unit because when he finally emerged in a historically reliable context in the early part of the reign of Claudius II he seems to have been its commander.13 Ulpius Crinitusedit The existence of Ulpius Crinitus has been doubted by many historians.14 If he did exist he would have been a dux of the Illyrian and Thracian legions.15 Ulpius was reportedly born in the city of Italica in modern Spain.16 He took an interest in Aurelians early career.17 Aurelian was reportedly his deputy for a time. When a group of Goths invaded Illyria and Thrace Ulpius had fallen ill so he ordered Aurelian to deal with the invaders. Aurelian was designated as legate of the Third Legion. He used his force of 2500 auxiliaries and the armies of four Germanic chieftains to defeat the Goths in battle. Aurelian used the resources gained from the battles to enrich the provinces. After the battle Crinitus thanked Valerian the emperor at the time for providing him with such a talented deputy.14 Crinitus adopted Aurelian as his heir either voluntarily or possibly through force.18 Emperor Valerian attended the adoption ceremony which took place in the baths of Byzantium.19 Following this Crinitus disappeared from the historical record.1416 A painting showing Ulpius Crinitus alongside Aurelian has been found in the Temple of Sol adding to the veracity of his existence.20 Under Gallienusedit Aurelians successes as a cavalry commander ultimately made him a member of Emperor Gallienus entourage. In 268 Gallienus travelled to Italy and fought Aureolus his former general and now usurper for the throne. Driving Aureolus back into Mediolanum Gallienus promptly besieged his adversary in the city. However during the siege the Emperor was assassinated. One source says Aurelian who was present at the siege participated and supported general Claudius for the purple  which is plausible.21 In 268 or 269 Aurelian and his cavalry participated in the victory of Emperor Gallienus or Emperor Claudius II Gothicus over the Goths at the Battle of Naissus.2223 Aurelian was married to Ulpia Severina about whom little is known. She was from Dacia.24 They are known to have had a daughter together.25 Under Claudiusedit Claudius was proclaimed emperor by the soldiers outside Mediolanum. The new emperor immediately ordered the Senate to deify Gallienus. Next Claudius began to distance himself from those responsible for his predecessors assassination ordering the execution of those directly involved.26 Aureolus was still besieged in Mediolanum and sought reconciliation with the new emperor but Claudius had no sympathy for a potential rival. The emperor had Aureolus killed and one source implicates Aurelian in the deed perhaps even signing the warrant for his death himself.26 During the reign of Claudius Aurelian was promoted rapidly he was given command of the elite Dalmatian cavalry and soon promoted to overall head of the army after the emperor and what had been Emperor Claudius own position before his acclamation.26 The war against Aureolus and the concentration of forces in Italy allowed the Alamanni to break through the Rhaetian limes along the upper Danube. Marching through Raetia and the Alps unhindered they entered northern Italy and began pillaging the area. In early 269 emperor Claudius and Aurelian marched north to meet the Alamanni defeating them at the Battle of Lake Benacus.27 While still dealing with the defeated enemy news came from the Balkans reporting largescale attacks from the Heruli Goths Gepids and Bastarnae.27 Claudius immediately dispatched Aurelian to the Balkans to contain the invasion as best he could until Claudius could arrive with his main army.28 The Goths were besieging Thessalonica when they heard of emperor Claudius approach causing them to abandon the siege and pillage northeastern Macedonia. Aurelian intercepted the Goths with his Dalmatian cavalry and defeated them in a series of minor skirmishes killing as many as three thousand of the enemy. Aurelian continued to harass the enemy driving them northward into Upper Moesia where emperor Claudius had assembled his main army. The ensuing battle was indecisive the northward advance of the Goths was halted but Roman losses were heavy.28 Claudius could not afford another pitched battle so he instead laid a successful ambush killing thousands. However the majority of the Goths escaped and began retreating south the way they had come. For the rest of year Aurelian harassed the enemy with his Dalmatian cavalry.29 Ruins of Imperial Palace at Sirmium today in Sremska Mitrovica Now stranded in Roman territory the Goths lack of provisions began to take its toll. Aurelian sensing his enemies desperation attacked them with the full force of his cavalry killing many and driving the remainder westward into Thrace.29 As winter set in the Goths retreated into the Haemus Mountains only to find themselves trapped and surrounded. The harsh conditions now exacerbated their shortage of food. However the Romans underestimated the Goths and let their guard down allowing the enemy to break through their lines and escape. Apparently emperor Claudius ignored advice perhaps from Aurelian and withheld the cavalry and sent in only the infantry to stop their breakout. The determined Goths killed many of the oncoming infantry and were only prevented from slaughtering them all when Aurelian finally charged in with his Dalmatian cavalry. The Goths still managed to escape and continued their march through Thrace.29 The Roman army continued to follow the Goths during the spring and summer of 270. Meanwhile a devastating plague swept through the Balkans killing many soldiers in both armies. Emperor Claudius fell ill on the march to the battle and returned to his regional headquarters in Sirmium leaving Aurelian in charge of operations against the Goths.29 Aurelian used his cavalry to great effect breaking the Goths into smaller groups which were easier to handle. By late summer the Goths were defeated any survivors were stripped of their animals and booty and were levied into the army or settled as farmers in frontier regions.29 Aurelian had no time to relish his victories in late August news arrived from Sirmium that emperor Claudius was dead.30 Emperoredit This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. March 2021 Learn how and when to remove this message Rise to poweredit When Claudius died his brother Quintillus seized power with support of the Senate. With an act typical of the Crisis of the Third Century the army refused to recognize the new emperor preferring to support one of its own commanders Aurelian was proclaimed emperor about August or September3132 older sources argue for May33 by the legions in Sirmium. Aurelian defeated Quintillus troops and was recognized as emperor by the Senate after Quintillus death. The claim that Aurelian was chosen by Claudius on his death bed34 can be dismissed as propaganda later probably in 272 Aurelian put his own dies imperii at the day of Claudius death thus implicitly considering Quintillus a usurper.35 With his base of power secure he now turned his attention to Romes greatest problems  recovering the vast territories lost over the previous two decades and reforming the res publica. The Roman Empire in the 2
70 sedit Aurelian was a military commander and during his reign he tried to keep legions fidelity this coin celebrated the CONCORDIA MILITVM concord of the soldiers  in other words harmony between the emperor and the military. Legend IMP. C. AVRELIANVS AVG.  CONCORDIA MILITVM  XXIQ mint In 248 Emperor Philip the Arab had celebrated the millennium of the city of Rome with great and expensive ceremonies and games and the Empire had given a tremendous proof of selfconfidence.36 In the following years however the Empire had to face a huge pressure from external enemies while at the same time dangerous civil wars threatened the empire from within with usurpers weakening the strength of the state. Also the economic substrate of the state agriculture and commerce suffered from the disruption caused by the instability. On top of this an epidemic swept through the Empire around 250 greatly diminishing manpower37 both for the army and for agriculture. The end result was that the Empire could not endure the blow of the capture of Emperor Valerian in 260 by the Sassanids. The eastern provinces found their protectors in the rulers of the city of Palmyra in Syria whose autonomy grew until the formation of the Palmyrene Empire which was successful in defending against the Sassanid threat. The western provinces those facing the limes of the Rhine seceded to form a third autonomous state within the territories of the Roman Empire which is now known as the Gallic Empire. In Rome the Emperor was occupied with internal menaces to his power and with the defence of Italia and the Balkans. Reunification of the empireedit The first actions of the new Emperor were aimed at strengthening his own position in his territories. Late in 270 Aurelian campaigned in northern Italia against the Vandals Juthungi and Sarmatians expelling them from Roman territory. To celebrate these victories Aurelian was granted the title of Germanicus Maximus.38 The authority of the Emperor was challenged by several usurpersSeptimius Urbanus Domitianus and the rebellion of Felicissimuswho tried to exploit the sense of insecurity of the empire and the overwhelming influence of the armies in Roman politics. Aurelian being an experienced commander was aware of the importance of the army and his propaganda known through his coinage shows he wanted the support of the legions.35 Defending Italy against the Juthungiedit The Porta Asinaria a gate in the Aurelian Walls The burden of the northern barbarians was not yet over however. In 271 the Alamanni moved towards Italia entering the Po plain and sacking the villages they passed the Po River occupied Placentia and moved towards Fano. Aurelian who was in Pannonia to control the Vandals withdrawal quickly entered Italia but his army was defeated in an ambush near Placentia January 271. When the news of the defeat arrived in Rome it caused great fear for the arrival of the barbarians but Aurelian attacked the Alamanni camping near the Metaurus River defeating them in the Battle of Fano and forcing them to recross the Po river Aurelian finally routed them at Pavia. For this he received the title Germanicus Maximus. However the menace of the Germanic people and a Germanic invasion was still perceived by the Romans as likely therefore Aurelian resolved to build a new system of walls around Rome that became known as the Aurelian Walls.39 Defeat of the Goths and abandonment of Daciaedit The emperor led his legions to the Balkans where he defeated and routed the Goths beyond the Danube killing the Gothic leader Cannabaudes and assuming the title of Gothicus Maximus. However he decided to abandon the province of Dacia on the exposed north bank of the Danube as it was too difficult and expensive to defend. He reorganized a new province of Dacia south of the Danube inside the former Moesia called Dacia Aureliana with Serdica as the capital.40 Conquest of the Palmyrene Empireedit The Roman Empire by 271 A.D before the reconquest of the Palmyrene Empire and the Gallic Empire by Aurelian The route of Aurelians campaign against Palmyra. In 272 Aurelian turned his attention to the lost eastern provinces of the empire the Palmyrene Empire ruled by Queen Zenobia from the city of Palmyra.41 Zenobia had carved out her own empire encompassing Syria Palestine Egypt and large parts of Asia Minor. The Syrian queen cut off Romes shipments of grain and in a matter of weeks the Romans started running low on bread. In the beginning Aurelian had been recognized as Emperor while Vaballathus the son of Zenobia held the title of rex and imperator king and supreme military commander but Aurelian decided to invade the eastern provinces as soon as he felt his army to be strong enough. Asia Minor was recovered easily every city but Byzantium and Tyana surrendered to him with little resistance. The fall of Tyana lent itself to a legend Aurelian to that point had destroyed every city that resisted him but he spared Tyana after having a vision of the great 
1 stcentury philosopher Apollonius of Tyana whom he respected greatly in a dream. Apollonius implored Aurelian if you desire to rule abstain from the blood of the innocent Aurelian if you will conquer be merciful42 Aurelian spared Tyana and it paid off many more cities submitted to him upon seeing that the Emperor would not exact revenge upon them. Within six months his armies stood at the gates of Palmyra which surrendered when Zenobia tried to flee to the Sassanid Empire. Aurelian and the personification of Sol defeat the Palmyrene Empire and celebrates ORIENS AVG  oriens Augusti the rising sunstar of Augustus. Legend IMP. AVRELIANVS AVG.  ORIENS AVG.  XIR. Eventually Zenobia and her son were captured and made to walk the streets of Rome in his triumph the woman in golden chains. With the grain stores once again shipped to Rome Aurelians soldiers handed out free bread to the citizens of the city and the Emperor was hailed a hero by his subjects. After a brief clash with the Persians and another in Egypt against the usurper Firmus Aurelian was obliged to return to Palmyra in 273 when that city rebelled once more. This time Aurelian allowed his soldiers to sack the city and Palmyra never recovered. More honors came his way he was now known as Parthicus Maximus and Restitutor Orientis Restorer of the East.35 The rich province of Egypt was also recovered by Aurelian. The Brucheion Royal Quarter in Alexandria was burned to the ground. This section of the city once contained the Library of Alexandria although the extent of the surviving Library in Aurelians time is uncertain. Conquest of the Gallic Empireedit In 274 the victorious emperor turned his attention to the west and the Gallic Empire which had already been reduced in size by Claudius II. Aurelian won this campaign largely through diplomacy the Gallic Emperor Tetricus was willing to abandon his throne and allow Gaul and Britain to return to the Empire but could not openly submit to Aurelian. Instead the two seem to have conspired so that when the armies met at the Battle of Chlons at Durocatalaunum that autumn Tetricus simply deserted to the Roman camp and Aurelian easily defeated the Gallic army facing him.4344 Tetricus was rewarded for his collusion by Aurelian who made him a senator and corrector governor of Lucania et Bruttium. A Radiate of Aurelian obverse. Legend IMP. AVRELIANVS AVG. A Radiate of Aurelian reverse. Legend ORIENS AVG.  EXXI. Aurelian returned to Rome and won his last honorific from the Senate  Restitutor Orbis Restorer of the World. This title was first assumed by Aurelian in late summer of 272 and had been carried previously by both Valerian and Gallienus.24 In four years Aurelian had secured the frontiers of the Empire and reunified it.citation needed Reformsedit Aurelian was a reformer and settled many important functions of the imperial apparatus dealing with the economy and religion. He restored many public buildings reorganized the management of the food reserves set fixed prices for the most important goods and prosecuted misconduct by the public officers.45 Religious reformedit Aurelian strengthened the position of the Sun god Sol Invictus as the main divinity of the Roman pantheon. His intention was to give to all the peoples of the Empire civilian or soldiers easterners or westerners a single god they could believe in without betraying their own gods. The centre of the cult was a new temple built in 274 and dedicated on December 2546 of that year in the Campus Agrippae in Rome with great decorations financed by the spoils of the Palmyrene Empire. During his short rule Aurelian seemed to follow the principle of one faith one empire which would not be made official until the Edict of Thessalonica. He appears with the title deus et dominus natus God and born ruler on some of his coins a style also later adopted by Diocletian. Lactantius argued that Aurelian would have outlawed all the other gods if he had had enough time. He was recorded by Christian historians as having organized persecutions.47484950 Felicissimus rebellion and coinage reformedit Aurelians reign records the only uprising of mint workers. The rationalis Felicissimus a senior public financial official whose responsibilities included supervision of the mint at Rome revolted against Aurelian. The revolt seems to have been caused by the fact that the mint workers and Felicissimus first were accustomed to stealing the silver for the coins and producing coins of inferior quality. Aurelian wanted to eliminate this and put Felicissimus on trial. The rationalis incited the mint workers to revolt the rebellion spread in the streets even if it seems that Felicissimus was killed immediately presumably executed. The Palmyrene rebellion in Egypt had probably reduced the grain supply to Rome thus disaffecting the population to the emperor. This rebellion also had the support of some senators probably those who had supported the election of Quintillus and thus had something to fear from Aurelian. Aurelian ordered the cohortes urbanae urban cohorts reinforced by some regular troops of the imperial army to attack the rebelling mob the resulting battle fought on the Caelian hill marked the end of the revolt even if at a high price some sources give the figure probably exaggerated of 7000 casualties.45 Many of the rebels were executed also some of the supporting senators were put to death. The mint of Rome was closed temporarily and the institution of several other mints caused the main mint of the empire to lose its hegemony.51 His monetary reformation included the introduction of antoniniani containing 5 silver. They bore the mark XXI or its Greek numeral form KA which meant that twenty of such coins would contain the same silver quantity of an old silver denarius.
52 e Considering that this was an improvement over the previous situation gives an idea of the severity of the economic situation Aurelian faced. The Emperor struggled to introduce the new good coin by recalling all the old bad coins before their introduction.35 A very large number of rare gold coins of Aurelian have been discovered as part of the Lava Treasure in Corsica France in the 19
80 s.53 Food distribution reformsedit Rome had been distributing grain to its poorest citizens at a reduced price since 123 BC and for free since 58 BC through the Cura Annonae. Aurelian is usually credited with changing or completing the change of the food distribution system from grain or flour to bread and adding olive oil salt and pork to the products distributed to the populace. These products had been distributed sporadically before. Aurelian is also credited with increasing the size of the loaves of bread without increasing their price  a measure that was undoubtedly popular with the Romans who were not receiving free bread and other products through the dole.54 Aurelian is believed to have terminated Trajans alimenta program. Roman prefect Titus Flavius Postumius Quietus was the last known official in charge of the alimenta in 271. If Aurelian did suppress this food distribution system he most likely intended to put into effect a more radical reform. Indeed around this time Aurelian reformed the Cura Annonae to replace the dole of grain by a dole of bread salt and pork as well as subsidized prices for other goods such as oil and wine.55 Deathedit Aureus of Aurelian. The deaths of the Sassanid Kings Shapur I 272 and Hormizd I 273 in quick succession and the rise to power of a weakened ruler Bahram I presented an opportunity to attack the Sassanid Empire and in 275 Aurelian set out for another campaign against the Sassanids. On his way he suppressed a revolt in Gaul  possibly against Faustinus an officer or usurper of Tetricus  and defeated barbarian marauders in Vindelicia Germany. However Aurelian never reached Persia as he was murdered while waiting in Thrace to cross into Asia Minor. As an administrator he had been strict and had handed out severe punishments to corrupt officials or soldiers. A secretary of his called Eros by Zosimus had told a lie on a minor issue. In fear of what the emperor might do he forged a document listing the names of high officials marked by the emperor for execution and showed it to collaborators. The notarius Mucapor and other highranking officers of the Praetorian Guard fearing punishment from the emperor murdered him shortly after October 275 Tacitus began his reign in November or December in Caenophrurium Thrace.5631 Aurelians enemies in the Senate briefly succeeded in passing damnatio memoriae on the emperor but this was reversed before the end of the year and Aurelian like his predecessor Claudius II was deified as Divus Aurelianus. There is some evidence that Aurelians wife Ulpia Severina who had been declared Augusta in 274 ruled the empire in her own right for some time after his death although this is just speculative.5725 Sources hint at an interregnum between Aurelians death and the election of Marcus Claudius Tacitus as his successor. Additionally some of Ulpias coins appear to have been minted after Aurelians death.25 Legacyedit The city of Orlans in France is named after Aurelian. Originally named Cenabum Aurelian rebuilt and renamed it Aurelianum or Aureliana Civitas city of Aurelian cit dAurlien which evolved into Orlans. The city of New Orleans in French La NouvelleOrlans in Latin Nova Aurelianum in Louisiana United States is named after the commune of Orlans and therefore by extension Aurelian.58 Notesedit  His full name with honorific and victory titles was Imperator Caesar Lucius Domitius Aurelianus pius felix invictus Augustus pontifex maximus Germanicus maximus Gothicus maximus Parthicus maximus Carpicus maximus tribunicia potestate VI consul III imperator pater patriae proconsul restitutor orbis.3  Had Aurelians family been enfranchised by virtue of the Constitutio Antoniniana 212 his nomen would have been Aurelius.  The tres militia were i prefecture of a cohort of auxiliary infantry ii tribunate of a legionary cohort and iii prefecture of an ala of auxiliary cavalry.  Compare the career of Pertinax who pursued the Tres Militia with those of Publius Aelius Aelianus Lucius Aurelius Marcianus both probably and Traianus Mucianus certainly who rose e caliga i.e. through the ranks.  Later emperors Tacitus and Carus would mint coins with the legends XI or IA signalling a 10 of silver in the alloy. Referencesedit  Kleiner Diana E. E. 1992. Roman sculpture. Yale University Press. pp. 375376. ISBN 0300046316. OCLC 25050500.  White 2015 p. 139.  Groag col. 157.  Halsberghe G.H. 1972. The Cult of Sol Invictus. Etudes prliminaires aux religions orientales dans lEmpire romain. Brill. p. 152. Retrieved 13 April 2018.  a b Watson 1999 p. 1.  John Malalas Book 12 chapter 30.  Croke Brian 1990. Studies in John Malalas. BRILL. p. 76. ISBN 9789004344624.  Wijnendaele Jeroen W. P. Hanaghan Michael P. 2021. Constantius heros ILCV 66  An elegiac testimony on the decline of the Late Roman West. Chiron. 51 273. doi
10.1 5159783110742770008. ISBN 9783110742770. S
2 CID 244540886.  Syvnne 2020 pp. 2930.  Saunders 1992 p. 107.  Saunders 1992 p. 109.  For instance vita Divi Aureliani paras 
5.5 6 
6.3 5 and 
7.1 2. If he ever was a tribune of a legion as suggested in 
7.1 2 it could not have been with Legio VII Gallicana as that unit never existed.  Saunders 1992 pp. 129130.  a b c White 2015 p. 1   Syvnne Ilkka 30 May 2019. The Reign of Emperor Gallienus The Apogee of Roman Cavalry. Pen and Sword. ISBN 9781526745224.  a b Hengst Danil den 2010. Emperors and Historiography Collected Essays on the Literature of the Roman Empire by Danil Den Hengst. BRILL. pp. 91 119 204 206. ISBN 9789004174382.  Watson Alaric 2004. Aurelian and the Third Century. New York Psychology Press. p. 113. ISBN 0415301874.  ToposText. topostext.org. Retrieved 7 June 2020.  Watson Alaric 2004. Aurelian and the Third Century. New York NY Psychology Press. p. 172. ISBN 0415301874.  LacusCurtius Templum Solis Platner  Ashby 1929. penelope.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 23 June 2020.  Aurelius Victor xxxiii21. Other sources do not cite Aurelian among those who conspired against Gallienus though different sources have claimed that he was the one who called Gallienus out of his tent under a proposed conspiracy at the point Gallienus was stabbed.  Watson 1999 p. 41.  J. Bray 1997 pp. 279288 Pat Southern 2001 p. 109. Also see Alaric Watson 1999 p. 215 David S. Potter 2004 p. 266 Herwig Wolfram History of the Goths transl. by Thomas J. Dunlap University of California Press 1988. ISBN 0520069838 p. 54  a b Watson 1999.  a b c Krner Christian 23 December 2008. Aurelian A.D. 270275. De Imperatoribus Romanis An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Rulers and Their Families. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2011.  a b c Watson 1999 p. 42.  a b Watson 1999 p. 43.  a b Watson 1999 p. 44.  a b c d e Watson 1999 p. 45.  Watson 1999 p. 46.  a b Peachin 1990 pp. 4344.  Kienast 2017 p. 222.  Stein pp. 46 50.  Zonaras.  a b c d Korner.  Magh David. Historia Augusta. Vol. II. Loeb Classical Library.  Solving the Mystery of an Ancient Roman Plague. The Atlantic. November 2017.  Zosimus 1
48 f. Eutropius Dexippus FGrH IIA 460 F7 Historia Augusta  Aurelianus xxi13 and xviii2.  Watson 1999 pp. 5154 217.  Watson 1999 pp. 5455.  The war against the Palmyrene Empire is described in Zosimus 15011611 and Historia Augusta Aurelianus 2231.  Stoneman Richard 1994. Palmyra and its Empire Zenobias Revolt against Rome. University of Michigan Press. p. 167. ISBN 0472083155.  Goldsworthy Adrian Keith 2009. How Rome fell death of a superpower. New haven Conn. Yale University Press. pp. 118119. ISBN 9780300137194.  Gibbon Edward 1993. The decline and fall of the Roman empire. Volume I New. 10. printing ed.. New York Everymans Library. p. 332. ISBN 9780679423089.  a b Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Aurelian . Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 2 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 923924.  Clauss Manfred 2001. Die rmischen Kaiser  55 historische Portraits von Caesar bis Iustinian in German. Mnchen Beck. p. 250. ISBN 9783406472886.  Lactantius De Mortibus Persecutorum 6.  Eusebius Historia Ecclesiastica 
7.3 
0.2 0  Jerome Chronicon 2
63 rd Olympiad  Orosius Historiarum Book 7 Chapter 23  Watson 1999 pp. 5253.  Watson 1999 p. 130.  Sylvianne Estiot The Lava Treasure of Roman Gold. Also in Trsors montaires volume XXIV BNF 2011 ISBN 9782717724929  Watson Alaric 2004 Aurelian and the Third Century London Routledge pp 139140  Pat Southern The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine London Routledge 2015 ISBN 9780415738071 page 181.  Watson 1999 pp. 104105 225.  Watson 1999 pp. 113116.  For an exact etymology see Debal Jacques 1996. Cenabum Aurelianis Orlans. Lyon Presses universitaires de Lyon. ISBN 9782729705541. Primary sourcesedit Aurelius Victor Epitome de Caesaribus xxxv Epitome de Caesaribus 
4 th century Eutropius Breviarium historiae Romanae IX. 1315 
4 th century Historia Augusta Aurelianus Life of Aurelian Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Zosimus Historia Nova Translation of the Historia Nova published in 1814 book 1 
5 th
6 th century Joannes Zonaras Compendium of History Compendium excerpt Claudius to Diocletian 268284 
12 th century Secondary sourcesedit Groag Edmund Domitius 36 Realencyclopdie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft volume 9 V.1 Metzlerscher Verlag Stuttgart 1903 columns 13471419. Kienast D. 2017. Rmische Kaisertabelle. Grundzge einer rmischen Kaiserchronologie. Darmstadt Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. ISBN 9783534132898. Krner Christian 20 July 2001. Aurelian. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Archived from the original on 20 October 2006. Retrieved 4 November 2006. Korner2001 Saunders Randall Titus 1992. A biography of the Emperor Aurelian AD 270275. Ann Arbor Michigan UMI Dissertation Services. Southern Pat 2001. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine. Routledge. p. 125. ISBN 0415239443. Peachin Michael 1990. Roman Imperial Titulature and Chronology A.D. 235284. Amsterdam Gieben. ISBN 9050630340. Stein Arthur 1924. Zur Chronologie der rmischen Kaiser von Decius bis Diocletian. Archiv fr Papyrusforschung und verwandte Gebiete. 7 12 3051. doi
10.1 5
15 apf.19

24.7.1 
2.3 0. S
2 CID 161464046. Syvnne Ilkka 2020. Aurelian and Probus The Soldier Emperors Who Saved Rome. Yorkshire Pen and Sword Military. ISBN 9781526767509. Watson Alaric 1999. Aurelian and the Third Century PDF. The Classical World. Vol. 94. London Routledge. pp. 284286. doi
10.2 3074352566. ISBN 0415072484. JSTOR 4352566. S
2 CID 153920517. Archived from the original PDF on 18 February 2020. Further readingedit White John 2015. The Roman Emperor Aurelian Restorer of the World. Casemate Publishers and Book Distributors. ISBN 9781473845695. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aurelianus. Aurelian coinage at Wildwinds.com On coins of Aurelian with the title dominus et deus Section 
1.9  Regnal titles Preceded by Quintillus Roman emperor 270275 Succeeded by Tacitus Political offices Preceded by Flavius Antiochianus Virius Orfitus Roman consul 271 with Pomponius Bassus Succeeded by T. Flavius Postumius Quietus Junius Veldumnianus Preceded by M. Claudius Tacitus Julius Placidianus Roman consul 274275 with Capitolinus 274 Marcellinus 275 Succeeded by M. Claudius Tacitus II Aemilianus II v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Spain France BnF data Germany Italy Israel United States Sweden Czech Republic Australia Greece Netherlands Poland Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAurelianoldid1216764981 Categories 2
10 s births 214 births 275 deaths 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Ancient assassinated people Aurelian Crisis of the Third Century Deified Roman emperors Domitii Gothicus Maximus Illyrian emperors Illyrian people 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Murdered Roman emperors People from Sirmium Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae Damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Articles containing Latinlanguage text Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 1 April 2024 at 2117 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width