Quintillus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Reign of Quintillus 
3 Legacy 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
6.1 Ancient sources 
6.2 Secondary sources Toggle the table of contents Quintillus 61 languages Afrikaans     Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego Hakkng  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Kiswahili Latina Lombard Magyar  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor in 270 Quintillus Aureus depicting Quintillus. Inscription reads IMP C M AVR QVINTILLVS AVG Roman emperor Reign 270 1777 days Predecessor Claudius Gothicus Successor Aurelian Born Sirmium Pannonia Inferior Sremska Mitrovica Serbia Died 270 Aquileia Italy Issue 2 sons Names Marcus Aurelius Claudius Quintillus Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius Claudius Quintillus Augustus1 Marcus Aurelius Claudius Quintillus died 270 was a shortlived Roman emperor. He was a brother of Emperor Claudius Gothicus whom he succeeded after Claudius death in 270. Quintillus claim to be emperor was challenged by Aurelian who was proclaimed emperor by the legions he commanded. Quintillus reign only lasted a few weeks. Different sources report his cause of death as murder by his own soldiers in battle with Aurelian or by suicide. Early lifeedit Marcus Aurelius Claudius Quintillus exact birthplace is unknown. An Illyrian he was likely born in Pannonia Inferior as is indicated by his coinage.2 Originating from a lowborn family Quintillus came to prominence with the accession of his brother Claudius Gothicus to the imperial throne in 268. Quintillus was possibly made Procurator of Sardinia during his brothers reign. Reign of Quintillusedit Quintillus was declared emperor either by the Senate or by his brothers soldiers upon the latters death in 270. Eutropius reports Quintillus to have been elected by soldiers of the Roman army immediately following the death of his brother3 the choice was reportedly approved by the Roman Senate. Joannes Zonaras reports him elected by the Senate itself.4 Records however agree that the legions which had followed Claudius in campaigning along the Danube were either unaware or disapproving of Quintillus elevation. They instead elevated their current leader Aurelian as emperor.5 The few records of Quintillus reign are contradictory. They disagree on the length of his reign variously reported to have lasted 17 days Jerome Eutropius and Zonaras or 77 days Filocalus Zosimus gives a few months. Modern scholars believe 17 to be a misreading of a larger number as there is an abundance of coins produced during his reign.56 Records also disagree on the cause of his death. The Historia Augusta reports him murdered by his own soldiers in reaction to his strict military discipline.7 Jerome only reports that he was slain at Aquileia.8 Joannes Zonaras reported Quintillus to have committed suicide by opening his veins and bleeding himself to death4 John of Antioch reports the suicide to have been assisted by a physician.5 Claudius Salmasius noted that Dexippus recorded the death without stating causes.9 All records however agree in placing the death at Aquileia. Quintillus was reportedly survived by his two sons.10 The Historia Augusta reports Claudius and Quintillus having another brother named Crispus and through him a niece Claudia who reportedly married Eutropius and was mother to Constantius Chlorus.11 Some historians however suspect this account to be a genealogical fabrication to flatter Constantine I.5 Legacyedit Ruins of Imperial Palace at Sirmium today in Sremska Mitrovica His reign was very short and he never managed to visit Rome as emperor. Surviving Roman records considered Quintillus a moderate and capable emperor.3 He was seen as a champion of the Senate and thus compared to previous emperors Galba and Pertinax. All three were highly regarded by senatorial sources despite their failure to survive a full year of reign.5 In his reign the priestly offices held by the emperor were separated and the image of the emperor as pontifex maximus was abandoned.12 See alsoedit List of Roman emperors Referencesedit  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 500. ISBN 9780521840262.  Manders 2012 p. 258.  a b Eutropius IX12.  a b Zonaras 1226.  a b c d e Banchich 1999.  Syvnne Ilkka 2020. Aurelian and Probus. Pen and Sword. p. 65. ISBN 9781526767530.  Historia Augusta 125.  Jerome s.a. 271.  Historia Augusta 126.  Historia Augusta 139.  Historia Augusta 131.  Manders 2012 p. 145. Sourcesedit Ancient sourcesedit Jerome 2005 c. 380. Chronicon. Translated by Roger Pearse. Aurelius Victor 2018 c. 400. Epitome de Caesaribus. Translated by Thomas M. Banchich. Eutropius 1853 c. 380. Breviarium ab urbe condita. Translated by John Selby Watson. Live of Claudius. Historia Augusta. Translated by David Magie. 1913. Joannes Zonaras 2008 c. 1120. Epitome Historiarum. Translated by Basileos Nestor. Archived from the original on 21 May 2008. Zosimus 1814 c. 500. Nova Historia. Translated by J. Davis. Secondary sourcesedit Manders Erika 2012. Coining Images of Power Patterns in the Representation of Roman Emperors on Imperial Coinage A.D. 193284. BRILL. ISBN 9789004189706. Banchich Thomas 1999. Quintillus 270 A.D. De Imperatoribus Romanis. Jones A.H.M. Martindale J.R. Morris J. 1971. Quintillus 1. The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire I. Cambridge University Press p. 759. ISBN 0521072336 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Quintillus. Regnal titles Preceded by Claudius II Roman emperor 270 Succeeded by Aurelian v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Artists Te Papa New Zealand People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleQuintillusoldid1208848433 Categories 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors Crisis of the Third Century Suicides in Ancient Rome Suicides by sharp instrument in Italy 2
10 s births 270 deaths Illyrian people Aurelii Claudii Illyrian emperors Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth uncertain Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 19 February 2024 at 0531 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width