Tacitus (emperor) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Early life 
2 Emperor Toggle Emperor subsection 
2.1 Fighting barbarians 
2.2 Death 
3 References 
4 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 
4.1 Ancient sources 
4.2 Secondary sources 
5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Tacitus emperor 59 languages     Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego Hakkng  Hrvatski Italiano   Kiswahili Latina Lombard Magyar    Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 275 to 276 For the firstcentury Roman historian see Tacitus. Tacitus Roman emperor Reign c. December 275  c. June 276 Predecessor Aurelian Successor Florianus Died June 276 Antoniana Colonia Tyana Cappadocia Names Marcus Claudius Tacitus1 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Claudius Tacitus Augustus Marcus Claudius Tacitus tsts TASits died June 276 was Roman emperor from 275 to 276. During his short reign he campaigned against the Goths and the Heruli for which he received the title Gothicus Maximus. Early lifeedit Antoninianus of Tacitus. Legend IMPerator Caesar Marcus CLavdius TACITVS AVGustus. His early life is largely unknown. An origin story which claimed Tacitus to be the heir of an old Umbrian family and one of the wealthiest men of the empire with a total wealth of 280 million sestertii circulated after his coronation. His faction distributed copies of the historian Publius Cornelius Tacitus work which was barely read at the time perhaps contributing to its partial survival. Modern historiography rejects his alleged descent from the historian as a fabrication.23 It is more likely that he emerged from the Illyrian military which made him a representative of the army in imperial politics.4 In the course of his long life he held various civil offices including the consulship twice once under Valerian and again in 273 earning universal respect.5 Emperoredit After the assassination of Aurelian the army apparently showing remorse towards its role in the death of the beloved emperor relinquished the right of choosing his successor to the Senate.6 After a few weeks the throne was offered to the aged Princeps Senatus Tacitus. According to the Historia Augusta Tacitus after ascertaining the sincerity of the Senates regard for him accepted their nomination on 25 September 2757 and the choice was cordially ratified by the army.1 If true Tacitus would have been the last emperor elected by the Senate.8 However its possible that much of this narrative is fictitious as Zosimus and Zonaras report that Tacitus was actually proclaimed by the army without any intervention of the Senate.9 His proclamation as emperor should have happened in late November or early December.10 In older historiography it was generally accepted that Aurelians wife Ulpia Severina ruled in her own right before the election of Tacitus which could indicate an interregnum which lasted as long as six months.1112 Contemporary bibliography considers that no interregnum may have existed between Aurelians death and the coronation of the new Emperor. Tacitus had been living in Campania before his election and returned only reluctantly to the assembly of the Senate in Rome where he was elected. He immediately asked the Senators to deify Aurelian before arresting and executing Aurelians murderers.13 In ancient sources he was described as very old at that time but in reality he was possibly in his fifties.4 Amongst the highest concerns of the new reign was the restoration of the ancient Senatorial powers. He granted substantial prerogatives to the Senate securing to them by law the appointment of the emperor of the consuls and the provincial governors as well as supreme right of appeal from every court in the empire in its judicial function and the direction of certain branches of the revenue in its longabeyant administrative capacity.14 Probus respected these changes but after the reforms of Diocletian in the succeeding decades not a vestige would be left of them. Fighting barbariansedit Next he moved against the barbarian mercenaries that had been gathered by Aurelian to supplement Roman forces for his Eastern campaign.citation needed These mercenaries had plundered several towns in the Eastern Roman provinces after Aurelian had been murdered and the campaign cancelled.15 His halfbrother the Praetorian Prefect Florian and Tacitus himself won a victory against these tribes among which were the Heruli gaining the emperor the title Gothicus Maximus.13 Deathedit On his way back to the west to deal with a Frankish and Alamannic invasion of Gaul according to Aurelius Victor Eutropius and the Historia Augusta Tacitus died of fever at Tyana in Cappadocia around June 276 after a rule of just over 6 months.1617 In a contrary account Zosimus claims he was assassinated after appointing one of his relatives to an important command in Syria.18 Referencesedit  a b Jones pg. 873  McMahon Note 3 and accompanying text  Leadbetter 2010 p. 86.  a b Hagi 2016 p. 336  Edward Gibbon The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire The Modern Library 1932 ch. XII. p. 276  Gibbon pp. 274278  Historia Augusta Vita Taciti 
3.2 .  Lee Fratantuono 2017. Tacitus Annals XVI. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 4. ISBN 9781350023512.  Grant Michael 1985. The Roman Emperors A Biographical Guide to the Rulers of Imperial Rome 31 BCAD 476. New York Charles Scribners Sons. pp. 188189. ISBN 0684183889.  Watson A. 1999. Aurelian and the Third Century. London Routledge. p. 225. ISBN 0415072484.  Watson Alaric 1999. Aurelian and the Third Century. London Routledge. ISBN 0415072484.  Krner Christian 23 December 2008. Aurelian A.D. 270275. De Imperatoribus Romanis An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Rulers and Their Families. Retrieved 6 January 2011.  a b Southern p. 127  Gibbon p. 279  Gibbon p. 280  Aurelius Victor 361  Historia Augusta Vita Taciti 135  Zosimus I632 Sourcesedit Ancient sourcesedit Historia Augusta Vita Taciti English translation Eutropius Breviarium ab urbe condita ix. 16 English translation Aurelius Victor Epitome de Caesaribus English translation Zosimus Historia Nova English translation Joannes Zonaras Compendium of History extract Zonaras Alexander Severus to Diocletian 222284 Secondary sourcesedit McMahon Robin Tacitus 275276 A.D De Imperatoribus Romanis Jones A.H.M. J.R. Martindale  J. Morris 1971. The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire Volume 1 A.D. 260395. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521072336. Leadbetter Bill 2010. Galerius and the Will of Diocletian. London Routledge. ISBN 9780415404884. Hagi David ed. 2016. Coinage and History of the Roman Empire. Routledge. ISBN 9781135971250. Southern Pat. The Roman Empire from Severus to Constantine Routledge 2001 Gibbon. Edward Decline  Fall of the Roman Empire 1888 Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Tacitus Marcus Claudius . Encyclopdia Britannica 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marcus Claudius Tacitus. Constantine P. Cavafy The Complete Poems Harcourt Brace  World 1961 p. 201 Alan Dugan Poems 2 Yale University Press 1963 p. 33 Regnal titles Preceded by Aurelian Roman emperor 275276 Succeeded by Florian Political offices Preceded by T. Flavius Postumius Quietus Junius Veldumnianus Roman consul 273 with Julius Placidianus Succeeded by Aurelian Capitolinus Preceded by Aurelian Marcellinus Roman consul 276 with Aemilianus Succeeded by Probus Paulinus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National France BnF data Germany Netherlands People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTacitusemperoroldid1216119362 Categories 200 births 276 deaths 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs Illyrian people 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Crisis of the Third Century Claudii Murdered Roman emperors Gothicus Maximus Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 29 March 2024 at 0500 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width