Carinus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
1.1 Death in 285 
1.2 Character 
2 Family tree 
3 References Toggle References subsection 
3.1 Primary sources 
3.2 Secondary sources 
3.3 In literature 
4 External links Toggle the table of contents Carinus 53 languages  Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Brezhoneg Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Euskara  Franais Hakkng   Hrvatski Italiano  Kiswahili Latina Lombard Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Sicilianu   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Yorb  Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Roman emperor from 283 to 285 You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French. March 2022 Click show for important translation instructions. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate rather than simply copypasting machinetranslated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template there are already 6178 articles in the main category and specifyingtopic will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or lowquality. If possible verify the text with references provided in the foreignlanguage article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at frCarin see its history for attribution. You may also add the template TranslatedfrCarin to the talk page. For more guidance see WikipediaTranslation. Carinus Roman emperor Reign Spring 283  July 285 Predecessor Carus Successor Diocletian in competition with Carinus from 284 Coemperors Carus 283 Numerian 283284 Died July 285 River Margus Moesia Spouse Magnia Urbica Issue Nigrinianus disputed possibly adopted Names Marcus Aurelius Carinus1 Regnal name Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius Carinus Augustus2 Father Carus A Roman radiate produced in 283 depicting Emperor Carinus. From the collection of York Museums Trust. Legend M. AVR. CARINVS NOB. CAES. Marcus Aurelius Carinus died 285 was Roman Emperor from 283 to 285. The eldest son of the Emperor Carus he was first appointed Caesar in late 282 then given the title of Augustus in early 283 and made coemperor of the western part of the Empire by his father.3 Official accounts of his character and career which portray him as dissolute and incompetent have been filtered through the propaganda of his successful opponent Diocletian. Reignedit After the death of Emperor Probus in a spontaneous mutiny by the army in 282 his praetorian prefect Carus ascended to the throne. When he left for the Persian war he elevated his two sons to the title of Caesar. The elder Carinus was left to manage the affairs of the West in his absence and was later elevated to the rank of Augustus while the younger Numerian accompanied his father to the East.4 Carinus acquitted himself well at least at first showing some merit in suppressing unrest in Gaul and against the Quadi56 but the young emperor soon left the defence of the Upper Rhine to his legates and returned to Rome where the surviving accounts which demonise him claim he indulged in all manner of extravagance and excess.3 He is said to have married and divorced nine different women during his short reign in Rome and to have made his private life notorious. He is said to have persecuted many who he felt had treated him with insufficient respect before his elevation to have alienated the Senate by his open dislike and contempt and to have prostituted the imperial dignity with the various low entertainments he introduced at court.7 When Carus heard of his sons behaviour in the capital he declared his intention of removing him from office and replacing him with Constantius Chlorus who was already known for his ability and virtue. Carus however died soon afterwards in the midst of the Persian War and his two sons jointly succeeded him. On his return to Rome Carinus organised the annual games the Ludi Romani on an unprecedented scale.839 At the same time Numerian was forced to abandon his fathers ambitious campaign in the east by the soldiers who were superstitious about Carus death supposedly caused by a bolt of lightning.5 Numerian led his army back to Rome where a triumph awaited him leaving the Persians astonished at the inexplicable retreat of a victorious army. Numerians health however was broken by the climate and unable to bear the heat of the sun he was carried on a covered litter on the march. Arrius Aper the praetorian prefect took charge in his name but his ambitious temper aroused the troops suspicions. At Heraclea in Thrace they broke into the imperial tent and found Numerian dead. Diocletian commander of the bodyguard confirmed that Numerian had been murdered by the Praefect and after executing the Praefect he was proclaimed Emperor by the soldiers.10311 Carinus immediately left Rome and headed east to meet Diocletian. On his way through Pannonia he overthrew the usurper Sabinus Julianus and in July 285 met Diocletians army at the Battle of the Margus River modern Morava River in Moesia.63 Death in 2
85 edit Historians disagree about what happened next. According to one account his troops prevailed at the Battle of the Margus River but Carinus was murdered by a tribune whose wife he had seduced.612 Another account describes the battle as a complete victory for Diocletian and claims that Carinus army deserted him. This account may be supported by the fact that Diocletian kept Carinus Praetorian Guard commander Titus Claudius Aurelius Aristobulus in service.63 Characteredit Carinus has the reputation of being one of the worst Roman emperors.3 This infamy may have been encouraged by Diocletian. The unreliable Historia Augusta has Carinus marrying nine wives. After his death Carinus memory was officially condemned in the Roman procedure known as damnatio memoriae. His name and that of his wife were erased from inscriptions.13 Family treeedit Marcus Claudius Tacitus Roman Emperor 275276 previous Florianus Roman Emperor 276 Probus Roman Emperor 276282 Carus Roman Emperor 282283 next Diocletian Roman Emperor 284305  Prisca Carinus Roman Emperor 282284  Magnia Urbica Numerian coemperor 282284 Galeria Valeria Referencesedit Primary sourcesedit Anonymous Epitome de Caesaribus Aurelius Victor Eutropius Breviarium ab urbe condita Historia Augusta Life of Carus Carinus and Numerian Joannes Zonaras Compendium of History extract Zonaras Alexander Severus to Diocletian 222284 Secondary sourcesedit  Jones A. H. M. Martindale J. R. Morris J. 1971. The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire Volume 1 A.D. 260395. Cambridge University Press. p. 181. ISBN 0521072336.  Cooley Alison E. 2012. The Cambridge Manual of Latin Epigraphy. Cambridge University Press. p. 501. ISBN 9780521840262.  a b c d e f g One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Carinus Marcus Aurelius. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 5 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 337.  Edward Gibbon The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire The Modern Library 1932 ch. XXII. p. 293  a b Gibbon p. 296  a b c d Leadbetter William 8 August 2023. Carinus 283285 A.D..  Gibbon pp. 296 297  Spence H. Donald M. 2003. Early Christianity and Paganism. Kessinger Publishing. pp. 391392. ISBN 0766130681.  Gibbon pp. 297300  Pohlsander Hans A. 1996. Constantine. Routledge. p. 6. ISBN 0415319382.  Gibbon pp. 301 302  Gibbon p. 302  Varner Eric R. 2004. Mutilation and Transformation Damnatio Memoriae and Roman Imperial Portraiture. Brill Academic Publishers. p. 212. ISBN 9004135774. In literatureedit Mor Jokais A Christian but a Roman is set in Carinus Rome External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carinus. Regnal titles Preceded by Carus Roman emperor 283285 With Carus 283 and Numerian 283284 Succeeded by Diocletian Political offices Preceded by Probus  Victorinus Consul of the Roman Empire 283285 with Carus Numerian  Diocletian Bassus T. Claudius Aurelius Aristobulus Succeeded by Marcus Junius Maximus Vettius Aquilinus v t e Roman and Byzantine emperors and empresses regnant Principate 27 BC  AD 235 Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Marcus Aurelius Lucius Verus Commodus Pertinax Didius Julianus Septimius Severus Caracalla Geta Macrinus w. Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Crisis 235285 Maximinus I Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip I w. Philip II Decius w. Herennius Etruscus Trebonianus Gallus w. Hostilian  Volusianus Aemilianus Silbannacus  Valerian Gallienus w. Saloninus Claudius II Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Florianus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Dominate 284610 Diocletian Maximian Galerius Constantius I Severus II Constantine I Maxentius Licinius Maximinus II Valerius Valens Martinian Constantine II Constantius II Constans I Magnentius Nepotianus Vetranio Julian Jovian Valentinian I Valens Procopius Gratian Theodosius I Valentinian II Magnus Maximus w. Victor Eugenius Western Empire 395480 Honorius Constantine III w. Constans II Priscus Attalus Constantius III Joannes Valentinian III Petronius Maximus Avitus Majorian Severus III Anthemius Olybrius Glycerius Julius Nepos Romulus Augustulus Eastern Empire 395610 Arcadius Theodosius II Marcian Leo I Leo II Zeno Basiliscus w. Marcus Anastasius I Justin I Justinian I Justin II Tiberius II Constantine Maurice w. Theodosius Phocas Eastern Byzantine Empire 6101453 Heraclius Constantine III Heraclonas w. Tiberius Constans II Constantine IV w. Heraclius  Tiberius Justinian II Leontius Tiberius III Justinian II w. Tiberius Philippicus Anastasius II Theodosius III Leo III Constantine V Artabasdos w. Nikephoros Leo IV Constantine VI Irene Nikephoros I Staurakios Michael I Rangabe w. Theophylact  Staurakios Leo V w. Constantine Michael II Theophilos w. Constantine Theodora II w. Thekla Michael III Basil I w. Constantine Leo VI Alexander Constantine VII Romanos I Lekapenos w. Christopher Stephen  Constantine Lekapenos Romanos II Nikephoros II Phokas John I Tzimiskes Basil II Constantine VIII Zoe Romanos III Argyros Michael IV Michael V Constantine IX Monomachos Theodora III Michael VI Bringas Isaac I Komnenos Constantine X Doukas Eudokia Makrembolitissa Romanos IV Diogenes w. Leo  Nikephoros Michael VII Doukas w. Andronikos Konstantios  Constantine Doukas Nikephoros III Botaneiates Alexios I Komnenos w. Constantine Doukas John II Komnenos w. Alexios Manuel I Komnenos Alexios II Komnenos Andronikos I Komnenos w. John Isaac II Angelos Alexios III Angelos Alexios IV Angelos Alexios V Doukas Theodore I Laskaris w. Nicholas John III Vatatzes Theodore II Laskaris John IV Laskaris Michael VIII Palaiologos Andronikos II Palaiologos Michael IX Palaiologos Andronikos III Palaiologos John V Palaiologos John VI Kantakouzenos w. Matthew Andronikos IV Palaiologos John VII Palaiologos w. Andronikos V Manuel II Palaiologos John VIII Palaiologos Constantine XI Palaiologos See also Gallic emperors 260274 Palmyrene emperors 267273 Britannic emperors 286296 Trapezuntine emperors 12041461 Thessalonian emperors 12241242 Empresses Augustae Usurpers Classical Eastern Italics indicates a junior coemperor underlining indicates an emperor variously regarded as either legitimate or a usurper v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Netherlands Artists Te Papa New Zealand People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleCarinusoldid1203351427 Categories 285 deaths 
3 rdcentury murdered monarchs 
3 rdcentury Roman emperors 
3 rdcentury Roman consuls Crisis of the Third Century Murdered Roman emperors Aurelii 
3 rdcentury births Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae Sons of Roman emperors Caran dynasty Ancient assassinated people Damnatio memoriae Hidden categories Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Use dmy dates from August 2022 Commons link from Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with TePapa identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 4 February 2024 at 1814 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width