Ancient Egyptian agriculture - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Beginnings of agriculture Toggle Beginnings of agriculture subsection 
1.1 The Nile and Field Planting 
1.2 Irrigation systems 

1.2.1 Basin irrigation 
1.3 Horticulture 
2 Crops grown Toggle Crops grown subsection 
2.1 Food crops 
2.2 Industrial and fiber crops 
3 Livestock Toggle Livestock subsection 
3.1 Cattle 
3.2 Chickens 
4 Religion and agriculture Toggle Religion and agriculture subsection 
4.1 Gods 
5 See also 
6 Notes and references 
7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian agriculture 19 languages   Brezhoneg Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais  Italiano   Romn  Simple English   srpski  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ploughing with a yoke of horned cattle in ancient Egypt. Painting from the burial chamber of Sennedjem c. 1200 BC The civilization of ancient Egypt was indebted to the Nile River and its dependable seasonal flooding. The rivers predictability and fertile soil allowed the Egyptians to build an empire on the basis of great agricultural wealth. Egyptians are credited as being one of the first groups of people to practice agriculture on a large scale. This was possible because of the ingenuity of the Egyptians as they developed basin irrigation.1 Their farming practices allowed them to grow staple food crops especially grains such as wheat and barley and industrial crops such as flax and papyrus.2 Beginnings of agricultureedit To the west of Nile Valley eastern Sahara was the home of several Neolithic cultures. During the African humid period this was the area with rich vegetation and the human population in the Sahara had increased considerably by about 8000 years BC. They lived by hunting and fishing in the local lakes3 and by gathering wild cereals of the Sahara that were abundant. The cereals such as brachiaria sorghum and urochloa were an important source of food.4 The African humid period was gradually coming to an end and by about 60005000 years ago it was over. Well before that time the migrating herders were going to other parts of Africa but also coming west to the Nile delta where there were relatively few indications of agriculture before that. Dakhleh Oasis in particular has been the subject of considerable recent research and it supplies important evidence for early Egyptian agriculture.5 It could be considered typical of postPleistocene developments in Northeastern Africa in general. Dakhleh Oasis is located in Western Desert Egypt. It lies 350 km 220 mi. from the Nile between the oases of Farafra and Kharga. In Dakhleh the Bashendi culture people were mobile herderforagers during the African humid period. They lived in slabbuilt settlement sites and openair sites consisting of clusters of hearth mounds. Elsewhere in the Western Desert of Egypt Bashendilike groups have also inhabited the Farafra Oasis and Nabta Playa to the south.5 The Bashendi used sandstone grinders to grind local wild millet and sorghum.6 At Farafra Oasis a goat dated around 6100 BC 8100 cal BP was found in the Hidden Valley village. At Nabta Playa remains of sheepgoat and cattle are present beginning about 6000 BC 8000 cal BP. Yet goats and cattle are almost the only Neolithic elements from the Near East that the oasis dwellers accepted. Other cultural developments such as the lithic industry originated locally or at least from within Northeastern Africa.5 Faiyum Oasis of Egypt also provides evidence for agriculture from about the same period. Domesticated sheep goats pigs and cattle are here. Sheep at the site of Qasr ElSagha is dated at 5350 BC 7350 cal BP and sheep goats and cattle at 5150 BC 7150 cal BP.7 As for crops emmer wheat and barley are found in the Faiyum at the sites of Kom K and Kom W dated ca. 45004200 BC.87 Plentiful pottery is found at these sites but there is little evidence of permanent structures being built. The Merimde culture is dated from around 4800 to 4300 BC. These peoples came to develop a fully agricultural economy. Also the site called Merimde Beni Salama about 15 miles northwest from Cairo is believed to be the earliest permanently occupied town in Egypt.9 Merimde culture overlapped in time with the Faiyum A culture and with the Badari culture in Upper Egypt which are dated somewhat later. These were all agricultural cultures Farming systems. The Nile and Field Plantingedit The Niles watershed Further information Geography of Egypt The civilization of ancient Egypt developed in the arid climate of northern Africa. This region is distinguished by the Arabian and Libyan deserts10 and the River Nile. The Nile is the longest river in the world flowing northward from Lake Victoria and eventually emptying into the Mediterranean Sea. The Nile has two main tributaries the Blue Nile which originates in Ethiopia and the White Nile that flows from Uganda. While the White Nile is considered to be longer and easier to traverse the Blue Nile actually carries about twothirds of the water volume of the river. The names of the tributaries derive from the color of the water that they carry. The tributaries come together in Khartoum and branches again when it reaches Egypt forming the Nile delta.11 The Egyptians took advantage of the natural cyclical flooding pattern of the Nile. Because this flooding happened fairly predictably the Egyptians were able to develop their agricultural practices around it. The water levels of the river would rise in August and September leaving the floodplain and delta submerged by 
1.5  meters of water at the peak of the flooding. This yearly flooding of the river is known as inundation. As the floodwaters receded in October farmers were left with wellwatered and fertile soil in which to plant their crops. The soil left behind by the flooding is known as silt and was brought from Ethiopian Highlands by the Nile. Planting took place in October once the flooding was over and crops were left to grow with minimal care until they ripened between the months of March and May. While the flooding of the Nile was much more predictable and calm than other rivers such as the Tigris and Euphrates it was not always perfect. High floodwaters were destructive and could destroy canals that were made for irrigation. Lack of flooding created a potentially greater issue because it left Egyptians suffering from famine.12 Irrigation systemsedit To make the best use of the waters of the Nile river the Egyptians developed systems of irrigation. Irrigation allowed the Egyptians to use the Niles waters for a variety of purposes. Notably irrigation granted them greater control over their agricultural practices.1 Floodwaters were diverted away from certain areas such as cities and gardens to keep them from flooding. Irrigation was also used to provide drinking water to Egyptians. Despite the fact that irrigation was crucial to their agricultural success there were no statewide regulations on water control. Rather irrigation was the responsibility of local farmers. However the earliest and most famous reference to irrigation in Egyptian archaeology has been found on the mace head of the Scorpion King which has been roughly dated to about 3100 BC. The mace head depicts the king cutting into a ditch that is part of a grid of basin irrigation. The association of the highranking king with irrigation highlights the importance of irrigation and Egypt. Basin irrigationedit Egyptians developed and utilized a form of water management known as basin irrigation. This practice allowed them to control the rise and fall of the river to best suit their agricultural needs. A crisscross network of earthen walls was formed in a field of crops that the river would flood. When the floods came the water would be trapped in the basins formed by the walls. This grid would hold water longer than it would have naturally stayed allowing the earth to become fully saturated for later planting. Once the soil was fully watered the floodwater that remained in the basin would basically be drained to another basin that was in need of more water.12 Horticultureedit Gardens of Amun from the Temple of Karnak painting in the tomb of Nakh the chief gardener early 
14 th century B.C. Main article Gardens of ancient Egypt Orchards and gardens were also developed in addition to field planting in the floodplains. This horticulture generally took place further from the floodplain of the Nile and as a result they required much more work.13 The perennial irrigation required by gardens forced growers to manually carry water from either a well or the Nile to water their garden crops. Additionally while the Nile brought silt which naturally fertilized the valley gardens had to be fertilized by pigeon manure. These gardens and orchards were generally used to grow vegetables vines and fruit trees.14 Crops grownedit Food cropsedit See also Ancient Egyptian cuisine The Egyptians grew a variety of crops for consumption including grains vegetables and fruits. However their diets revolved around several staple crops especially cereals and barley. Other major grains grown included einkorn wheat and emmer wheat grown to make bread. Other staples for the majority of the population included beans lentils and later chickpeas and fava beans. Root crops such as onions garlic and radishes were grown along with salad crops such as lettuce and parsley.2 Fruits were a common motif of Egyptian artwork suggesting that their growth was also a major focus of agricultural efforts as the civilizations agricultural technology developed. Unlike cereals and pulses fruit required more demanding and complex agricultural techniques including the use of irrigation systems cloning propagation and training. While the first fruits cultivated by the Egyptians were likely indigenous such as the palm date and sorghum more fruits were introduced as other cultural influences were introduced. Grapes and watermelon were found throughout predynastic Egyptian sites as were the sycamore fig dom palm and Christs thorn. The carob olive apple and pomegranate were introduced to Egyptians during the New Kingdom. Later during the GrecoRoman period peaches and pears were also introduced.15 Industrial and fiber cropsedit Egyptians relied on agriculture for more than just the production of food. They were creative in their use of plants using them for medicine as part of their religious practices and in the production of clothing. Herbs perhaps had the most varied purposes they were used in cooking medicine as cosmetics and in the process of embalming. Over 2000 different species of flowering or aromatic plants have been found in tombs.2 Papyrus was an extremely versatile crop that grew wild and was also cultivated.16 The roots of the plant were eaten as food but it was primarily used as an industrial crop. The stem of the plant was used to make boats mats and paper. Flax was another important industrial crop that had several uses. Its primary use was in the production of rope and for linen which was the Egyptians principal material for making their clothing. Henna was grown for the production of dye.2 Scene showing the presentation of Egyptian cattle to Nebamun Livestockedit Cattleedit See also Cattle count Ancient Egyptian cattle were of four principal different types longhorned shorthorned polled and zebuine.17 The earliest evidence for cattle in Egypt is from the Faiyum region dating back to the fifth millennium BC.17 In the New Kingdom humpbacked zebuine cattle from Syria were introduced to Egypt and seem to have replaced earlier types.17 Chickensedit Manmade incubators called Egyptian egg ovens date back to the 
4 th century BC and were used to mass produce chickens.18 Religion and agricultureedit Further information Ancient Egyptian religion In ancient Egypt religion was a highly important aspect of daily life. Many of the Egyptians religious observances were centered on their observations of the environment the Nile and agriculture. They used religion as a way to explain natural phenomena such as the cyclical flooding of the Nile and agricultural yields.19 Although the Nile was directly responsible for either good or bad fortune experienced by the Egyptians they did not worship the Nile itself. Rather they thanked specific gods for any good fortune. They did not have a name for the river and simply referred to it as River. The term Nile is not of Egyptian origin.16 Godsedit See also Egyptian pantheon The Egyptians personified the inundation with the creation of the god called Hapi. Despite the fact that inundation was crucial to their survival Hapi was not considered to be a major god.16 He was depicted as an overweight figure who ironically made offerings of water and other products of abundance to pharaohs.13 A temple was never built specifically for Hapi but he was worshipped as inundation began by making sacrifices and the singing of hymns.16 The god Osiris was also closely associated with the Nile and the fertility of the land. During inundation festivals mud figures of Osiris were planted with barley.16 See alsoedit Land reform in ancient Egypt Notes and referencesedit  a b KeesHerman. Ancient Egypt A Cultural Topography. Chicago University of Chicago Press 1961. Print.  a b c d Janick Jules June 2002. Ancient Egyptian Agriculture and the Origins of Horticulture. Acta Horticulturae 583 2339. CiteSeerX 

10.1.1 .6
93.7 643. doi
10.1 76
60 ActaHortic.20
02.5 
82.1 .  White Kevin H. Bristow Charlie S. Armitage Simon J. Blench Roger M. Drake Nick A. 11 January 2011. Ancient watercourses and biogeography of the Sahara explain the peopling of the desert. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 108 2 458462. Bibcode20
11 PNAS..108..4
58 D. doi
10.1 0
73 pnas.1012231108. ISSN 10916490. PMC 3021035. PMID 21187416.  Tafuri Mary Anne Bentley R. Alexander Manzi Giorgio di Lernia Savino September 2006. Mobility and kinship in the prehistoric Sahara Strontium isotope analysis of Holocene human skeletons from the Acacus Mts. southwestern Libya. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology. 25 3 390402. doi
10.1 0
16 j.jaa.20
06.0 
1.0 02. ISSN 02784165.  a b c McDonald Mary M.A. 2016. The pattern of Neolithization in Dakhleh Oasis in the Eastern Sahara. Quaternary International. 410. Elsevier BV 181197. Bibcode20
16 QuInt.410..1
81 M. doi
10.1 0
16 j.quaint.20
15.1 
0.1 00. ISSN 10406182.  Graham Chandler 2006 Before the Mummies The Desert Origins of the Pharaohs. Saudi Aramco World. Volume 57 Number 5  a b Linseele Veerle Van Neer Wim Thys Sofie Phillipps Rebecca Cappers Ren Wendrich Willeke Holdaway Simon 20141013. Caramelli David ed.. New Archaeozoological Data from the Fayum Neolithic with a Critical Assessment of the Evidence for Early Stock Keeping in Egypt. PLOS ONE. 9 10. Public Library of Science PLoS e108517. Bibcode20
14 PLoSO...
9 j85
17 L. doi
10.1 3
71 journal.pone.0108517. ISSN 19326203. PMC 4195595. PMID 25310283.  Wendrich W. Taylor R.E. Southon J. 2010. Dating stratified settlement sites at Kom K and Kom W Fifth millennium BCE radiocarbon ages for the Fayum Neolithic. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms. 268 78. Elsevier BV 9991002. Bibcode20
10 NIMPB.268..9
99 W. doi
10.1 0
16 j.nimb.20
09.1 
0.0 83. ISSN 01685
83 X.  William H. Stiebing Jr. Susan N. Helft 2017 Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture. Routledge. p. 76  Mysteries of Egypt. Canadian Museum of Civilization. httpwww.civilization.cacmcexhibitionscivilegyptegcgeo
2 e.shtml  Hoyt Alia. How the Nile Works. httphistory.howstuffworks.comafricanhistorynileriver2.htm  a b Postel Sandra. Egypts Nile Valley Basin Irrigation. httpwww.waterhistory.orghistoriesnilet1.htmlphoto1  a b Dollinger Andre. An Introduction to the History and Culture of Pharaonic Egypt. httpwww.reshafim.org.iladegyptindex.html.  Agriculture. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. 2001. Print.l  Janick Jules February 2005. The Origins of Fruits Fruit Growing and Fruit Breeding. Plant Breeding Reviews. 25 255320. doi
10.1 0029780470650301.ch8. ISBN 9780470650301.  a b c d e Baines John. The Story of the Nile. httpwww.bbc.co.ukhistoryancientegyptiansnile01.shtml  a b c Cattle in Ancient Egypt. Ucl.ac.uk. Retrieved 20160909.  Percy Pam. The Field Guide to Chickens Voyageur Press St. Paul Minnesota 2006 page 16. ISBN 0760324735.  Teeter Emily and Brewer Douglas. Religion in the Lives of the Ancient Egyptians. The University of Chicago Library. httpfathom.lib.uchicago.edu1777777190168 Bibliographyedit Jared Diamond Guns germs and steel. A short history of everybody for the last 13000 years 1997. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancient Egyptian agriculture. v t e Agriculture Outline History Index Occupations Agriculturist Agricultural Engineer Farmer Farm worker Herder General Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Digital Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animalfree agriculture Cellular agriculture Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Polyculture Riceduck farming Ricefish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture History Prehistory Neolithic Revolution Agriculture in Mesoamerica Austronesian expansion Ancient history Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Postclassical Agriculture in the Middle Ages Arab Agricultural Revolution Columbian exchange Modern history British Agricultural Revolution Green Revolution Organic Monoculture Farming Types Agrivoltaic Aquaculture Cattle Dairy farming Fur farming Goat farming Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Hydroponics Insect farming Livestock Pasture Mixed Paddy field Pastoral Bocage Pig farming Poultry farming Ranch Orchards Sheep farming Terrace Wildlife farming Environmental impact Agricultural expansion Agricultural pollution Agricultural wastewater Overgrazing Environmental impact of irrigation Overdrafting Climate change and agriculture Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Government ministries Universities and colleges Category Portal Commons Wikiproject v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Portals Ancient Egypt Agriculture and agronomy Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientEgyptianagricultureoldid1217268845 Categories Agriculture by culture Ancient Egypt History of agriculture Agriculture in Egypt Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 4 April 2024 at 2034 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width