Glossary of ancient Egypt artifacts - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Glossary of ancient Egyptian artifacts and materials 
2 See also 
3 References Toggle the table of contents Glossary of ancient Egypt artifacts 2 languages   srpski  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia This is a glossary of ancient Egypt artifacts. This list is incomplete you can help by adding missing items. August 2008 Glossary of ancient Egyptian artifacts and materialsedit Amulet  an amulet is an object that is typically worn on ones person that some people believe has the magical or miraculous power to protect its holder. Ankh  a symbol of life held by Ra Benben stone also known as a pyramidion  the top stone of the Egyptian pyramid Canopic jar  vessel containing internal body organs removed during mummification Canopic chest  the common chest contained the four Canopic jars Cartonnage  papyrus or linen soaked in plaster shaped around a body and used for mummy masks and coffins Cenotaph  an empty tomb or a monument erected in honor of a person or group of people whose remains are elsewhere Crook  a symbol of pharaonic power. Symbol of the god Osiris Faience  glasswork articles amulets etc. False door  an artistic representation of a door a common architectural element in the tombs Flail  a symbol of pharaonic power. Symbol of the god Osiris Flint knife  prestige funerary good from the Naqada period until the end of the Early Dynastic Period Funerary cone  small cones made from clay that were placed over the entrance of the chapel of a tomb used almost exclusively in the Theban necropolis Mesopotamia had clay nails Headrest  found in tombs etc. Typically personal or a memorial headrest Imiut fetish  a religious object used in funerary rites a stuffed headless animal skin often of a feline or bull tied by the tail to a pole terminating in a lotus bud and inserted into a stand Microlith  ancient Egyptian stone flakes Menat  an amulet worn around the neck. Also a musical instrument a metal rattle see also sistrum Menhed  a scribes pallet Mummy  body after mummification Naos  religious shrine portable shrine for carrying a god Ostracon  pottery sherd limestone Sherd used as writing material Cosmetic palette  slab of stone sometimes decorated used for preparing cosmetics. See Narmer Palette and CategoryArchaeological palettes. Papyrus  a material made from papyrus reeds used as writing and painting material Pectoral Ancient Egypt  many forms. Up to 13 additional Gardinerunlisted determinative hieroglyphs for the pectoral See Gardiners sign list. Rosetta Stone  A stone with three languages on it which unlocked the Egyptian language Saqqara Bird  wooden bird model Sarcophagus  a funeral receptacle for a corpse most commonly carved in stone Scarab  amulet or seal in the form of an abstract dung beetle Senet  a board game Shabti  figurines placed in the tomb as substitutes for the tomb owner in the next world Sphinx Pyramid  a monumental structure with a square or triangular base and sloping sides that meet in a point at the top especially one built of stone as a royal tomb in ancient Egypt Statuary  pharaonic and nonpharaonic. Range of sizes. Amulets  numerous and predynastic. Stele Boundary Stele  placed at boundaries. Memorial Stele  pharaonic or nonpharaonic. Monumental Stele  offered to gods special individuals. Votive Stele  private dedication. Victory Stele  pharaonic. Talatat  limestone wall blocks at times painted. Ushabti  shabtis from the 
21 st Dynasty and later. See alsoedit Grave goods Votive deposit Referencesedit Reeves Nicholas. Ancient Egypt The Great Discoveries a YearbyYear Chronicle Nicholas Reeves Thames and Hudson Ltd. London c.2000. Glossary p. 242 v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject This article about subjects relating to Ancient Egypt is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleGlossaryofancientEgyptartifactsoldid1153305464 Categories Ancient Egypt stubs Egyptology Glossaries of history Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles using small message boxes Incomplete lists from August 2008 All stub articles Wikipedia glossaries using unordered lists This page was last edited on 5 May 2023 at 1329 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width