Template talk:Ancient Egypt topics - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Box size 3 comments 
2 Reordering and Renaming of Deities 1 comment 
3 Categories 
4 The template is out of control 5 comments 
5 Rulers of Egypt  is this a history template or a history subtemplate 1 comment 
6 What is the point 2 comments 
7 Alternate 5 comments Toggle the table of contents Template talkAncient Egypt topics Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. Template Talk English Read Edit Add topic View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit Add topic View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egypt Templateclass Ancient Egypt portal This template is within the scope of WikiProject Ancient Egypt a collaborative effort to improve the coverage of Egyptological subjects on Wikipedia. If you would like to participate please visit the project page where you can join the discussion and see a list of open tasks.Ancient EgyptWikipediaWikiProject Ancient EgyptTemplateWikiProject Ancient EgyptAncient Egypt articles Template This template does not require a rating on Wikipedias content assessment scale. WikiProject Ancient Egypt todo list edit history watch purge Needed articles. We should have an article on every pyramid and every nome in Ancient Egypt. Im sure the rest of us can think of other articles we should have. Cleanup. To start with most of the general history articles badly need attention. And Im told that at least some of the dynasty articles need work. Any other candidates Standardize the Chronology. A boring task but the benefit of doing it is that you can set the dates e.g. why say Khufu lived 25892566 As long as you keep the length of his reign correct or cite a respected source you can date it 25902567 or 25852563 Stub sorting Anyone I consider this probably the most unimportant of tasks on Wikipedia but if you believe it needs to be done . . . Data sorting. This is a project Id like to take on some day  could be applied to more of Wikipedia than just Ancient Egypt. Take one of the standard authorities of history or culture  Herotodus the Elder Pliny the writings of Breasted or Kenneth Kitchen  see if you cant smoothly merge quotations or information into relevant articles. Probably a good exercise for someone who owns one of those impressive texts yet cant get access to a research library. Box sizeedit This template is getting pretty big. Is there anything we can edit away to keep it down Personally I think we could loose the Egyptologists line its not really that critical to include. Noel talk 0300 23 Apr 2005 UTC Its so difficult to decide what should be in and what should be out. Its probably far too radical a proposal but Id prefer something like Ancient Egypt Directory of Topics with a link to a cracking good well organised and complete list of related topics. Why not Clean and simple. If too simple how about links to only the major articles Pharaohs etc. and the Portal. iggle 0132 27 March 2006 UTCreply Failing that yes lets lose the Egyptologists theres not one of those articles that does its subject justice anyway. Hajor 0411 23 Apr 2005 UTC With my settings this template is almost impossible to read. Fornadan t 0805 10 July 2005 UTCreply The gods bit is going to get out of control if it was filled in fully.  1759 18 July 2005 UTCreply Reordering and Renaming of Deitiesedit I just went through the deities in the template and changed a bunch of things. First of all a lot of the spellings of the name were not standard Anupu Ausare Aset and so on are some of the possibilities but they are certainly not universally accepted and many of them are long obsolete. Ive kept the most often used names for most of them using Wilkonsons Complete Gods and Goddesses as a guideline The group of Gods associated with the Ogdoad was puzzling. First of all there were many Ogdoads in Egyptian history and the heliopolis Ogdoad had as the name suggests eight deities four pairs of malefemale counterparts. Ive kept thouse eight in there and removed the others like Shu and Geb and so on which were not actually in the Ogdoad. Virtually any Egyptian God was associated with it. I cant say I agree with the War Gods and especially Deified Concepts sections but Ill leave them be for now. Whats the source for all that Why are say Min and Hapy considered deified concepts and Amun and Geb and Nut are not Seems like superficial grouping of some fringe modern author without any concrete basis in actual Egyptian mythology. Flyboy Will 1744 26 December 2005 UTCreply Categoriesedit Why not get rid of this rather useless list too long and biased towards religion and just use at most links to various categories for example Egyptian deities Egyptologists Egyptian mythology etc. The template is out of controledit This template is again getting out of hand as I have my browser configured it consumes almost the entire window On one hand 6 of the 12 categories concern Egyptian Gods  cant this be trimmed down  duplicate names like Set mythology pruned On the other there are no people included in this template  nor any links to lead to a list of Ancient Egyptian persons either Egyptologists or historical figures. If no one else steps up Ill happily whittle this beast down.  llywrch 0340 20 March 2006 UTCreply Totally agree  the above idea seems a great one have a page that has all of the data seperated and perhaps links to the portal and project pages and that is it. This list also means that hundreds of pages all link to hundreds of other pages very confusing when trying to correct names etc. Markh 1336 23 March 2006 UTCreply Anyone object if I just do this nobody seems to have objected here. I will take the latest subject in the big template and put them into Directory of Ancient Egypt Topics unless anyone really objects Markh 1438 6 May 2006 UTCreply I have changed the template so that it can be hidden so I guess the list can get as big as it likes now Markh 2240 20 May 2006 UTCreply This is mad. One template cannot possibly contain every article about Ancient Egypt It needs to be slimmed down radically  just taking the headings perhaps History Geography Sites Architecture Art Mythology Dynasties Pharaohs People Language Writing Medicine Egyptology Chronology Unsolved problems I know some of these articles do not exist but they should all as subpages of Ancient Egypt.  ALoan Talk 2121 15 June 2006 UTCreply Rulers of Egypt  is this a history template or a history subtemplateedit I was considering adding a Rulers of Egypt line to this template but then I realised that the template is titled Ancient Egypt. So why does it have links to more recent history including one to Modern Egypt If anyone is interested in listing the Rulers of Egypt see the discussion here. Carcharoth 1457 25 March 2006 UTCreply What is the pointedit Could someone kindly explain to me the point of this template Is it supposed to be the Index of All the Egyptian Gods Ever Worshipped in Ancient Egypt plus some other stuff that well tack on for good measure anyhow but really dont care about ourselves because were into Egyptian mythology template Why not add the name of every king and every dynasty and period as well Cats in Ancient Egypt apparently is so important a topic that it must be included but Old Kingdom is not. There isnt even a link to Egyptian language only articles on writing This is not at all useful and is frankly an eye sore not to mention a waste of space and a readers time. I realize it can be hidden but why bother with it at all It is useless unless of course you really do need a link to the very obscure god Maahes on every single page about ancient Egypt. Just my opinion naturally. Flembles 0841 8 October 2006 UTCreply Revert it if you want but I was bold... Flembles 0929 8 October 2006 UTCreply Alternateedit I found this on a page Topics about Ancient Egypt edit Places Nile  Upper and Lower Egypt  Abu Simbel  AbydosAbdju  Alexandria  Al FayyumAtefPehu  AmarnaAkhetaten  Dahshur  Edfu  ElephantineAbuYebu  Giza  HeliopolisAnnuIunu  Karnak  Luxor  MemphisIneb Hedj  PhilaePilak  QiftCoptos  Rosetta  Saqqara  TanisDjanet  ThebesNiwtWaset  Valley of the Kings  Valley of the Queens Great Ennead of Heliopolis Atum  Shu  Tefnut Geb  Nut Nuit  Osiris  Isis  Set  Nephthys Other Major Deities Amun  Anubis  Apep  Apis  Aten  Bast  Djehuty  Hathor  Horus  Khepri  Chons  Maat  Min  Neith  Ptah  Ra  Sekhmet  Sobek  Wepwawet  Heryshaf Ogdoad of Heliopolis AmunAmunet  HuhHauhet  KukKauket  NunNaunet War Deities Anhur  Bast  Maahes  Pakhet  Sekhmet Deified Concepts Chons  Hapy  Maat  Min  Renenutet  Shai  Hu  Saa Other Deities Bes  Chnum  Seker  Seshat  Tawaret Death Mummy  Four sons of Horus  Canopic jars  Ankh  Book of the Dead  KV  Mortuary temple  Ushabti Buildings Pyramids  Karnak Temple  Sphinx  Great Lighthouse  Great Library  Deir elBahri  Colossi of Memnon  Ramesseum  Abu Simbel Writing Egyptian hieroglyphs  Egyptian numerals  Transliteration of ancient Egyptian  Demotic  Hieratic Chronology Ancient Egypt  Ptolemaic Egypt  Roman Egypt Lists List of Egyptian Dynasties  List of Pharaohs Science and Culture Medicine  Architecture  Cats in Ancient Egypt Another possible list.  Secisek talk 2004 17 March 2009 UTCreply While I prefer the more concise template we have now I changed the color of the current template to this color as it looks more like the color of sand than the yellow color we had previously. I mean when you think of Ancient Egypt dont you think of the color of sand A. Parrot talk 2345 23 March 2009 UTCreply Selection of possible color choices for the template. The original F
1 F
1 DE is at upper left I like the current compact size of the template but I think the new color is too yellow. Of the two I prefer F
1 F
1 DE. Whatever color is chosen it should be applied consistently throughout the ancient Egypt wikiproject on the Portal and various infoboxes. Jeff Dahl Talk  contribs 0254 12 April 2009 UTCreply The color in the center third column second row looks best to me but I dont know the code for it. If thats too dark the one to the left of it would be my second choice. A. Parrot talk 0156 24 April 2009 UTCreply The lighter swatch is e
9 ddaf and the darker one is decd87. In addition to the topics template there are I think two or three other templates that should use the same color such as the Pharaoh Infobox and the Dynasty lists. Jeff Dahl Talk  contribs 2258 29 June 2009 UTCreply Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTemplatetalkAncientEgypttopicsoldid1143317760 Categories TemplateClass Ancient Egypt articles NAimportance Ancient Egypt articles Hidden category WikiProject banners without banner shells This page was last edited on 7 March 2023 at 0112 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width