Egyptian astronomy - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Ancient Egypt Toggle Ancient Egypt subsection 
1.1 The First Intermediate Period 
1.2 GrecoRoman Egypt 
2 Islamic Egypt 
3 See also 
4 Notes 
5 References 
6 Further reading 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Egyptian astronomy 19 languages  Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Norsk bokml Romn  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Trke  Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Overview of astronomy in Ancient Egypt Astronomical ceiling from the Tomb of Senenmut XVIII Dynasty circa 14791458 BCE discovered in Thebes Upper Egypt facsimile preserved in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.1 The sky goddess Nut and human figures representing stars and constellations from the star chart in the tomb of Ramses VI. Egyptian astronomy began in prehistoric times in the Predynastic Period. In the 
5 th millennium BCE the stone circles at Nabta Playa may have made use of astronomical alignments. By the time the historical Dynastic Period began in the 
3 rd millennium BCE the 365 day period of the Egyptian calendar was already in use and the observation of stars was important in determining the annual flooding of the Nile. The Egyptian pyramids were carefully aligned towards the pole star and the temple of AmunRe at Karnak was aligned on the rising of the midwinter Sun. Astronomy played a considerable part in fixing the dates of religious festivals and determining the hours of night and temple astrologers were especially adept at watching the stars and observing the conjunctions and risings of the Sun Moon and planets as well as the lunar phases. In Ptolemaic Egypt the Egyptian tradition merged with Greek astronomy and Babylonian astronomy with the city of Alexandria in Lower Egypt becoming the centre of scientific activity across the Hellenistic world. Roman Egypt produced the greatest astronomer of the era Ptolemy 90168 CE. His works on astronomy including the Almagest became the most influential books in the history of Western astronomy. Following the Muslim conquest of Egypt the region came to be dominated by Arabic culture and Islamic astronomy. The astronomer Ibn Yunus c. 9501009 observed the Suns position for many years using a large astrolabe and his observations on eclipses were still used centuries later. In 1006 Ali ibn Ridwan observed the SN 1006 a supernova regarded as the brightest stellar event in recorded history and left the most detailed description of it. In the 
14 th century Najm alDin alMisri wrote a treatise describing over 100 different types of scientific and astronomical instruments many of which he invented himself. Ancient Egyptedit Plan of a stone circle at Nabta Egypt Egyptian astronomy dates back to prehistoric times. The presence of stone circles at Nabta Playa in Upper Egypt from the 
5 th millennium BCE show the importance of astronomy to the religious life of ancient Egypt even in the prehistoric period. The annual flooding of the Nile meant that the heliacal risings or first visible appearances of stars at dawn were of special interest in determining when this might occur. The 365 day period of the Egyptian calendar was already in use at the beginning of Egyptian history. The constellation system used among the Egyptians also appears to have been essentially of native origin. Archaeological evidence has linked fractal geometry designs among SubSaharan African cultures with Egyptian cosmological signs.2 The precise orientation of the Egyptian pyramids serves as a lasting demonstration of the high degree of technical skill attained in the 
3 rd millennium BCE. It has been shown the pyramids were aligned towards the pole star which because of the precession of the equinoxes was at that time Thuban a faint star in the constellation of Draco.3 Evaluation of the site of the temple of AmunRe at Karnak taking into account the change over time of the obliquity of the ecliptic has shown that the Great Temple was aligned on the rising of the midwinter Sun.4 The length of the corridor down which sunlight would travel would have limited illumination at other times of the year. Astronomy played a considerable part in religious matters for fixing the dates of festivals and determining the hours of the night. The titles of several temple books are preserved recording the movements and phases of the Sun Moon and stars. The rising of Sirius Egyptian Sopdet Greek Sothis at the beginning of the inundation was a particularly important point to fix in the yearly calendar.5 One of the most important Egyptian astronomical texts was the Book of Nut going back to the Middle Kingdom or earlier. For Ancient Egyptians the death of a king had a strong connection to the stars. They believed once a king was deceased their soul would rise to the heavens and become a star.6 The Pyramid Texts describe the king ascending and becoming the Morning Star among the Imperishable Stars of past kings.7 The First Intermediate Periodedit Beginning with the 
9 th Dynasty ancient Egyptians produced Diagonal star tables which were usually painted on the inside surface of wooden coffin lids.8 This practice continued until the 
12 th dynasty.9 These Diagonal star tables or star charts are also known as diagonal star clocks. In the past they have also been known as star calendars or decanal clocks.10 These star charts featuring the paintings of Egyptian deities decans constellations and star observations are also found on the ceilings of tombs and temples. Star clock method from the tomb of Rameses VI From the tables of stars on the ceiling of the tombs of Rameses VI and Rameses IX it seems that for fixing the hours of the night a man seated on the ground faced the Astrologer in such a position that the line of observation of the pole star passed over the middle of his head. On the different days of the year each hour was determined by a fixed star culminating or nearly culminating in it and the position of these stars at the time is given in the tables as in the centre on the left eye on the right shoulder etc. According to the texts in founding or rebuilding temples the north axis was determined by the same apparatus and we may conclude that it was the usual one for astronomical observations. In careful hands it might give results of a high degree of accuracy.5 Macrobius Ambrosius Theodosius floruit 395423 CE attributed the planetary theory where the Earth rotates on its axis and the interior planets Mercury and Venus revolve around the Sun which in turn revolves around the Earth to the ancient Egyptians. He called it the Egyptian System and stated that it did not escape the skill of the Egyptians though there is no other evidence it was known in ancient Egypt.1112 512 GrecoRoman Egyptedit See also Astrology in Hellenistic Egypt and Greek astronomy An Egyptian 
30 th dynasty Ptolemaic terracotta astrological disc at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. Writing in the Roman era Clement of Alexandria gives some idea of the importance of astronomical observations to the sacred rites And after the Singer advances the Astrologer  with a horologium  in his hand and a palm  the symbols of astrology. He must know by heart the Hermetic astrological books which are four in number. Of these one is about the arrangement of the fixed stars that are visible one on the positions of the sun and moon and five planets one on the conjunctions and phases of the sun and moon and one concerns their risings.13 The astrologers instruments horologium and palm are a plumb line and sighting instrument. They have been identified with two inscribed objects in the Berlin Museum a short handle from which a plumb line was hung and a palm branch with a sightslit in the broader end. In the Ancient Egyptian language they were referred to as the merkhet and bay respectively. The palm branch was held close to the eye the plumb line in the other hand  perhaps at arms length.
5 a Astronomical ceiling relief from Dendera Egypt Following Alexander the Greats conquests and the foundation of Ptolemaic Egypt the native Egyptian tradition of astronomy had merged with Greek astronomy as well as Babylonian astronomy. The city of Alexandria in Lower Egypt became the centre of scientific activity throughout the Hellenistic civilization. The greatest Alexandrian astronomer of this era was the Greek Eratosthenes c. 276195 BCE who calculated the size of the Earth providing an estimate for the circumference of the Earth. Following the Roman conquest of Egypt the region once again became the centre of scientific activity throughout the Roman Empire. The greatest astronomer of this era was the Hellenic Egyptian Claudius Ptolemy 90168 CE. Originating from the Thebaid region of Upper Egypt he worked at Alexandria and wrote works on astronomy including the Almagest the Planetary Hypotheses and the Tetrabiblos as well as the Handy Tables the Canobic Inscription and other works unrelated to astronomy. Ptolemys Almagest originally titled The Mathematical Syntaxis is one of the most influential books in the history of Western astronomy. In this book Ptolemy explained how to predict the behavior of the planets with the introduction of a new mathematical idea the equant. A few mathematicians of late Antiquity wrote commentaries on the Almagest including Pappus of Alexandria as well as Theon of Alexandria and his daughter Hypatia. Ptolemaic astronomy became standard in medieval western European and Islamic astronomy until it was displaced by Maraghan heliocentric and Tychonic systems by the 
16 th century. Islamic Egyptedit See also Astronomy in medieval Islam Following the Muslim conquest of Egypt the region came to be dominated by Arabic culture. It was ruled by the Rashidun Umayyad and Abbasid Caliphates up until the 
10 th century when the Fatimids founded their own Caliphate centred around the city of Cairo in Egypt. The region once again became a centre of scientific activity competing with Baghdad for intellectual dominance in the medieval Islamic world. By the 
13 th century the city of Cairo eventually overtook Baghdad as the intellectual center of the Islamic world.citation needed Ibn Yunus c. 9501009 observed more than 10000 entries for the Suns position for many years using a large astrolabe with a diameter of nearly 
1.4  meters. His observations on eclipses were still used centuries later in Simon Newcombs investigations on the motion of the Moon while his other observations inspired Laplaces Obliquity of the Ecliptic and Inequalities of Jupiter and Saturn.clarification needed not the title of any work by Laplacecitation needed In 1006 Ali ibn Ridwan observed the supernova of 1006 regarded as the brightest stellar event in recorded history and left the most detailed description of the temporary star. He says that the object was two to three times as large as the disc of Venus and about onequarter the brightness of the Moon and that the star was low on the southern horizon.15 The astrolabic quadrant was invented in Egypt in the 
11 th century or 
12 th century and later known in Europe as the Quadrans Vetus Old Quadrant.16 333 In 
14 th century Egypt Najm alDin alMisri c. 1325 wrote a treatise describing over 100 different types of scientific and astronomical instruments many of which he invented himself.17 See alsoedit Ancient Egypt Archaeoastronomy Dendera zodiac Decans Egyptian constellations. Egyptian astronomers Egyptian calendar Egyptian mathematics History of astronomy Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy Nabta Playa Sothic cycle Notesedit  The Hermetic books which Clement refers to are the Egyptian theological texts which probably have nothing to do with Hellenistic Hermetism.14 Referencesedit  Full version at Met Museum  Eglash Ron 1995. Fractal Geometry in African Material Culture. Symmetry Culture and Science. 61 174177.  Ruggles C.L.N. 2005. Ancient Astronomy. ABCClio. pp. 354355. ISBN 1851094776.  Krupp E.C. 1988. Light in the Temples. In Ruggles C.L.N. ed.. Records in Stone Papers in memory of Alexander Thom. CUP. pp. 473499. ISBN 0521333814.  a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Griffith Francis Llewellyn 1911. Ancient Egypt. In Chisholm Hugh ed.. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 9 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 3980.  Relk Joan 20022003. Ancient Egyptian astronomy Ursa Major  symbol of rejuvenation. Archaeoastronomy. 17 6480.  Faulkner R.O. 1969. The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts. Oxford The Clarendon Press. pp. 154 155 162 173 253.  S Symons S.L. Cockcroft R. Bettencourt J. Koykka C. 2013. Ancient Egyptian Astronomy. Physics Department Online database. Hamilton Ontario McMaster University. Diagonal star tables.  Symons S.L. A stars year The annual cycle in the Ancient Egyptian sky. In Steele J.M. ed.. Calendars and Years Astronomy and time in the ancient world. Oxford UK Oxbow Books. pp. 133. Archived from the original on 20130615.  Clagett Marshall 1989. Ancient Egyptian Science Calendars clocks and astronomy. American Philosophical Society. p. 53. ISBN 9780871692146.  Neugebauer O.E. 1975. A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy. Birkhuser. ISBN 3540069
95 X.  Rufus W. Carl 1923. The astronomical system of Copernicus. Popular Astronomy. Vol. 31. pp. 510521. Bibcode19
23 PA.....31..5
10 R.  Clement of Alexandria. Stromata. vi 4.  Neugebauer O.E. 1942. Egyptian planetary texts. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. 32 2 237. doi
10.2 3071005598. JSTOR 1005598.  Goldstein Bernard R. 1965. Evidence for a supernova of A.D. 1006. Astronomical Journal. 70 1 105114. Bibcode19
65 AJ.....70..1
05 G. doi
10.1 086109679.  King David A. van Cleempoel Koenraad Moreno Roberto 2002. A recently discovered sixteenthcentury Spanish astrolabe. Annals of Science. 59 4 331362. doi
10.1 08000033790110095813. S
2 CID 144335909.  King David A. June 2004. Reflections on some new studies on applied science in Islamic societies 
8 th
19 th centuries. Islam  Science. Further readingedit Clagett Marshall 2004. Ancient Egyptian Science A source book. Vol. Two Calendars Clocks and Astronomy. American Philosophical Society. ISBN 0871692147. Franci Massimiliano 2010. Astronomia egizia Introduzione alle conoscenze astronomiche dellantico Egitto. Firenze IT Edarc. ISBN 9788886428941. Priskin Gyula 2019. The constellations of the Egyptian astronomical diagrams. gypte Nilotique et Mditerranenne. 12 137180. External linksedit Media related to Ancient Egyptian astronomy at Wikimedia Commons Symons S.L. Cockcroft R. Bettencourt J. Koykka C. 2013. Ancient Egyptian Astronomy. Physics Department Online database. Hamilton Ontario McMaster University. v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic  Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared Farinfrared Visiblelight optical Ultraviolet Xray History Gammaray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation Highenergy Radar Spherical Multimessenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrophysics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Binoculars Constellation IAU Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope Xray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons v t e Space research in Africa Space agencies North Africa ASAL Algeria NARSS Egypt CRTS Morocco CNCT Tunisia SubSaharan GSSTC Ghana NASRDA Nigeria SANSA South Africa Initiatives African Space Agency ASA Kenya Uganda Zambia Observatories in Algeria in Namibia in South Africa Astronomy Egyptian astronomy Astronomical Society of Southern Africa See also Timeline of first orbital launches by country Portal Ancient Egypt Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEgyptianastronomyoldid1216454424 Categories Ancient astronomy Egyptian calendar Ancient Egyptian science Astronomy in Egypt Hidden categories Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 CS1 long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 March 2024 at 0247 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width