Urban planning in ancient Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Predynastic period 
2 Tell elDaba 
3 ElLahun 
4 Deir elMedina 
5 Amarna 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Urban planning in ancient Egypt 7 languages Espaol Franais Bahasa Indonesia Kiswahili Shqip   srpski  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia The use of urban planning in ancient Egypt is a matter of continuous debate. Because ancient sites usually survive only in fragments and many ancient Egyptian cities have been continuously inhabited since their original forms relatively little is actually understood about the general designs of Egyptian towns for any given period.1 The Egyptians referred to most cities as either nwt or dmj.2 Nwt usually refers to unplanned cities that grew naturally such as Memphis and Thebes while dmj can be translated as settlement and usually refers to towns that were laid out along a plan.citation needed The archaeological evidence of such cities is best preserved and has been most thoroughly delved at El Lahun Deir elMedina and Amarna though some averment of urban planning exists at other sites as well. Predynastic periodedit Main article Predynastic Egypt Almost no traces of Egyptian settlements exist before the development of Neolithic culture around 6000 BC as settlements were certainly very small and buildings were made of perishable materials such as reeds and were not meant to be permanent structures.3 Sites that do survive do not show much evidence of urban planning. The earliest known predynastic settlement is at MerimdaBeni Salame at the southwest desert edge of the Nile Delta and covers about 44 acres 180000 m2 a very large area for the predynastic period. The city was rebuilt three times during its inhabited life and in at least one of its incarnations its houses were placed very regularly along a main street. Almost all the houses follow a plan which faces their doorways to the northwest to avoid the prevailing northerly wind. Other known predynastic settlements such as those of the Badarian and Naqada cultures are laid out arbitrarily and lack a defining plan. These villages mostly consisting of small huts situated around circular storage pits. Tell elDabaedit At Tell ElDaba were excavated remains of a settlement dating to the early Middle Kingdom about 2000 BC. The ancient name of the town is not known. An area of about 100 to 100 meters were uncovered therefore only parts of the settlements are known. The settlements consisted of at least ten rows of houses divided by straight streets. There is evidence that the town was surrounded by a wall. Remains were found in the north. Here there was also a bigger building. The east side of the settlements had an open space. The rows of houses on the east side west of the open space consisted of blocks with twelve houses. The single houses were small just about 5 by 5 meters large and all built on the same plan. The rows of houses on the west side consisted of blocks of at least twenty houses but perhaps even more. The settlement was inhabited only for about twenty years.4 ElLahunedit Main article ElLahun The workmens village at ElLahun was built and inhabited during the reign of Senusret II of the Twelfth Dynasty.5 Located near the entrance to the channel of the Nile that leads to the Faiyum Oasis it housed the workers who constructed Senusrets pyramid as well as the priests who maintained the royal funerary cult and possibly even the king himself. The village was apparently only fully inhabited during the kings reign. The village was organized according to a regular plan. It was centered on the temple of the Senusrets pyramid which visually dominated the village and it consisted of two unequal quarters enclosed by mudbrick walls on at least three sides. The smaller western quarter contained the relatively humble dwellings of the workers that were laid out on a rectangular grid pattern. Flinders Petrie who first excavated the site noted how the layout of the neighborhood would allow a single nightwatchman to easily guard the area. The houses all followed the same basic pattern and dimensions and they were evenly spaced along the parallel streets. The streets were paved and stone drainage channels built into them leading to a central drain allowed the disposal of dirty water from the houses. The much larger eastern quarter contained considerably larger buildings including mansions an acropolis with an attached guard building storerooms a few more workers dwellings and some buildings at the far east side whose purposes are unknown. Deir elMedinaedit Main article Deir elMedina The workmens village at Deir elMedina located in a valley on the west bank of the Nile across from Thebes was first constructed under Thutmose I of the Nineteenth Dynasty to house the workers who worked on the tombs in the nearby Valley of the Kings during the New Kingdom.6 The village is surrounded by a thin mudbrick wall and built around a central street. Houses were connected at the sides sharing walls for building and space efficiency. It is possible that entire blocks of houses were covered by a single roof. The original village had 20 houses probably supporting a population of about 100 people. The village was expanded once under Thutmose III and when the workers returned to Deir elMedina after the reign of Akhenaten during which they were transferred to Amarna the village was expanded again and formed nine distinct quarters. At its largest point Deir elMedina contained 120 houses and probably about 600 inhabitants. Amarnaedit Main article Amarna Royal Wadi Workmens village Tomb of Akhenaten Northern tombs Southern tombs Stelae U Desert altars MaruAten Northern Palace North City Kom elNana Stelae H Great Aten Temple Akhenaten of the eighteenth Dynasty built Akhetaten as the new capital city of Egypt.7 For the location he chose Amarna a fresh site on the eastern bank of the Nile about 275 kilometers northwest of the old capital city of Thebes. After his death the city was virtually abandoned. The degree of planning involved in the construction of Amarna involved for the most part the administrative and religious buildings of the Central City.8 Even the planned part of the city was somewhat hastily designed and assembled.9 Most of the city was built along an eight kilometer northsouth main street referred to today as the Royal Road which connected the Central City with the North City an outlying satellite and the probable residence of the king.10 The king probably lived in the North Riverside Palace in the North City a large building on the east side of the Royal Road and separate from the rest of the city protected by a fortified wall which enclosed a complex of royal service buildings. On the opposite side of the road from the palace lay a group of some of the largest houses in the city probably belonging to nobles who were close to the king. An administrative building containing an enormous warehouse formed the northern limit of the North City. At the southern end of the Royal Road lay the Central City a group of temples palaces and administrative buildings forming the executive hub of the city. The planned buildings of the Central City can be found in an inscription on one of the Amarna Boundary Stelae which marked the boundaries of the city at its founding.11 In it Akhenaten describes the main buildings he will construct in his new capital  I am making a House of the Aten for the Aten my father in Akhetaten in this place. I am making the Mansion of the Aten for the Aten my father in Akhetaten in this place. I am making the Sunshade of Re of the great royal wife  for the Aten my father in Akhetaten in this place. I am making a House of Rejoicing for the Aten my father in the island of Aten distinguished in jubilees in Akhetaten in this place. I have made a house of Rejoicing of the Aten for the Aten my father in the island of Aten distinguished in jubilees in Akhetaten in this place.12 Some of these buildings can be identified easily by their inscriptions but we know the names of others only through this speech. On the entire western side of the road and probably reaching down to the riverside was the Great Palace consisting of several stone courts and halls and housing at its center a huge courtyard surrounded by statues of Akhenaten.13 Across the road and connected by a brick bridge lay the Kings House a small palace and residence of the king.14 South of the palace on the west side of the road was the Mansion of the Sundisc a religious building whose purpose is not completely understood but was likely the kings mortuary temple.15 In the northernmost position on the east side of the road in the Central City was the largest temple of all the House of the Sundisc or the Great Temple of the Aten which lay on an eastwest axis and consisted of a rectangular walled area measuring 760 by 290 meters enclosing several individual temples. Near the temples were long storehouses and priests housing.16 Due east of the kings house were offices the archives in which the Amarna Letters were found and police and military barracks. On the eastern outskirts of the Central City was a walled workmens village housing the workers during the citys construction. Villas of the kings viziers and priests sprawled along both sides of the Royal Road to the south. At the far south of the city was an unusual complex called the MaruAten a walled complex of gardens pools an artificial island and openair kiosks.17 While it was originally mistaken by excavators as a sort of pleasure resort it is understood now to be a religious building. Most of Amarnas housing was in two large areas north and south of the Central City.18 These sprawling suburbs housed the large population needed to maintain the court and run the administration of the Central City. Residing in the suburbs was a very mixed collection of social groups the priests soldiers builders sculptors and scribes having the most prominent houses. As far as the residential sections of Amarna are concerned there is almost a complete absence of an imposed layout. Outside the corridor of the Royal Road there were a few broad far from straight streets running more or less north and south and joining the suburbs to the center crossed by perpendicular smaller streets. The houses themselves are arranged in arbitrary clusters which create distinct neighborhoods. There does not seem to be any concept of prime location except to be located on one of the main northsouth streets and rich and poor seemed to live side by side. Proximity to the Central City or the Royal Road seems to have been unimportant and there is at least one example of a royal vizier who seems to have chosen to live as far away from the king as possible. See alsoedit Index of urban planning articles Referencesedit  Kemp elAmarna 124  Uphill  Uphill  Kemp Ancient Egypt p. 227  Uphill  Uphill  Kemp elAmarna 123  Kemp Ancient Egypt 284  Redford 144  Kemp Ancient Egypt 284  Fairman  Fairman 136  Kemp Ancient Egypt 184  Kemp Ancient Egypt 287  Redford 146  Redford 148  Redford 149  Kemp Ancient Egypt 327 Bibliographyedit Fairman H. W. Topographical Notes on the Central City Tell elAmarnah Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 21 1935 135139. Kemp Barry. The City of elAmarna as a Source for the Study of Urban Society in Ancient Egypt. World Archaeology 
9.2  1977 123139. Kemp Barry. Ancient Egypt Anatomy of a Civilization Second Edition Routledge London New York 2006 ISBN 9780415235501 2006. Redford Donald B. Akhenaten the Heretic King. Princeton University Press 1984. Uphill Eric. Egyptian Towns and Cities. Oxford Shire 2008. v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Landuse planning Comprehensive planning US History of urban planning Spatial planning Eur Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement UK Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transitoriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts theories Movements Athens Charter Carfree movement City Beautiful movement Darksky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town  Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Model village Planned community New town Intentional community Arcology Urban village Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain US Filtering housing Gentrification  Brusselization Infill Healthy cities  Healthy community design LEEDND Leapfrog development Mixeduse development Model cities Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl  Periurbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization  Highrise urbanism Zoning People Theorists practitioners Andrs Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal OToole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related disciplines Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Urban ecology Urban economics Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleUrbanplanninginancientEgyptoldid1174111762 Categories Ancient Egyptian society Urban planning Ancient Egyptian culture Cities in ancient Egypt Ancient Egyptian architecture Hidden categories All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 This page was last edited on 6 September 2023 at 1146 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width