Ancient Egyptian architecture - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Characteristics 
2 Columns 
3 Giza pyramid complex 
4 New Kingdom Temples Toggle New Kingdom Temples subsection 
4.1 Luxor Temple 
4.2 Temple of Karnak 
4.3 Ramesseum 
4.4 Temple of Malkata 
5 Ancient Egyptian fortresses Toggle Ancient Egyptian fortresses subsection 
5.1 Pelusium Fortress 
5.2 Fortress of Jaffa 
6 Mastabas 
7 Gardens 
8 Transformation and later use Toggle Transformation and later use subsection 
8.1 Modern use 
9 See also 
10 References 
11 Further reading 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian architecture 39 languages  Azrbaycanca Catal etina Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge   Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar    Nederlands  Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia This is Wikipedias current article for improvement  and you can help edit it You can discuss how to improve it on its talk page and ask questions at the help desk or Teahouse. See the cheatsheet tutorial editing help and FAQ for additional information. Editors are encouraged to create a Wikipedia account and place this article on their watchlist. Ancient Egyptian architecture Top Great Pyramid of Giza c. 25892566 BC Centre Columns of the Great Hypostyle Hall from the Temple of Karnak c. 12941213 BC Bottom Temple of Isis from Philae c. 380 BC117 AD Years active c. 3100 BC300 AD Ancient Egyptian culture Architecture Art Clothing Cuisine Dance Literature v t e Spanning over three thousand years ancient Egypt was not one stable civilization but in constant change and upheaval commonly split into periods by historians. Likewise ancient Egyptian architecture is not one style but a set of styles differing over time but with some commonalities. The best known example of ancient Egyptian architecture are the Egyptian pyramids and Sphinx while excavated temples palaces tombs and fortresses have also been studied. Most buildings were built of locally available mud brick and limestone by paid laborers and craftsmen.12 Monumental buildings were built using the post and lintel method of construction. Many buildings were aligned astronomically. Columns were typically adorned with capitals decorated to resemble plants important to Egyptian civilization such as the papyrus plant. Ancient Egyptian architectural motifs have influenced architecture elsewhere reaching the wider world first during the Orientalizing period and again during the nineteenthcentury Egyptomania. Characteristicsedit Winged sun on a cavetto from the Medinet Habu temple complex. The winged sun represents a form of the falcon god Horus son of Isis triumphant over his enemies. The image was also a common protective device over temple entrances The well preserved Temple of Isis from Philae Egypt with a pylon the monumental gate of an Egyptian temple Due to the scarcity of wood3 the two predominant building materials used in ancient Egypt were sunbaked mud brick and stone mainly limestone but also sandstone and granite in considerable quantities.4 From the Old Kingdom onward stone was generally reserved for tombs and temples while bricks were used even for royal palaces fortresses the walls of temple precincts and towns and for subsidiary buildings in temple complexes. The core of the pyramids consisted of locally quarried stone mud bricks sand or gravel. For the casing stones were used that had to be transported from farther away predominantly white limestone from Tura and red granite from upper Egypt. Ancient Egyptian houses were made out of mud collected from the damp banks of the Nile river. It was placed in moulds and left to dry in the hot sun to harden for use in construction. If the bricks were intended to be used in a royal tomb like a pyramid the exterior bricks would also be finely chiselled and polished. Many Egyptian towns have disappeared because they were situated near the cultivated area of the Nile Valley and were flooded as the river bed slowly rose during the millennia or the mud bricks and sundried brick of which they were built were used by peasants as fertilizer. Others are inaccessible new buildings having been erected on ancient ones. However the dry hot climate of Egypt preserved some mud brick structures. Examples include the village Deir alMadinah the Middle Kingdom town at Kahun5 and the fortresses at Buhen6 and Mirgissa. Also many temples and tombs have survived because they were built on high ground unaffected by the Nile flood and were constructed of stone. Thus our understanding of ancient Egyptian architecture is based mainly on religious monuments7 massive structures characterized by thick sloping walls with few openings possibly echoing a method of construction used to obtain stability in mud walls. In a similar manner the incised and flatly modeled surface adornment of the stone buildings may have derived from mud wall ornamentation. Although the use of the arch was developed during the fourth dynasty all monumental buildings are post and lintel constructions with flat roofs constructed of huge stone blocks supported by the external walls and the closely spaced columns. Exterior and interior walls as well as the columns and piers were covered with hieroglyphic and pictorial frescoes and carvings painted in brilliant colors.8 Many motifs of Egyptian ornamentation are symbolic such as the scarab or sacred beetle the solar disk and the vulture. Other common motifs include palm leaves the papyrus plant and the buds and flowers of the lotus.9 Hieroglyphs were inscribed for decorative purposes as well as to record historic events or spells. In addition these pictorial frescoes and carvings allow us to understand how the Ancient Egyptians lived statuses wars that were fought and their beliefs. This was especially true in recent years when exploring the tombs of Ancient Egyptian officials. Ancient Egyptian temples were aligned with astronomically significant events such as solstices and equinoxes requiring precise measurements at the moment of the particular event. Measurements at the most significant temples may have been ceremonially undertaken by the Pharaoh himself.1011 Columnsedit Illustrations of various types of capitals c.18491859 drawn by the egyptologist Karl Richard Lepsius Illustrations of papyriform capitals in The Grammar of Ornament Illustration of other nine types of capitals from The Grammar of Ornament Columns with Hathoric capitals at the Temple of Isis from island Philae Papyriform columns in the Luxor Temple As early as 2600 BC the architect Imhotep made use of stone columns whose surface was carved to reflect the organic form of bundled reeds like papyrus lotus and palm in later Egyptian architecture faceted cylinders were also common. Their form is thought to derive from archaic reedbuilt shrines. Carved from stone the columns were highly decorated with carved and painted hieroglyphs texts ritual imagery and natural motifs. Egyptian columns are famously present in the Great Hypostyle Hall of Karnak c.1224 BC where 134 columns are lined up in 16 rows with some columns reaching heights of 24 metres. One of the most important type are the papyriform columns. The origin of these columns goes back to the 
5 th Dynasty. They are composed of lotus papyrus stems which are drawn together into a bundle decorated with bands the capital instead of opening out into the shape of a bellflower swells out and then narrows again like a flower in bud. The base which tapers to take the shape of a halfsphere like the stem of the lotus has a continuously recurring decoration of stipules. At the Luxor Temple the columns are reminiscent of papyrus bundles perhaps symbolic of the marsh from which the ancient Egyptians believed the creation of the world to have unfolded. Giza pyramid complexedit Main article Giza pyramid complex The Giza Necropolis stands on the Giza Plateau on the outskirts of Cairo Egypt. This complex of ancient monuments is located some 8 kilometers 
5.0  miles inland into the desert from the old town of Giza on the Nile some 20 kilometers 12 miles southwest of Cairo city center. This ancient Egyptian necropolis consists of the Pyramid of Khufu also known as the Great Pyramid or the Pyramid of Cheops the somewhat smaller Pyramid of Khafre or KephrenChefren and the relatively modestsized Pyramid of Menkaure or MykerinusMycerinus along with a number of smaller satellite edifices known as queens pyramids the Great Sphinx as well as a few hundred mastabas and chapels.12 The three main pyramids at Giza together with subsidiary pyramids and the remains of other structures at the Giza pyramid complex The pyramids which were built in the Fourth Dynasty testify to the power of the pharaonic religion and state. They were built to serve both as grave sites and also as a way to make their names last forever.13 The size and simple design show the high skill level of Egyptian design and engineering on a large scale.13 The Great Pyramid of Giza which was probably completed c.2580 BC is the oldest of the Giza pyramids and the largest pyramid in the world and is the only surviving monument of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.14 The pyramid of Khafre is believed to have been completed around 2532 BC at the end of Khafres reign.15 Khafre ambitiously placed his pyramid next to his fathers. It is not as tall as his fathers pyramid but he was able to give it the impression of appearing taller by building it on a site with a foundation 33 feet 10 m higher than his fathers.15 Along with building his pyramid Chefren commissioned the sculpting of the giant Sphinx as guardian over his tomb. The face of a human possibly a depiction of the pharaoh on a lions body was seen as a symbol of divinity among the Greeks fifteen hundred years later.13 The Great Sphinx is carved out of the limestone bedrock and stands about 65 feet 20 m tall.13 Menkaures pyramid dates to circa 2490 BC and stands 213 feet 65 m high making it the smallest of the Great Pyramids.16 Popular culture leads people to believe that Pyramids are highly confusing with many tunnels within the pyramid to create confusion for grave robbers. This is not true. The shafts of pyramids are quite simple mostly leading directly to the tomb. The immense size of the pyramids attracted robbers to the wealth that lay inside which caused the tombs to be robbed relatively soon after they were sealed in some cases.13 There are sometimes additional tunnels but these were used for the builders to understand how far they could dig the tomb into the crust of the Earth. Also it is popularly thought that due to grave robbers future kings were buried in the Valley of the Kings to help keep them hidden. This is also false as the pyramid construction continued for many dynasties just on a smaller scale. Finally the pyramid construction was stopped due to economic factors not theft. New Kingdom Templesedit Luxor Templeedit Main article Luxor Temple Entrance to Luxor Temple The Luxor Temple is a huge ancient Egyptian temple complex located on the east bank of the River Nile in the city today known as Luxor ancient Thebes. Construction work on the temple began during the reign of Amenhotep III in the 
14 th century BC during the New Kingdom. Horemheb and Tutankhamun added columns statues and friezes  and Akhenaten had earlier obliterated his fathers cartouches and installed a shrine to the Aten  but the only major expansion effort took place under Ramesses II some 100 years after the first stones were put in place. Luxor is thus unique among the main Egyptian temple complexes in having only two pharaohs leave their mark on its architectural structure. Hypostyle hall of Karnak Temple. Pictured is the largest precinct of the temple complex dedicated to AmunRe. The columns are of sandstone. The temple proper begins with the 24 m 79 ft high First Pylon built by Ramesses II. The pylon was decorated with scenes of Ramessess military triumphs particularly the Battle of Qadesh later pharaohs particularly those of the Kushite dynasty also recorded their victories there. This main entrance to the temple complex was originally flanked by six colossal statues of Ramesses  four seated and two standing  but only two both seated have survived. Modern visitors can also see a 25 m 82 ft tall pink granite obelisk this one of a matching pair until 1835 when the other one was taken to Paris where it now stands in the centre of the Place de la Concorde. Through the pylon gateway leads into a peristyle courtyard also built by Ramesses II. This area and the pylon were built at an oblique angle to the rest of the temple presumably to accommodate the three preexisting barque shrines located in the northwest corner. After the peristyle courtyard comes the processional colonnade built by Amenhotep III  a 100 m 330 ft corridor lined by 14 papyruscapital columns. Friezes on the wall describe the stages in the Opet Festival from sacrifices at Karnak at the top left through Amuns arrival at Luxor at the end of that wall and concluding with his return on the opposite side. The decorations were put in place by Tutankhamun the boy pharaoh is depicted but his names have been replaced with those of Horemheb. Beyond the colonnade is a peristyle courtyard which also dates back to Amenhoteps original construction. The best preserved columns are on the eastern side where some traces of original color can be seen. The southern side of this courtyard is made up of a 
36 column hypostyle court i.e. a roofed space supported by columns that leads into the dark inner rooms of the temple. Temple of Karnakedit Main article Karnak Example of inscriptions present throughout the complex. The upper regions are painted suggesting in canon with other such temples that the remaining columns and ceilings would have been brightly painted. The temple roof representing the heavens17 often bore images of stars and birds while the columns often bore images of palms lotuses and people. The temple complex of Karnak is located on the banks of the Nile River some 
2.5  kilometers 
1.6  miles north of Luxor. It consists of four main parts Precinct of AmonRe the Precinct of Montu the Precinct of Mut and the Temple of Amenhotep IV dismantled as well as a few smaller temples and sanctuaries located outside the enclosing walls of the four main parts and several avenues of ramheaded sphinxes connecting the Precinct of Mut the Precinct of AmonRe and Luxor Temple. This temple complex is particularly significant for many rulers notably every ruler of the New Kingdom have added to it. The site covers over 80 hectares 200 acres and consists of a series of pylons leading into courtyards halls chapels obelisks and smaller temples. The key difference between Karnak and most of the other temples and sites in Egypt is the length of time over which it was developed and used. Construction work began in the 
16 th century BC and was originally quite modest in size but eventually in the main precinct alone as many as twenty temples and chapels would be constructed.18 Approximately 30 pharaohs contributed to the buildings enabling it to reach a size complexity and diversity not seen elsewhere. Few of the individual features of Karnak are unique but the size and number of those features are overwhelming. Recreation of the temple complex at Karnak visitor center One of the greatest temples in Egyptian history is that of AmunRa at Karnak. As with many other temples in Egypt this one honors the gods and details the feats of the past including thousands of years of history depicted by inscriptions on many of the walls and columns found on site often modified or completely erased and redone by following rulers. The temple of AmunRe was constructed in three sections the third being constructed by late New Kingdom pharaohs. In canon with the traditional style of Egyptian architecture many of the architectural features such as the inner sanctum of the complex were aligned with the sunset of the summer solstice. One of the architectural features present at the site is the 5000 sq m 50000 sq ft hypostyle hall built during the Ramesside period. The hall is supported by approximately 139 sandstone and mud brick columns with 12 central columns 25 meters 82 feet tall that would have all been brightly painted. Ramesseumedit Main article Ramesseum Ramesses mortuary temple adheres to standard New Kingdom templearchitecture style. Oriented northwest to southeast the temple entrance comprises a number of stone figures one located horizontally to the next. At center of the complex was a covered 
48 column hypostyle hall surrounding the inner sanctuary. Ramesses II a 
19 th Dynasty pharaoh ruled Egypt from around 1279 to 1213 BCE. Among his many accomplishments such as the expansion of Egypts borders he constructed a massive temple called the Ramesseum located near Thebes then the capital of the New Kingdom. The Ramesseum was a magnificent temple complete with monumental statues to guard its entrance. The most impressive was a 62 foottall statue of Ramses himself.19 The base and torso are all that remain of this impressive statue of the enthroned pharaoh thus its original dimensions and weight approximately 1000 tons are based on estimates. The temple features impressive reliefs many detailing a number of Ramses military victories such as the Battle of Kadesh ca. 1274 BCE and the pillaging of the city of Shalem. The Ramesseum was built to be a place of worship for Ramesses II.20 Although there are only traces left of its former structure the Ramesseum was not only a temple but it included a palace too.21 The Ramesseum was more than those however. Not only was it a place of worship but it also had other rooms used for catering to the needs of the people such as bakeries kitchens and supply rooms which were found in the southern part of the temple during an excavation.22 There was also a school where boys were taught to become scribes which was located in the area between the kitchen and palace.22 There were other burials that were built in the Ramesseum after it was ruined as well.20 The Ramesseum was originally built for Ramesses II but after it was ruined the Ramesseum was given to certain families of the 
22 nd dynasty who then placed the second burials in the chambers and used it as a cemetery of sort.20 There have been many restorations done to the Ramesseum as well with one being the installation of a Ramesses IIs colossus head on a plinth and bracing it after it was found lying on the ground.22 Another was for areas that were made out of mud bricks. These areas were restored by covering them with modern bricks that were made of the same material but are stronger than the mud bricks so they would be able to hold against natural elements such as torrential rain.22 Temple of Malkataedit Main article Malkata Under the tenure of Amenhotep III workers constructed over 250 buildings and monuments. One of the most impressive building projects was the temple complex of Malkata known among the ancient Egyptians as the house of rejoicing was constructed to serve his royal residence on the west bank of Thebes just south of the Theban necropolis. The site is approximately 226000 square meters or 2432643 square feet.23 Given the immense size of the site along with its many buildings courts parade grounds and housing it is considered to have served not just as a temple and dwelling of the Pharaoh but a town. The central area of the complex consisted in the Pharaohs apartments that were made up of a number of rooms and courts all of which were oriented around a columned banquet hall. Accompanying the apartments that presumably housed the royal cohort and foreign guests was a large throne room connected to smaller chambers for storage waiting and smaller audiences. The greater elements of this area of the complex are what have been come to be called the West Villas just west of the Kings Palace the North Palace and Village and Temple. The faience glazed ceramic earthenware tile above is a reconstruction of wall decoration fragments found at the Temple of Malkata in stacks at the southwest corner.24 The gold spirals here were painted with gold paint whereas the originals would have probably been covered by gold foil. Notably similar patterns are found in the Pharaohs Palace.24 The temples external dimensions are approximately 1
83.5  by 1
10.5  m and consists of two parts the large forecourt and the temple proper.23 The large front court is 1
31.5  by 1
05.5  m oriented on the eastwest axis and occupies the east part of the temple complex.23 The western part of the court is on a higher level and is divided from the rest of the court by a low retaining wall. The lower court is almost square whereas the upper terrace was rectangular in shape. The upper section of the court was paved with mud bricks and has a 4 m wide entrance to it from the lower part of the forecourt connecting the base to the upper landing was a ramp enclosed by walls.23 This ramp and entrance were both at the center of the temple with the same orientation as the front court entrance and the temple proper. The temple proper might be seen as divided in to three distinct parts central north and south. The central part is indicated by a small rectangular anteroom 
6.5  by 
3.5  m many of the door jambs including those of the antechamber include inscriptions such as given life like Ra forever.23 A 
12.5  by 
14.5  m hall follows the anteroom from which is entered via a 
3.5  m wide door in the center of the front wall of the hall. There is evidence the ceiling of this chamber was decorated with yellow stars on blue background whereas the walls today show only the appearance of a white stucco over mud plaster.23 Notwithstanding we might speculate given the numerous decorative plaster fragments found within the rooms deposit that these too were ornately decorated with various images and patterns. Supporting the ceiling are six columns arranged in two rows with eastwest axis. Only small fragments of the column bases have survived though they suggest the diameter of these columns to have been about 
2.2 5 m.23 The columns are placed 
2.5  m away from the walls and in each row the columns are approximately 
1.4  m away from the next while the space between the two rows is 3 m.23 A second hall 
12.5  by 10 m23 is accessed by a 3 m door at the center of the back wall of the first. The second hall is similar to the first first its ceiling seems to have been decorated with similar if not identical patterns and images as the first. Second in the same way the ceiling is supported by columns four to be precise ordered in two rows on the same axis as those of the first hall with a 3 m wide space between them. In hall two atleast one of the rooms appears to have been dedicated to the cult of Maat which suggests the other three in this area might have likewise served such a religious purpose.23 The southern part of the temple may be divided into two sections western and southern. The western section consists of 6 rooms whereas the southern area given its size 
19.5  by 
17.2  m suggests it might have served as another open court. In many of these rooms were found blue ceramic tiles inlaid with gold around their edge.23 The Northern part of the temple proper consists of ten rooms similar in style to those of the southern. The temple itself seems to have been dedicated to the Egyptian deity Amun given the number of bricks stamped with various inscriptions such as the temple of Amun in the house of Rejoicing or Nebmaarta in the Temple of Amun in the house of Rejoicing. Overall the temple of Malakata shares many with other cult temples of the New Kingdom with magnificent halls and religiously oriented rooms with many others more closely resemble store rooms.25 Ancient Egyptian fortressesedit Ramparts at Mirgissa Nubia Fortifications within Ancient Egypt were built in times of conflict between rival principalities.26 Out of all fortresses analyzed within this time frame most if not all were built of the same materials. The only exception to the rule were some fortresses from the Old Kingdom as fortresses such as the fort of Buhen utilized stone with the creation of its walls. The main walls were mainly built with mud brick but were reinforced with other materials such as timber. Rocks were also utilized to not only preserve them from erosion as well as paving.26 Secondary walls would be built outside of fortresses main walls and were relatively close to one another. As a result this would prove to be a challenge to invaders as they were forced to destroy this fortification before they could reach the main walls of the fort.27 Another strategy was utilized if the enemy managed to break through the first barrier. Upon making it to the main wall a ditch would be constructed that would be positioned between the secondary and first walls. The purpose of this was to place the enemy in a position that would leave them exposed to the enemy making the invaders susceptible to arrow fire.27 The position of this ditch walls within the interior of fortresses would become demilitarized during times of unity leading to them being demolished. The parts that were used to construct said walls could then be reused making the overall design extremely beneficial. Fortresses within ancient Egypt held multiple functions. During the Middle Kingdom Period the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt would establish means of control throughout the Nubian Riverside by creating fortified stations. The location of Egyptian fortresses were not exclusive to just the riverside. Sites within both Egypt and Nubia would be placed on terrain that was either rocky or sandy.27 The purpose behind this method was to spread its influence throughout the region as well as discourage rival groups from raiding the sites.26 Inspections of these forts in Nubia have led to the discovery of copper smelting materials which suggest a relationship with miners in the region.26 The occupation of these Nubian forts suggests a trade relationship between the two parties. Miners would collect the materials and would transfer them to these forts in exchange for food and water. Up until the Thirteenth dynasty Egypt would maintain control of Nubia through the use of these fortresses.26 Pelusium Fortressedit The Pelusium fortress served as means of protection for the Nile Delta from invaders.28 While the site served this role for more than a millennium Pelusium was also known for being a center of trade both land and maritime. Trade was primarily conducted between Egypt and the Levant.28 While information is not concrete in terms of the fortresss establishment it is suggested that Pelusium was erected during either the Middle Kingdom period or during the Saite and Persian periods from the 
8 th to 
6 th century BC.28 Pelusium is also seen as an integral part of the Nile as other ruins were found outside its borders indicating that the area was large in occupation. Architecturally structures of Pelusium such as its gates and towers appear to be built from limestone. A metallurgy industry is also indicated to have taken place at this site due to the discovery of copperore.28 Excavations of the site have also discovered older materials that date back to some of the early dynasties and include basalt granite diorite marble and quartzite.28 These materials may however have been of more recent origin.28 The fortress was constructed in close proximity to the Nile River and was largely surrounded by both dunes and coastlines.28 There are multiple reasons that caused the decline of the Pelusium fortress. During its existence events such as the Bubonic Plague appeared in the Mediterranean for the first time and multiple fires within the fortress occurred.28 Conquest by the Persians as well as a decrease in trade also may have led to an increase in abandonment. Officially natural reasons are what led to Pelusium falling apart such as tectonic motions.28 The official desertion of the site is attributed to the time of the crusades.28 Fortress of Jaffaedit Jaffa Fortress was prominent during the New Kingdom period of Egypt. It served as both a fortress and a port on the Mediterranean coast. To this day Jaffa serves as a primary Israeli port.29 Originally under the control of the Canaanites the site fell under the control of the Egyptian Empire.29 During the Late Bronze Age the site was successfully used as a base for campaigns of 
18 th dynasty Pharaohs.29 In terms of its functions the site held multiple roles. It is suggested that Jaffas primary function was to serve as a granary for the Egyptian Army. Rameses gate which is dated to the Late Bronze Age serves as a connection to the fortress. Ramparts were also discovered with the fortress. Upon excavation the site hosted multiple items such as bowls imported jars pot stands and beer and bread which further emphasizes the importance of these items to the area.29 The discovery of these objects show a close connection between the storing of food and the creation of ceramic items.29 Mastabasedit Mastabat alFiraun where king Shepseskaf was buried made of red sandstone pink granite and Tura limestone Mastabas are burial tombs that hold royal significance. As chosen by Egyptian rulers many of the tombs found throughout time were located along the Nile river.30 The structural exterior regarding Mastabas varies throughout history but there is a noticeable evolution in successive Egyptian dynasties. The mastabas of the First Egyptian Dynasty would be created through the use of stepped bricks.31 The design evolved so that by the time of the Fourth Dynasty the structural exterior had been changed from brick to stone.31 The reasoning behind the stepped designs of mastabas is connected to the idea of accession.31 Lateral penetration was a concern in when constructing tombs. In order to prevent damage to the structure brickwork layers were placed around the base of structure.31 Mastabas from the old empire took on a pyramidal design structure.30 This design was largely reserved for rulers such as the king and his family as a means for burial.30 Other design characteristics regarding mastabas from the Old Kingdom include having rectangular outlines walls that were slanted the use of stone and brick materials and having the axis of the structure run NorthSouth.30 Multiple elements make up the interior of a mastaba such as an offering chamber statues for the dead and a vault beneath which held the sarcophagus.30 By the end of the Old Kingdom the use of these tombs had been abandoned. Gardensedit Further information Gardens of ancient Egypt This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. March 2022 Learn how and when to remove this message Three types of gardens are attested from ancient Egypt temple gardens private gardens and vegetable gardens. Some temples such as those at Deir elBahri were provided with groves and trees especially the sacred Ished Tree Persea. Private pleasure gardens are known from an 
11 th Dynasty tomb model of Meketra and from tomb decoration of the New Kingdom. They were typically surrounded by a high wall planted with trees and flowers and provided with shady areas. Plants were cultivated for fruits and fragrance. Flowers included cornflowers32 poppies and daisies while the pomegranate introduced in the New Kingdom became a popular shrub. The gardens of wealthier individuals were arranged around an ornamental pool for fish waterfowl and waterlilies. Vegetable plots whether privately owned or belonging to temples were laid out in squares divided by water channels and located close to the Nile. They were irrigated by hand or from the late 
18 th Dynasty by means of the shaduf. Model of Meketras house and garden from his tomb at Thebes which consists of a shady grove of trees surrounding a central garden c.19811975 BC painted wood and copper height 
39.5  cm 15 916 in. Metropolitan Museum of Art New York City Architectural drawing of a garden on a writing board c.15501295 BC plastered and painted wood height 
23.5  cm 9 14 in. Metropolitan Museum of Art Brickmakers getting water from a pool c.14791425 BC tempera on paper from the tomb of Rekhmire Metropolitan Museum of Art Fresco which depicts the pool in Nebamuns estate garden c.1350 BC painted plaster height 64 cm maxim British Museum London Transformation and later useedit The Abu Haggag Mosque is integrated into the pharaonic era 
14 th century BC Egyptian Luxor temple which has made it the oldest continuously used temple structure worldwide With the rise of ancient Roman and Coptic culture elements of ancient Egyptian architecture were integrated and transformed as evident in Egyptian churches and later mosques. The White Monastery as well as the nearby Red Monastery are early coptic examples with ancient Egyptian style elements Modern useedit See also Egyptomania In the 
19 th and 
20 th centuries Egyptian architectural motifs were used for modern architecture giving rise to Egyptian Revival architecture and later particularly Egyptian Theater cinemas and other themed entertainment places. The Washington Monument a modern monument in Egyptian obelisk style. See alsoedit Art of ancient Egypt Center for Documentation of Cultural and Natural Heritage Edfu Egyptian pyramid construction techniques Egyptian Revival architecture Egyptian revival decorative arts List of ancient Egyptian sites Medinet Habu Urban planning in ancient Egypt Coptic architecture Referencesedit  Pyramids of Giza  National Geographic. History. 21 January 2017. Archived from the original on 19 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2023.  Lesko Leonard H. 2018. Pharaohs Workers The Villagers of Deir el Medina. Cornell University Press. ISBN 9781501727610. Archived from the original on 15 May 2023. Retrieved 22 February 2023.  R. G. Blakemore History of Interior Design and Furniture From Ancient Egypt to NineteenthCentury Europe John Wiley and Sons 1996 p.100  Blakemore 1996 p.107  W. M. Flinders Petrie Kahun Gurob and Hawara Kegan Paul Trench Trbner and Co. London 1890  Charles Gates Ancient Cities The Archaeology of Urban Life in the Ancient Near East and Egypt Greece and Rome Routledge 2003 p.101  Dieter Arnold Byron Esely Shafer Temples of Ancient Egypt I.B.Tauris 2005  Blakemore 1996 pp.1
07 ff.  Arnold 2005 pp.2
04 ff  Ancient Egyptian temples aligned with astronomical events. New Scientist. 203 2724 7. September 2009. doi
10.1 0
16 S0262407909623071.  Belmonte Juan Antonio Shaltout Mosalam August 2010. Keeping Maat An astronomical approach to the orientation of the temples in ancient Egypt. Advances in Space Research. 46 4 532539. Bibcode20
10 AdSpR..46..5
32 B. doi
10.1 0
16 j.asr.20
09.0 
3.0 33.  Winston Alan. An overview of the Giza Plateau in Egypt. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011.  a b c d e Reich Lawrence S. Cunningham John J. 2010. Culture and values  a survey of the humanities 
7 th ed.. Boston MA Wadsworth Cengage Learning. ISBN 9780495568773.cite book CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  The 7 Wonders of the Ancient World. Archived from the original on 8 August 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011.  a b Lehner Mark. The Pyramid of Khafre. The Complete Pyramids. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011.  Pyramid of Mankaure. National Geographic Egypt. National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011.  Giulio Magli 2013. Architecture Astronomy and Sacred Landscape in Ancient Egypt. Cambridge University Press.  Wilkinson R. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. New York Thames  Hudson. pp. 154. ISBN 9780500051009.  Dieter Arnold 2003. The encyclopaedia of ancient Egyptian architecture. I.B. Tauris. pp. 196. ISBN 1860644651.  a b c Quibell James Edward 1898. The Ramesseum. B. Quaritch. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2023.  Ancient Egyptian architecture  Tombs Temples  Significance  Britannica. www.britannica.com. 19 October 2023. Archived from the original on 30 September 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023.  a b c d Research Development and Management of Heritage on the Left Bank of the Nile Ramesseum and its environs. unesdoc.unesco.org. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023.  a b c d e f g h i j k Koltsida Aikaterini 2007. A Dark Spot in Ancient Egyptian Architecture The Temple of Malkata. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 43 4357. JSTOR 27801605.  a b Reconstruction of Geometric Decoration. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 10 May 2018. Retrieved 3 May 2018.  Lansing Ambrose 1918. Excavations at the Palace of Amenhotep III at Thebes. The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin. 13 3 814. doi
10.2 3073254041. JSTOR 3254041.  a b c d e Lawrence A. W. 1965. Ancient Egyptian Fortifications. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 51 6994. doi
10.1 177030751336505100109. JSTOR 3855621. S
2 CID 192286747.  a b c Clarke Somers 1916. Ancient Egyptian Frontier Fortresses. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 3 23 155179. doi
10.1 177030751331600300137. JSTOR 3853753. S
2 CID 220261423. Archived from the original on 6 May 2024. Retrieved 15 June 2022.  a b c d e f g h i j Stanley JeanDaniel Bernasconi Maria Pia Jorstad Thomas F. 2008. Pelusium an Ancient Port Fortress on Egypts Nile Delta Coast Its Evolving Environmental Setting from Foundation to Demise. Journal of Coastal Research. 24 2 451462. doi
10.2 112
07 A00
21.1 . JSTOR 30137849. S
2 CID 129465794.  a b c d e Burke Aaron A. Peilstcker Martin Karoll Amy Pierce George A. Kowalski Krister Marzouk Nadia Ben Damm Jacob C. Danielson Andrew J. Fessler Heidi D. Kaufman Brett Pierce Krystal V.L. Hflmayer Felix Damiata Brian N. Dee Michael 1 January 2017. Excavations of the New Kingdom Fortress in Jaffa 20112014 Traces of Resistance to Egyptian Rule in Canaan. American Journal of Archaeology. 121 1 85133. doi
10.3 7
64 aja.1

21.1.0 085. S
2 CID 193757757. Archived from the original on 6 May 2024. Retrieved 15 June 2022.  a b c d e R. L. E. 1910. Two Mastaba Chambers. Museum of Fine Arts Bulletin. 8 45 1920. JSTOR 4423469.  a b c d Badawy Alexander 1956. The Ideology of the Superstructure of the MastabaTomb in Egypt. Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 15 3 180183. doi
10.1 086371334. JSTOR 542310. S
2 CID 162106005.  Gardens in Ancient Egypt. National Museums Liverpool. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2022. Further readingedit Arnold Dieter 2003. The encyclopedia of ancient Egyptian architecture. Cairo American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 9781860644658. Fletcher Banister Cruickshank Dan Sir Banister Fletchers a History of Architecture Architectural Press 
20 th edition 1996 first published 1896. ISBN 0750622679. Cf. Part One Chapter 3. Hill Marsha 2007. Gifts for the gods images from Egyptian temples. New York The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9781588392312. Belmonte Juan Antonio Shaltout Mosalam Fekri Magdi 2009. Astronomy landscape and symbolism a study of the orientation of ancient Egyptian temples. In Belmonte Juan Antonio Shaltout M. A. Mosalam eds.. In Search of Cosmic Order Selected Essays on Egyptian Archaeoastronomy. Supreme Council of Antiquities Press. pp. 213284. Bibcode20
09 iscc.book..2
13 B. ISBN 9789774794834. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancient Egyptian architecture. AEgArOn  Ancient Egyptian Architecture Online open source project v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e History of architecture Architectural timeline History of construction Neolithic Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian Indian Dravidian Hindu Hoysala Vijayanagara Western Chalukya Chinese Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Aegean Minoan Mycenaean Etruscan Classical Ancient Greek Ancient Roman Herodian Incan PreIslamic Persian Achaemenid Sasanian Byzantine Russian Kievan Rus Muscovite Islamic Umayyad Moorish Abbasid Fatimid Mamluk Seljuk Timurid Ottoman Islamic Persian IndoIslamic Mughal Newari Medieval Scandinavian Somali Japanese Korean PreRomanesque Carolingian Romanesque Ottonian Norman RomanoGothic Gothic Sondergotik Plateresque Manueline Renaissance Palladian Spanish Spanish Colonial Portuguese Portuguese Colonial Sikh Baroque Andean Czech Dutch Edwardian English French Italian Maltese Petrine Elizabethan Naryshkin Portuguese Siberian Ukrainian Industrial British Revivalism Byzantine RussoByzantine SerboByzantine Colonial Egyptian Gothic Mayan Mediterranean Mission Monumentalism Baroque Rococo Neoclassical Moorish Mycenaean NeoManueline Pueblo Queen Anne Britain America and Australia Renaissance Romanian Russian Spanish Colonial Territorial Tudor Rationalism Modern Art Nouveau Jugendstil Liberty style Modern Style Modernisme Prairie School Expressionism Cubism De Stijl Bauhaus Constructivism New Objectivity Streamline Moderne Totalitarianism Nazi RationalistFascist International style Functionalism Futurism Organicism Art Deco Stripped Classicism Postconstructivism PWA Moderne Stalinist Googie Brutalism Structuralism Postmodern Blobitecture Hightech Critical regionalism Deconstructivism Neomodern New Classical Contemporary Neofuturism v t e Styles of African architecture Northern Coptic Ancient Egyptian Egyptian Revival Fatimid Heliopolis Mamluk Moorish Moorish Revival Nubian Western Igbo SudanoSahelian Hausa Songhai Yoruba Central Musgum Eastern Ethiopian Malagasy Somali Swahili Southern Cape Dutch Ndebele Colonial Cape Dutch French Portuguese v t e Architecture of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea GuineaBissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda So Tom and Prncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands  Ceuta  Melilla Spain Madeira Portugal Mayotte  Runion France Saint Helena  Ascension Island  Tristan da Cunha United Kingdom Portals Ancient Egypt Architecture Authority control databases National France BnF data Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientEgyptianarchitectureoldid1222494361 Categories Ancient Egyptian architecture Egyptology Architectural history Ancient Egyptian technology Egyptian inventions Hidden categories CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles needing additional references from March 2022 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 6 May 2024 at 0755 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width