Ancient Egyptian cuisine - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Meals 
2 Bread 
3 Beer 
4 Fruit and vegetables 
5 Meat fowl and fish 
6 See also 
7 Notes and references 
8 Further reading 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian cuisine 17 languages  Catal Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Portugus    srpski Suomi Svenska  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Diet as determined in surviving artifacts and remains An early Ramesside Period mural painting from Deir elMedina tomb depicts an Egyptian couple harvesting crops. Ancient Egyptian culture Architecture Art Clothing Cuisine Dance Literature v t e The cuisine of ancient Egypt covers a span of over three thousand years but still retained many consistent traits until well into GrecoRoman times. The staples of both poor and wealthy Egyptians were bread and beer often accompanied by greenshooted onions other vegetables and to a lesser extent meat game and fish. Mealsedit Depictions of banquets can be found in paintings from both the Old Kingdom and New Kingdom. They usually started sometime in the afternoon. Men and women were separated unless they were married. Seating varied according to social status with those of the highest status sitting on chairs those slightly lower sat on stools and those lowest in rank sat on the raw floor. Before the food was served basins were provided along with aromatics and flower scented fat was burned to spread pleasant smells or to repel insects depending on the type.1 Lily flowers and flower collars were handed out and professional dancers primarily women entertained accompanied by musicians playing harps lutes drums tambourines and clappers. There were usually considerable amounts of alcohol and abundant quantities of foods there were whole roast oxen ducks geese pigeons and at times fish. The dishes frequently consisted of stews served with great amounts of bread fresh vegetables and fruit. For sweets there were cakes baked with dates and sweetened with honey. The goddess Hathor was often invoked during feasts.1 Food could be prepared by stewing baking boiling grilling frying or roasting. Spices and herbs were added for flavor though the former were expensive imports and therefore confined to the tables of the wealthy. Food such as meats was mostly preserved by salting and dates and raisins could be dried for longterm storage. The staples bread and beer were usually prepared in the same locations as the yeast used for bread was also used for brewing. The two were prepared either in special bakeries or more often at home and any surplus would be sold.2 Honey was the primary sweetener but was rather expensive. There was honey collected from the wild and honey from domesticated bees kept in pottery hives. A cheaper alternative would have been dates or carob. There was even a hieroglyph nedjembener depicting a carob pod  that bore the primary meaning of sweet pleasant. Oils would be made from lettuce or radish seed safflower ben balanites and sesame. Animal fat was employed for cooking and jars used for storing it have been found in many settlements. Breadedit A depiction of the royal bakery from an engraving in the tomb of Ramesses III in the Valley of the Kings. There are many types of loaves including ones that are shaped like animals. 
20 th dynasty. Figurines of servants making bread First Intermediate Period after 2090 BC from Gebelein Museo Egizio Turin. Egyptian bread was made almost exclusively from emmer wheat which was more difficult to turn into flour than most other varieties of wheat. The chaff does not come off through threshing but comes in spikelets that needed to be removed by moistening and pounding with a pestle to avoid crushing the grains inside. It was then dried in the sun winnowed and sieved and finally milled on a saddle quern which functioned by moving the grindstone back and forth rather than with a rotating motion.3 The baking techniques varied over time. In the Old Kingdom heavy pottery molds were filled with dough and then set in the embers to bake. During the Middle Kingdom tall cones were used on square hearths. In the New Kingdom a new type of a large opentopped clay oven cylindrical in shape was used which was encased in thick mud bricks and mortar.3 Dough was then slapped on the heated inner wall and peeled off when done similar to how a tandoor oven is used for flatbreads. Tombs from the New Kingdom show images of bread in many different shapes and sizes. Loaves shaped like human figures fish various animals and fans all of varying dough texture. Flavorings used for bread included coriander seeds and dates but it is not known if this was ever used by the poor.3 Other than emmer barley was grown to make bread and also used for making beer and so were lily seeds and roots and tiger nut. The grit from the quern stones used to grind the flour mixed in with bread was a major source of tooth decay due to the wear it produced on the enamel. For those who could afford there was also fine dessert bread and cakes baked from highgrade flour.2 Small table of reeds and stems of papyrus. New Kingdom between 1425 and 1353 BC. AD from the Tomb of Kha and Merit Deir elMedina. Museo Egizio Turin. Beeredit Egyptian beer redirects here. For modern Egyptian beer see Beer in Egypt. Detail of painted limestone stela 
18 th dynasty reign of Akhenaten Amenophis IV circa 1300 B.C.E. depicting use of an early form of drinking straw in beerdrinking. Egyptian Museum of Berlin In Egypt beer was a primary source of nutrition and consumed daily. Beer was such an important part of the Egyptian diet that it was even used as currency.4 Like most modern African beers but unlike European beer it was very cloudy with plenty of solids and highly nutritious quite reminiscent of gruel. It was an important source of protein minerals and vitamins and was so valuable that beer jars were often used as a measurement of value and were used in medicine. Little is known about specific types of beer but there is mention of for example sweet beer but without any specific details mentioned. Globularbased vessels with a narrow neck that were used to store fermented beer5 from predynastic times have been found at Hierakonpolis and Abydos with emmer wheat residue that shows signs of gentle heating from below. Though not conclusive evidence of early beer brewing it is an indication that this might have been what they were used for. Archeological evidence shows that beer was made by first baking beer bread a type of wellleavened bread lightly baked so as to avoid killing the yeasts which was then crumbled over a sieve washed with water in a vat and finally left to ferment.6 Such beer bread resembles closely the type used in the preparation of bouza a traditional homebrewed beer still consumed in Egypt today.78 Microscopy of beer residue points to a different method of brewing where bread was not used as an ingredient. One batch of grain was sprouted which produced enzymes. The next batch was cooked in water dispersing the starch and then the two batches were mixed. The enzymes began to consume the starch to produce sugar. The resulting mixture was then sieved to remove chaff and yeast and probably lactic acid was then added to begin a fermentation process that produced alcohol. This method of brewing is still used in parts of nonindustrialized Africa. Most beers were made of barley and only a few of emmer wheat but so far no evidence of flavoring has been found.9 Fruit and vegetablesedit Vegetables were eaten as a complement to the ubiquitous beer and bread the most common were longshooted green scallions and garlic but both also had medical uses. There was also lettuce celery eaten raw or used to flavor stews certain types of cucumber and perhaps some types of Old World gourds and even melons. By GrecoRoman times there were turnips but it is not certain if they were available before that period. Various tubers of sedges including papyrus were eaten raw boiled roasted or ground into flour and were rich in nutrients. Tiger nut Cyperus esculentus was used to make a dessert made from the dried and ground tubers mixed with honey. Lily and similar flowering aquatic plants could be eaten raw or turned into flour and both root and stem were edible. A number of pulses and legumes such as peas beans lentils and chickpeas were vital sources of protein. The excavations of the workers village at Giza have revealed pottery vessels imported from the Middle East which were used to store and transport olive oil10 as early as the 
4 th Dynasty. The most common fruit were dates and there were also figs grapes and raisins dom palm nuts eaten raw or steeped to make juice certain species of Mimusops and nabk berries jujube or other members of the genus Ziziphus.2 Figs were so common because they were high in sugar and protein. The dates would either be drieddehydrated or eaten fresh. Dates were sometimes even used to ferment wine and the poor would use them as sweeteners. Unlike vegetables which were grown yearround fruit was more seasonal. Pomegranates and grapes would be brought into tombs of the deceased. Meat fowl and fishedit Hunting game birds and plowing a field. Depiction on a burial chamber from c. 2700 BC. Tomb of Nefermaat and his wife Itet. Meat came from domesticated animals game and poultry. This possibly included partridge quail pigeon ducks and geese. The chicken most likely arrived around the 
5 th to 
4 th century BC though no chicken bones have actually been found dating from before the GrecoRoman period. The most important animals were cattle sheep goats and pigs previously thought to have been taboo to eat because the priests of Egypt referred pig to the evil god Seth.11 
5 thcentury BC Greek historian Herodotus claimed that the Egyptians abstained from consuming female cows as they were sacred by association with Isis. They sacrificed male oxen that were inspected to be clean and free of disease and ate the remainder after it was ritually burned. Ill or diseased male oxen not worthy of sacrifice and had died were buried ritually and then dug up after the bones were clean and placed in a temple. Only the heads of the male oxen that were cut off and then cursed were available to be eaten by the Greeks in Egypt as they were not allowed of the sacred sacrifice meat. 12 Excavations at the Giza workers village have uncovered evidence of massive slaughter of oxen sheep and pigs such that researchers estimate that the workforce building the Great Pyramid were fed beef every day.11 Mutton and pork were more common2 despite Herodotus affirmations that swine were held by the Egyptians to be unclean and avoided.13 Poultry both wild and domestic and fish were available to all but the most destitute. The alternative protein sources would rather have been legumes eggs cheese and the amino acids available in the tandem staples of bread and beer. Mice and hedgehogs were also eaten and a common way to cook the latter was to encase a hedgehog in clay and bake it. When the clay was then cracked open and removed it took the prickly spikes with it.2 Foie gras a wellknown delicacy which is still enjoyed today was invented by the ancient Egyptians. The technique of gavage cramming food into the mouth of domesticated ducks and geese dates as far back as 2500 BC when the Egyptians began keeping birds for food.141516 A 
14 th century book translated and published in 2017 lists 10 recipes for sparrow which was eaten for its aphrodisiac properties.17 See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal Food portal History portal Egyptian cuisine Hunting fishing and animals in ancient Egypt Shedeh List of ancient dishes Notes and referencesedit  a b Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt banquets  a b c d e The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt diet  a b c Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt bread  Homan Michael 2004. Beer and Its Drinkers An Ancient near Eastern Love Story. Near Eastern Archaeology. 67 2 8495. doi
10.2 3074132364. JSTOR 4132364. S
2 CID 162357890.  Homan Michael June 2004. Beer and Its Drinkers An Ancient near Eastern Love Story. Near Eastern Archaeology. 67 2 86. doi
10.2 3074132364. JSTOR 4132364. S
2 CID 162357890.  Rayment W.J. History of Bread. www.breadinfo.com. Archived from the original on 26 August 2010. Retrieved 28 October 2018.  Caballero Benjamin Finglas Paul Toldr Fidel. Encyclopedia of Food and Health. Academic Press. p. 348.  Jensen Jon. Poor of Cairo drown their sorrows in moonshine. jonjensen. Retrieved 14 December 2016.  Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt beer  Hawass Zahi Mountains of the Pharaohs Doubleday New York 2006. p. 165.  a b Hawass Zahi Mountains of the Pharaohs Doubleday New York 2006. p. 211.  HERODOTUS Chapter II41. Retrieved 20190503.  HERODOTUS Chapter II47. Retrieved 20190503.  Ancient Egypt Farmed and domesticated animals. Archived from the original on 20171216. Retrieved 20171207.  A Global Taste Test of Foie Gras and Truffles. NPR. Archived from the original on 20180714. Retrieved 20180405.  Myhrvold Nathan. Cooking. Britannica. Britannica. Archived from the original on 20171207. Retrieved 7 December 2017.  Nasrallah Nawal 30 July 2018. 
14 thCentury Cookbook Profoundly Rich Resource for Egyptian Culinary Heritage. Arablit  Arablit Quarterly. Archived from the original on 20180801. Retrieved 6 September 2018. Further readingedit Fortin Jacey 20190808. Ancient Egyptian Yeast Is This Breads Secret Ingredient. The New York Times. Retrieved 20231107. Thurler Kim 20210318. Bake Like an Egyptian. Tufts Now. Retrieved 20231107. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cuisine of ancient Egypt. Food Bread beer and all good things reshafim.org.il 20002005. v t e Cuisines Continental African North West list Americas Caribbean North South list Asian Caucasian Central Levantine South list European Balkan Central Eastern list Oceanian Intercontinental Global Latin American Mediterranean Middle Eastern National and regional Afghan Albanian Algerian American Californian Floribbean Hawaiian Lowcountry South Carolina Midwestern US New English New Mexican Pacific Northwestern Puerto Rican Southern US Southwestern US Texan Angolan Argentine Armenian Australian Austrian Azerbaijani Bahraini Bangladeshi Barbadian Belarusian Belgian Belizean Beninese Bhutanese Bolivian BosnianHerzegovinian Botswana Brazilian British Anguillia Channel Islands English Gibraltarian Northern Irish Saint Helena Scottish Welsh Bruneian Bulgarian Burkinab Burmese Burundian Cambodian Cameroonian Canadian Acadian Qubcois Central African Republic Chadian Chilean Chinese Beijing Cantonese Hong Kong Macanese Shandong Sichuan Tibetan Xinjiang Colombian Congolese Corsican Croatian Cuban Cypriot Czech Danish Faroese Greenlandic Djiboutian Dominican Dominican Republic Dutch East Timorese Ecuadorian Egyptian Emirati Equatorial Guinean Eritrean Estonian Ethiopian Fijian Filipino Kapampangan Finnish French Occitan French Guianan Gabonese Gambian Georgian German Ghanaian Greek Cretan Epirotic Greek Macedonian Heptanesean Guatemalan GuineaBissauan Guinean Haitian Honduran Hungarian Icelandic Indian Andhra Arunachalese Assamese Bengali Bihari Goan Gujarati Himachal Pradesh Kashmiri Jharkhandi Karnataka Kerala Maharashtrian Manipuri Meghalayan Mizo Naga Odia Punjabi Rajasthani Sikkimese Sindhi Tamil Telangana Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Banjar Batak Betawi Gorontalese Indo Javanese Madurese Makassar Minahasan Minangkabau Palembangese Sundanese Iranian Iraqi Irish Israeli Jewish Italian Abruzzese Apulian Ligurian Lombard Lucanian Neapolitan Piedmontese Roman Sardinian Sicilian Venetian Ivorian Jamaican Japanese Okinawan Jordanian Kazakh Kenyan Korean North Korean South Korean Kosovan Kuwaiti Kyrgyz Lao Latvian Lebanese Lesotho Liberian Libyan Liechtensteiner Lithuanian Luxembourgish Macedonian Malagasy Malawian Malaysian Sabahan Sarawakian Maldivian Malian Maltese Marshallese Mauritanian Mauritian Mexican Moldovan Mongasque Mongolian Montenegrin Moroccan Mozambican Namibian Nauruan Nepalese New Zealand Nicaraguan Niger Nigerian Niuean Norwegian Omani Pakistani Palestinian Panamanian Papua New Guinean Paraguayan Peruvian Polish Portuguese Qatari Romanian Russian Bashkir Chechen Circassian Cossack Komi Mordovian Sakha Tatar Udmurt Yamal Rwandan Saint Lucian Salvadoran Sammarinese So Tom and Prncipe Saudi Arabian Senegalese Serbian Seychellois Sierra Leonean Singaporean Slovak Slovenian Somali South African Spanish Andalusian Asturian Balearic Basque Canarian Cantabrian Catalan Extremaduran Galician Manchegan Valencian Sri Lankan Sudanese Swazi Swedish Swiss Syrian Taiwanese Tajik Tanzanian Zanzibari Thai Togolese Tunisian Turkish Turkmen Tuvaluan Trinidadian and Tobagonian Ugandan Ukrainian Uruguayan Uzbek Vanuatuan Venezuelan Vietnamese Western Saharan Yemeni Zambian Zimbabwean Ethnic African American Ainu Arab Indonesian Aromanian Assyrian Balochi Berber Buryat Cajun Chinese American Australian British Canadian Filipino Indian Indonesian Malaysian Pakistani Peruvian Crimean Tatar Gagauz GreekAmerican Hazaragi Indian British Indonesian Malaysian Indigenous American Indigenous Australian Inuit Italian American Jewish American Ashkenazi Bukharan Ethiopian Mizrahi Sephardic Syrian Kurdish Livonian Louisiana Creole Malay Ossetian Parsi Pashtun Pennsylvania Dutch Peranakan Pontic Greek Romani Smi Tejano Transylvanian Saxon Yupik Religious Buddhist Christian Goan Catholic Mangalorean Catholic Mennonite Hindu Islamic Chinese Ital Jain Kashrut Kosher food Ritual slaughter Sikh Historical Ancient Egyptian Ancient Greek Ancient Israelite Ancient Roman Antebellum America Aztec Byzantine Early modern European Historical Argentine Historical Chinese Historical Indian subcontinent Historical Japanese Historical North Indian and Pakistani History of agriculture History of alcoholic drinks History of bread History of seafood History of vegetarianism Hittite Inca Mayan Muisca Mughal Medieval Ottoman Peasant Precontact Hawaiian Korean royal court Scottish royal household Soviet Thirteen Colonies Styles Classique Fast food Fusion New American Eurasian Haute Molecular gastronomy Note by Note Nouvelle Vegetarian Lists List of cuisines List of historical cuisines Lists of foods Prepared Related Cookbook Cooking Culinary arts Drink Food history sociology Diet Fat Meal Meal preparation Food portal Drink portal Category Commons Cookbook WikiProject Outline v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientEgyptiancuisineoldid1209645288 Categories Ancient Egyptian culture Cuisine by culture Historical foods Ancient dishes Egyptian cuisine Ancient Egyptian cuisine Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 February 2024 at 2247 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width