Demotic (Egyptian) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Script Toggle Script subsection 
1.1 Early Demotic 
1.2 Middle Demotic 
1.3 Late Demotic 
1.4 Uniliteral signs and transliteration 
2 Decipherment 
3 See also 
4 Notes 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Demotic Egyptian 52 languages Afrikaans  Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano    Latina Latvieu Magyar  Malagasy Malti  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska     Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian script This article is about the Egyptian script. For the later phase of the Egyptian language see Egyptian language  Demotic. Demotic Demotic script on a Rosetta Stone replica Script type Logographic with consonants Time period c. 650 BC  
5 th century AD Direction Righttoleft Languages Egyptian language Demotic Related scripts Parent systems Egyptian hieroglyphs Hieratic Demotic Child systems Meroitic Coptic influenced ISO 15924 ISO 15924 Egyd 070 Egyptian demotic This article contains phonetic transcriptions in the International Phonetic Alphabet IPA. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols see HelpIPA. For the distinction between     and   see IPA  Brackets and transcription delimiters. Demotic from Ancient Greek  dmotiks popular is the ancient Egyptian script derived from northern forms of hieratic used in the Nile Delta. The term was first used by the Greek historian Herodotus to distinguish it from hieratic and hieroglyphic scripts. By convention the word Demotic is capitalized in order to distinguish it from demotic Greek. Scriptedit The Demotic script was referred to by the Egyptians as ss n .t document writing which the secondcentury scholar Clement of Alexandria called  letterwriting while early Western scholars notably Thomas Young formerly referred to it as Enchorial Egyptian. The script was used for more than a thousand years and during that time a number of developmental stages occurred. It is written and read from right to left while earlier hieroglyphs could be written from top to bottom left to right or right to left. Parts of the Demotic Greek Magical Papyri were written with a cypher script.1 Early Demoticedit Early Demotic often referred to by the German term Frhdemotisch developed in Lower Egypt during the later part of the Twentyfifth Dynasty particularly found on steles from the Serapeum of Saqqara. It is generally dated between 650 and 400 BC as most texts written in Early Demotic are dated to the Twentysixth Dynasty and the subsequent rule as a satrapy of the Achaemenid Empire which was known as the Twentyseventh Dynasty. After the reunification of Egypt under Psamtik I Demotic replaced Abnormal Hieratic in Upper Egypt particularly during the reign of Amasis II when it became the official administrative and legal script. During this period Demotic was used only for administrative legal and commercial texts while hieroglyphs and hieratic were reserved for religious texts and literature. Middle Demoticedit Middle Demotic c.40030 BC is the stage of writing used during the Ptolemaic Kingdom. From the 
4 th century BC onward Demotic held a higher status as may be seen from its increasing use for literary and religious texts. By the end of the 
3 rd century BC Koine Greek was more important as it was the administrative language of the country Demotic contracts lost most of their legal force unless there was a note in Greek of being registered with the authorities. Examples of Ptolemaic Demotic Ostracon with Demotic inscription. Ptolemaic Kingdom c.30530 BC. Probably from Thebes. It is a prayer to the god Amun to heal a mans blindness. Contract in Demotic writing with signature of a witness on the verso. Papyrus Ptolemaic era. Late Demoticedit From the beginning of Roman rule of Egypt Demotic was progressively less used in public life. There are however a number of literary texts written in Late Demotic c.30 BC  452 AD especially from the 
1 st and 
2 nd centuries AD though the quantity of all Demotic texts decreased rapidly towards the end of the second century. In contrast to the way Latin eliminated languages in the western part of the Empire Greek did not replace Demotic entirely.2 After that Demotic was only used for a few ostraca subscriptions to Greek texts mummy labels and graffiti. The last dated example of the Demotic script is a graffito on the walls of the temple of Isis at Philae dated to December 12 452. The text simply reads Petise son of Petosiriswho Petise was is unknown.3 Uniliteral signs and transliterationedit Like its hieroglyphic predecessor script Demotic possessed a set of uniliteral or alphabetical signs that could be used to represent individual phonemes. These are the most common signs in Demotic making up between one third and one half of all signs in any given text foreign words are also almost exclusively written with these signs.4 Later Roman Period texts used these signs even more frequently.5 The table below gives a list of such uniliteral signs along with their conventional transcription their hieroglyphic origin the Coptic letters derived from them and notes on usage.456 Transliteration Sign Hieratic Hieroglyphic origin6 Coptic descendant Notes  Mostly used wordinitially only rarely wordfinally. Never used wordinitially.  or or or a Only used wordinitially. e Marks a prothetic  or wordinternal e.  a Usually used when not stacked above or below another sign. Usually used when stacked under a horizontal sign. Usually used when stacked on top of a horizontal sign. y w or Used wordmedially and wordfinally. or Used wordinitially consonantal. Used when w is a plural marker or the 
3 rd person plural suffix pronoun. b Used interchangeably. p or The first form developed from the second and largely supplanted it. f or  m or Used interchangeably. The second form developed from the first. n Usually used when not stacked above or below another sign but never for the preposition n or the genitive particle n. a Usually used when stacked above or below another sign. r The normal form of r when it is retained as a consonant and not lost to sound change. or Used interchangeably to indicate a vowel corresponding to Coptic  sometimes resulting from a loss of a consonant such as in the preposition r also used for prothetic . or l h a  or a Used interchangeably. or  a  a a h or   Usually used when not stacked above or below another sign. Usually used when stacked above or below another sign. s Most common form when not stacked above or below another sign. Used often in names and Greek loanwords. Never used wordinitially in native Egyptian words. or or Usually used when stacked under a horizontal sign. Usually used when stacked on top of a horizontal sign. or or Used as a pronoun.  or  a Usually used when not stacked above or below another sign. The second form developed from the first. a Used when stacked above or below another sign. q a k  Often written below the line. Originally biliteral for k. In late texts often used as q. g or a t or or b Less common except as the verb j to give. d  or Used interchangeably. Marks a wordfinal t which is actually pronounced distinguished from the silent t of the feminine suffix.  Originally the writing of the verb j to take sometimes used as a phonogram.  a Used interchangeably. The cobra form is rare.  a  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Only found in Old Coptic texts.  Alternatively  may be a ligature of  and .7 Deciphermentedit The Rosetta Stone was discovered in 1799. It is inscribed with a proclamation written in three scripts Egyptian hieroglyphs Demotic and the Greek alphabet. There are 32 lines of Demotic which is the middle of the three scripts on the stone. The Demotic was deciphered before the hieroglyphs starting with the efforts of Antoine Isaac Silvestre de Sacy. Scholars were eventually able to translate the hieroglyphs by comparing them with the Greek words which could be readily translated and fortifying that process by applying knowledge of Coptic the Coptic language being descended from earlier forms of Egyptian represented in hieroglyphic writing. Egyptologists linguists and papyrologists who specialize in the study of the Demotic stage of Egyptian script are known as Demotists. See alsoedit Transliteration of Ancient Egyptian Notesedit  Hans Dieter Betz 1992. The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation Including the Demotic Spells Volume 1. University of Chicago Press.  Haywood John 2000. Historical atlas of the classical world 500 BCAD 600. Barnes  Noble Books. p. 28. ISBN 9780760719732. However Greek did not take over as completely as Latin did in the west and there remained large communities of Demotic...and Aramaic speakers  CruzUribe Eugene 2018. The Last Demotic Inscription. In Donker van Heel Koenraad Hoogendijk Francisca A. J. Marin Cary J. eds.. Hieratic Demotic and Greek Studies and Text Editions Of Making Many Books There Is No End. Festschrift in Honour of Sven P. Vleeming. Leiden. pp. 68. ISBN 9789004345713.  a b Clarysse Willy 1994 Demotic for Papyrologists A First Acquaintance pages 9698.  a b Johnson Janet H. 1986. Thus Wrote Onchsheshonqy An Introductory Grammar of Demotic. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization No. 45. Chicago The Oriental Institute. pp. 24.  a b The Demotic Palaeographical Database Project accessed 11 November 2020.  Quack 2017. How the Coptic Script Came About. Greek Influence on EgyptianCoptic ContactInduced Change in an Ancient African Language. Widmaier Verlag. p. 75. It has normally been claimed that it derives from the form of the infinitive ti in Demotic but the actual forms do not fit well and furthermore it is a point of some concern that this sign never turns up in any Old Coptic text where we always have  for this sound sequence. For this reason the proposal by Kasser that it is actually a ligature of t and i seems to me quite convincing. Referencesedit Betr Maria Carmela 1996. Hieroglyphics The Writings of Ancient Egypt. New York Milan Abbeville Press English Arnoldo Mondadori Italian. pp. 34239. ISBN 9780789202321. Depauw Mark 1997. A Companion to Demotic Studies. Papyrologica Bruxellensia No. 28. Bruxelles Fondation gyptologique reine lisabeth. Johnson Janet H. 1986. Thus Wrote Onchsheshonqy An Introductory Grammar of Demotic. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization No. 45. Chicago The Oriental Institute. Hoffmann Friedhelm Quack Joachim Friedrich 2018. Anthologie der demotischen Literatur. Einfhrungen und Quellentexte zur gyptologie. Vol. 4 2 ed.. Berlin Lit. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Demotic. Demotic and Abnormal Hieratic Texts Chicago Demotic Dictionary The American Society of Papyrologists Directory of Institutions and Scholars Involved in Demotic Studies Thus Wrote Onchsheshonqy An Introductory Grammar of Demotic by Janet H. Johnson Archived 20131221 at the Wayback Machine Demotische Grammatik by Wilhelm Spiegelberg in German HieraticDemotic Fonts v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Types of writing systems Overview History of writing Grapheme Hieroglyph Lists Writing systems undeciphered inventors constructed Languages by writing system  by first written accounts Types Abjads Numerals Aramaic Hatran Arabic Elifba Egyptian hieroglyphs Elymaic Hebrew Ashuri Cursive Rashi Solitreo Tifinagh Mandaic Manichaean Nabataean Ancient North Arabian Pahlavi Book Inscriptional Inscriptional Parthian Psalter Pegon Phoenician PaleoHebrew Pitman shorthand ProtoSinaitic Punic Samaritan South Arabian Zabur Musnad Sogdian Syriac Esrangl Ser Many Teeline Shorthand Ugaritic Abugidas Brahmic Northern BengaliAssamese Bhaiksuki Brahmi script Devanagari Dogri Gujarati Gupta Gurmukhi Kaithi Kalinga Khema Khojki Khudabadi La Lepcha Mahajani Marchen Meitei Modi Multani Nagari Nandinagari Nepalese scripts Bhujimol Golmol Himmol Kummol Kvemmol Pachumol Pracalit Ranjana Tamyig Tirhuta Limbu Litumol Odia Karani Phagspa Sharada Siddha Soyombo Sylheti Nagri Takri Tibetan Uchen Um Tocharian Zanabazar square Southern Ahom Balinese Batak Baybayin Bhattiprolu Buda Buhid Chakma Cham Fakkham Grantha Goykanadi Hanunoo Javanese Kadamba Kannada Karen Kawi Khmer Khom Thai Kulitan Lanna Langdi Lao Leke Lontara Bilangbilang Makasar Malayalam Old Maldivian Dhives Akuru Eveyla Akuru MonBurmese Pallava Pyu Saurashtra Shan Sinhala Sukhothai Sundanese Old Sundanese Tagbanwa Tai Le New Tai Lue Tai Noi Tai Tham Tai Viet Lai Tay Tamil TamilBrahmi Tanchangya Telugu Thai Tigalari Ulu scripts Incung Lampung Lembak Ogan Pasemah Rejang Serawai Vatteluttu Kolezhuthu Malayanma Others Bharati Boyds syllabic shorthand Canadian syllabics Blackfoot Dn syllabics Dham Fox I Geez Gunjala Gondi Japanese Braille Sarati Jenticha Kharosthi Mandombe Masaram Gondi Meroitic Miao Mwangwego Pahawh Hmong Sorang Sompeng Tengwar Thaana Thomas Natural Shorthand Warang Citi Mwangwego Rma Alphabets Linear Adlam Ariyaka Armenian Avestan Pazend Avoiuli Bassa Vah Carian Caucasian Albanian Cirth Coelbren CoorgiCox alphabet Coptic Cyrillic Bosnian Early Deseret Duployan shorthand Chinook Eclectic shorthand Elbasan Enochian Etruscan Evenki Formosan Fox II Fraser Gabelsberger shorthand Gadabuursi Garay alphabet Georgian Asomtavruli Nuskhuri Mkhedruli Veso Bey Glagolitic Gothic Gregg shorthand Greek Archaic GrecoIberian alphabet Hangul Hanifi Jenticha Kaddare Kayah Li Klingon Latin Beneventan Blackletter Carolingian minuscule Fraktur Gaelic Insular Interlac IPA Kurrent Merovingian Sigla Stterlin Tironian notes Visigothic Luo Lycian Lydian Manchu Medefaidrin Molodtsov Mongolian Mru Mundari Bani NKo Ogham Oirat Ol Chiki Old Hungarian Old Italic Old Permic Orkhon Old Uyghur Ol Onal Osage Osmanya Pau Cin Hau Phrygian Pisidian Runic AngloSaxon Cipher Dalecarlian Elder Futhark Younger Futhark Gothic Marcomannic Medieval Staveless Shavian Sidetic Sorang Sompeng Sunuwar Tifinagh Todhri Tolong Siki Vagindra Vellara Visible Speech Vithkuqi Wancho Warang Citi Yezidi Zaghawa Nonlinear Braille Maritime flags Telegraph code New York Point Flag semaphore Moon type Ideograms Adinkra Aztec Blissymbols Dongba Ersu Shaba Emoji Isotype Kaid Mikmaw Mixtec New Epoch Notation Painting Nsibidi Ojibwe Hieroglyphs Olmec Siglas poveiras Testerian Yerkish Zapotec Logograms Chinese family of scripts Chinese characters Simplified Traditional Oracle bone script Bronze scripts Seal script large small birdworm Hanja Idu Kanji Ch Nm Sawndip Bowen Chineseinfluenced Jurchen Khitan large script Sui Tangut Cuneiform Akkadian Assyrian Elamite Hittite Luwian Sumerian Other logosyllabic Anatolian Bagam Cretan Isthmian Maya ProtoElamite Tenevil Yi Classical Logoconsonantal Demotic Hieratic Hieroglyphs Numerals HinduArabic Abjad Attic Greek Muisca Roman Other Sitelen Pona Semisyllabaries Full Linear Elamite Celtiberian Northeastern Iberian Southeastern Iberian Khom Dunging Redundant Espanca script Pahawh Hmong Khitan small script Southwest Paleohispanic Bopomofo Quc m Tn T Sign languages ASLwrite SignWriting si
5 s Stokoe notation Syllabaries Afaka Bamum Bt Byblos Canadian Aboriginal Cherokee Cypriot CyproMinoan Ditema tsa Dinoko Eskayan Geba Great Lakes Algonquian Iban Idu Kana Hiragana Katakana Manygana Hentaigana Sgana Jindai moji Kikakui Kpelle Linear B Linear Elamite Lisu Loma Nshu Nwagu Aneke script Old Persian cuneiform Sumerian Vai Woleai Yi Yugtun v t e Braille  Braille cell 1829 braille International uniformity ASCII braille Unicode braille patterns Braille scripts Frenchordered Albanian Azerbaijani Cantonese Catalan Chinese mainland Mandarin largely reassigned Czech Dutch English Unified English Esperanto French German Ghanaian Guarani Hawaiian Hungarian Iupiaq IPA Irish Italian Latvian Lithuanian Luxembourgish extended to 
8 dot Maltese Mori Navajo Nigerian Philippine Polish Portuguese Romanian Samoan Slovak South African Spanish Taiwanese Mandarin largely reassigned Turkish Vietnamese Welsh Yugoslav Zambian Nordic family Estonian Faroese Icelandic Scandinavian Danish Finnish Greenlandic Northern Smi Norwegian Swedish Russian lineage family i.e. Cyrillicmediated scripts Belarusian Bulgarian Kazakh Kyrgyz Mongolian Russian Tatar Ukrainian Egyptian lineage family i.e. Arabicmediated scripts Arabic Persian Urdu Pakistan Indian lineage family i.e. Bharati Braille Devanagari Hindi  Marathi  Nepali Bengali Bangla  Assamese Gujarati Kannada Malayalam Odia Punjabi Sinhala Tamil Telugu Urdu India Other scripts Amharic Armenian Burmese Dzongkha Bhutanese Georgian Greek Hebrew Inuktitut reassigned vowels Khmer Thai and Lao Japanese vowels Tibetan Reordered Algerian Braille obsolete Frequencybased American Braille obsolete Independent Chinese semisyllabaries Cantonese Mainland Chinese Mandarin Taiwanese Mandarin Twocell Chinese Shuangpin Japanese Korean Eightdot Luxembourgish Kanji GardnerSalinas braille codes GS8 Symbols in braille Braille music Canadian currency marks Computer Braille Code GardnerSalinas braille codes science GS
8 GS6 International Phonetic Alphabet IPA Nemeth braille code Braille technology Braille ebook Braille embosser Braille translator Braille watch Mountbatten Brailler Optical braille recognition Perforation Perkins Brailler Refreshable braille display Slate and stylus Braigo People Louis Braille Charles Barbier Ra Czacka Valentin Hay Harris Mowbray Thakur Vishva Narain Singh Sabriye Tenberken William Bell Wait Organisations Braille Institute of America Braille Without Borders Japan Braille Library National Braille Association Blindness organizations Schools for the blind American Printing House for the Blind Other tactile alphabets Decapoint Moon type New York Point Night writing Vibratese Related topics Accessible publishing Braille literacy RoboBraille v t e Electronic writing systems Emoticons Emoji Kaomoji iConji Unicode v t e Internet slang variants Arabizi Alay Indonesia Denglisch Doge DoggoLingo Fingilish Persian Greeklish Gyarumoji Japan Jejemon Philippines Leet 1337 Lolspeak  LOLspeak  Kitteh Martian language Chinese Miguxs Portuguese Padonkaffsky jargon Russian PseudoChinese SMS language used in phones Yaminjeongeum Korean Authority control databases National France BnF data Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDemoticEgyptianoldid1220586300 Categories Ancient Egyptian language Egyptian languages Extinct languages of Africa Writing systems of Africa Obsolete writing systems Languages attested from the 
7 th century BC Languages extinct in the 
5 th century Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Scripts with ISO 15924 fourletter codes Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Germanlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Germanlanguage sources de Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 24 April 2024 at 1840 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width