Hieratic - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Development 
3 Uses and materials 
4 Characteristics 
5 Influence 
6 Unicode 
7 See also 
8 References Toggle References subsection 
8.1 Bibliography 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Hieratic 47 languages Afrikaans  Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg   Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti Espaol Esperanto  Franais Galego   Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latvieu Magyar  Malti  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Trke    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Cursive writing system used in ancient Egyptian Hieratic Transcribed papyrus c. 1500 BC Script type Logographic with consonants Time period c. 3200 BC  
3 rd century AD Direction Mixed Languages Egyptian language Related scripts Parent systems Egyptian hieroglyphs Hieratic Child systems Demotic possibly inspired Byblos syllabary ISO 15924 ISO 15924 Egyh 060 Egyptian hieratic Unicode Unicode range U130
00 U13
42 F unified with Egyptian hieroglyphs This article contains phonetic transcriptions in the International Phonetic Alphabet IPA. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols see HelpIPA. For the distinction between     and   see IPA  Brackets and transcription delimiters. Hieratic hartk Ancient Greek  romanized hieratik lit.priestly is the name given to a cursive writing system used for Ancient Egyptian and the principal script used to write that language from its development in the third millennium BCE until the rise of Demotic in the midfirst millennium BCE. It was primarily written in ink with a reed brush on papyrus.1 Etymologyedit In the second century the term hieratic was used for the first time by the Greek scholar Clement of Alexandria to describe this Ancient Egyptian writing system.2 The term derives from the Greek for priestly writing Koin Greek   because at that time for more than eight and a half centuries hieratic had been used traditionally only for religious texts and literature. Hieratic can also be an adjective meaning of or associated with sacred persons or offices sacerdotal.3 Developmentedit Hieratic developed as a cursive form of hieroglyphic script in the Naqada III period of Ancient Egypt roughly 32003000 BCE.4 Although handwritten printed hieroglyphs continued to be used in some formal situations such as manuscripts of the Egyptian Book of the Dead noncursive hieroglyphic script became largely restricted to monumental inscriptions. Around 650 BCE the even morecursive Demotic script developed from hieratic.1 Demotic arose in northern Egypt and replaced hieratic and the southern shorthand known as abnormal hieratic for most mundane writing such as personal letters and mercantile documents. Hieratic continued to be used by the priestly class for religious texts and literature into the third century AD. Uses and materialsedit One of four official letters to vizier Khay copied onto fragments of limestone an ostracon Through most of its long history hieratic was used for writing administrative documents accounts legal texts and letters as well as mathematical medical literary and religious texts. During the GrcoRoman period when Demotic and later Greek had become the chief administrative script hieratic was limited primarily to religious texts. In general hieratic was much more important than hieroglyphs throughout Egypts history being the script used in daily life. It was also the writing system first taught to students knowledge of hieroglyphs being limited to a small minority who were given additional training.5 It is often possible to detect errors in hieroglyphic texts that came about due to a misunderstanding of an original hieratic text. Most often hieratic script was written in ink with a reed brush on papyrus wood stone or pottery ostraca. During the Roman period reed pens calami were also used. Thousands of limestone ostraca have been found at the site of Deir alMadinah revealing an intimate picture of the lives of common Egyptian workers. Besides papyrus stone ceramic shards and wood there are hieratic texts on leather rolls although few have survived. There are also hieratic texts written on cloth especially on linen used in mummification. There are some hieratic texts inscribed on stone a variety known as lapidary hieratic. These are particularly common on stelae from the twentysecond dynasty. During the late sixth dynasty hieratic was sometimes incised into mud tablets with a stylus similar to cuneiform. About five hundred of these tablets have been discovered in the governors palace at Ayn Asil Balat6 and a single example was discovered from the site of Ayn alGazzarin both in the Dakhla Oasis.789 At the time the tablets were made Dakhla was located far from centers of papyrus production.10 These tablets record inventories name lists accounts and approximately fifty letters. Of the letters many are internal letters that were circulated within the palace and the local settlement but others were sent from other villages in the oasis to the governor. Characteristicsedit An exercise tablet with a hieratic excerpt from The Instructions of Amenemhat dated to the eighteenth dynasty reign of Amenhotep I c.15141493 BC reads Be on your guard against all who are subordinate to you... Trust no brother know no friend make no intimates. Hieratic script unlike inscriptional and manuscript hieroglyphs reads from right to left. Initially hieratic could be written in either columns or horizontal lines but after the twelfth dynasty specifically during the reign of Amenemhat III horizontal writing became the standard. Hieratic is noted for its cursive nature and use of ligatures for a number of characters. Hieratic script also uses a much more standardized orthography than hieroglyphs texts written in the latter often had to take into account extratextual concerns such as decorative uses and religious concerns that were not present in say a tax receipt. There are also some signs that are unique to hieratic although Egyptologists have invented equivalent hieroglyphic forms for hieroglyphic transcriptions and typesetting.11 Several hieratic characters have diacritical additions so that similar signs could easily be distinguished. Hieratic is often present in any given period in two forms a highly ligatured cursive script used for administrative documents and a broad uncial bookhand used for literary scientific and religious texts. These two forms can often be significantly different from one another. Letters in particular used very cursive forms for quick writing often with large numbers of abbreviations for formulaic phrases similar to shorthand. A highly cursive form of hieratic known as Abnormal Hieratic was used in the Theban area from the second half of the twentieth dynasty until the beginning of the twentysixth dynasty.1213 It derives from the script of Upper Egyptian administrative documents and was used primarily for legal texts land leases letters and other texts. This type of writing was superseded by Demotica Lower Egyptian scribal traditionduring the twentysixth dynasty when Demotic was established as a standard administrative script throughout a reunified Egypt. Influenceedit Hieratic has had influence on a number of other writing systems. The most obvious is that on Demotic its direct descendant. Related to this are the Demotic signs of the Meroitic script and the borrowed Demotic characters used in the Coptic alphabet and Old Nubian. Outside of the Nile Valley many of the signs used in the Byblos syllabary apparently were borrowed from Old Kingdom hieratic signs.14 It is also known that early Hebrew used hieratic numerals.1516 Unicodeedit The Unicode standard considers hieratic characters to be font variants of the Egyptian hieroglyphs and the two scripts have been unified.17 Hieroglyphs were added to the Unicode Standard in October 2009 with the release of version 
5.2 . See alsoedit Cuneiform Referencesedit  a b McGregor 2015 p. 306.  Goedicke 1988 p. vii Wente 2001 p. 2006. The reference is made in Clements Stromata 54.  Definition of hieratic Free Online Dictionary. Retrieved 20111023.  Friedhelm Hoffmann 2012 Hieratic And Demotic Literature OUP.  Baines 1983 p. 583.  Soukiassian Wuttmann  Pantalacci 2002.  PosenerKriger 1992.  Pantalacci 1998.  Scribes and craftsmen the noble art of writing on clay. Archived 20160529 at the Wayback Machine Feb 29 2012 UCL Institute of Archaeology  Parkinson  Quirke 1995 p. 20.  Gardiner 1929.  Wente 2001 p. 210.  Malinine 1974.  Hoch 1990.  Aharoni 1966.  Goldwasser 1991.  The Unicode Standard Version 

5.2.0  Chapter 
14.1 7 Egyptian Hieroglyphs 1 Bibliographyedit Aharoni Yohanan 1966. The Use of Hieratic Numerals in Hebrew Ostraca and the Shekel Weights. Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research. 184 184 1319. doi
10.2 3071356200. JSTOR 1356200. S
2 CID 163341078. Baines John R. 1983. Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society. Man A Monthly Record of Anthropological Science. 18 new series 572599. Archived from the original on 20061009. Betr Maria Carmela 1996. Hieroglyphics The Writings of Ancient Egypt. New York Milan Abbeville Press English Arnoldo Mondadori Italian. pp. 34239. ISBN 9780789202321. FischerElfert HansWerner 2021. Grundzge einer Geschichte des Hieratischen. Einfhrungen und Quellentexte zur gyptologie. Vol. 14. Berlin Lit. Gardiner Alan H. 1929. The Transcription of New Kingdom Hieratic. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 15 12 4855. doi
10.2 3073854012. JSTOR 3854012. Goedicke Hans 1988. Old Hieratic Paleography. Baltimore Halgo Inc. Goldwasser Orly 1991. An Egyptian Scribe from Lachish and the Hieratic Tradition of the Hebrew Kingdoms. Tel Aviv Journal of the Tel Aviv University Institute of Archaeology. 18 248253. Hoch James E. 1990. The Byblos Syllabary Bridging the Gap Between Egyptian Hieroglyphs and Semitic Alphabets. Journal of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities. 20 115124. Janssen Jacobus Johannes 2000. Idiosyncrasies in Late Ramesside Hieratic Writing. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 86 5156. doi
10.2 3073822306. JSTOR 3822306. Malinine Michel 1974. Choix de textes juridiques en hiratique anormal et en dmotique. Textes et langages de lgypte pharaonique Cent cinquante annes de recherches 18221972 Hommage  JeanFranois Champollion. Vol. 1. Cairo Imprimerie de lInstitut franais darchologie orientale du Caire. pp. 3135. McGregor William B. 2015. Linguistics An Introduction. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 306. ISBN 9780567483393. Mller Georg Christian Julius 19271936. Hieratische Palographie Die aegyptische Buchschrift in ihrer Entwicklung von der Fnften Dynastie bis zur rmischen Kaiserzeit 
2 nd ed.. Leipzig J. C. Hinrichsschen Buchhandlungen. 4 vols. Mller Georg Christian Julius 19271935. Hieratische Lesestcke fr den akademischen Gebrauch 
2 nd ed.. Leipzig J. C. Hinrichsschen Buchhandlungen. 3 vols. Pantalacci Laure 1998. La documentation pistolaire du palais des gouverneurs  BalatAyn Asl. Bulletin de lInstitut Franais dArchologie Orientale. 98 303315. Parkinson Richard B. Quirke Stephen G. J. 1995. Papyrus. London British Museum Press. PosenerKriger Paule 1992. Les tablettes en terre crue de Balat. In lisabeth Lalou ed.. Les Tablettes  crire de lAntiquit  lpoque moderne. Turnhout Brepols. pp. 4149. Soukiassian Georges Wuttmann Michel Pantalacci Laure 2002. Le palais des gouverneurs de lpoque de Ppy II Les sanctuaires de ka et leurs dpendances. Cairo Imprimerie de lInstitut franais darchologie orientale du Caire. ISBN 9782724703139. Verhoeven Ursula 2001. Untersuchungen zur spthieratischen Buchschrift. Leuven Uitgeverij Peeters and Departement Orintalistiek. Wente Edward Frank 2001. Scripts Hieratic. In Donald Redford ed.. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Vol. 3. Oxford New York and Cairo Oxford University Press and The American University in Cairo Press. pp. 206210. Wimmer Stefan Jakob 1989. Hieratische Palographie der nichtliterarischen Ostraka der 19. und 20. Dynastie. Wiesbaden Harrassowitz Verlag. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hieratic. Ancient Egyptian scripts  hieratic The Hieratic Script Egyptian scripts at the Wayback Machine archived 20161121 v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Types of writing systems Overview History of writing Grapheme Hieroglyph Lists Writing systems undeciphered inventors constructed Languages by writing system  by first written accounts Types Abjads Numerals Aramaic Hatran Arabic Elifba Egyptian hieroglyphs Elymaic Hebrew Ashuri Cursive Rashi Solitreo Tifinagh Mandaic Manichaean Nabataean Ancient North Arabian Pahlavi Book Inscriptional Inscriptional Parthian Psalter Pegon Phoenician PaleoHebrew Pitman shorthand ProtoSinaitic Punic Samaritan South Arabian Zabur Musnad Sogdian Syriac Esrangl Ser Many Teeline Shorthand Ugaritic Abugidas Brahmic Northern BengaliAssamese Bhaiksuki Brahmi script Devanagari Dogri Gujarati Gupta Gurmukhi Kaithi Kalinga Khema Khojki Khudabadi La Lepcha Mahajani Marchen Meitei Modi Multani Nagari Nandinagari Nepalese scripts Bhujimol Golmol Himmol Kummol Kvemmol Pachumol Pracalit Ranjana Tamyig Tirhuta Limbu Litumol Odia Karani Phagspa Sharada Siddha Soyombo Sylheti Nagri Takri Tibetan Uchen Um Tocharian Zanabazar square Southern Ahom Balinese Batak Baybayin Bhattiprolu Buda Buhid Chakma Cham Fakkham Grantha Goykanadi Hanunoo Javanese Kadamba Kannada Karen Kawi Khmer Khom Thai Kulitan Lanna Langdi Lao Leke Lontara Bilangbilang Makasar Malayalam Old Maldivian Dhives Akuru Eveyla Akuru MonBurmese Pallava Pyu Saurashtra Shan Sinhala Sukhothai Sundanese Old Sundanese Tagbanwa Tai Le New Tai Lue Tai Noi Tai Tham Tai Viet Lai Tay Tamil TamilBrahmi Tanchangya Telugu Thai Tigalari Ulu scripts Incung Lampung Lembak Ogan Pasemah Rejang Serawai Vatteluttu Kolezhuthu Malayanma Others Bharati Boyds syllabic shorthand Canadian syllabics Blackfoot Dn syllabics Dham Fox I Geez Gunjala Gondi Japanese Braille Sarati Jenticha Kharosthi Mandombe Masaram Gondi Meroitic Miao Mwangwego Pahawh Hmong Sorang Sompeng Tengwar Thaana Thomas Natural Shorthand Warang Citi Mwangwego Rma Alphabets Linear Adlam Ariyaka Armenian Avestan Pazend Avoiuli Bassa Vah Carian Caucasian Albanian Cirth Coelbren CoorgiCox alphabet Coptic Cyrillic Bosnian Early Deseret Duployan shorthand Chinook Eclectic shorthand Elbasan Enochian Etruscan Evenki Formosan Fox II Fraser Gabelsberger shorthand Gadabuursi Garay alphabet Georgian Asomtavruli Nuskhuri Mkhedruli Veso Bey Glagolitic Gothic Gregg shorthand Greek Archaic GrecoIberian alphabet Hangul Hanifi Jenticha Kaddare Kayah Li Klingon Latin Beneventan Blackletter Carolingian minuscule Fraktur Gaelic Insular Interlac IPA Kurrent Merovingian Sigla Stterlin Tironian notes Visigothic Luo Lycian Lydian Manchu Medefaidrin Molodtsov Mongolian Mru Mundari Bani NKo Ogham Oirat Ol Chiki Old Hungarian Old Italic Old Permic Orkhon Old Uyghur Ol Onal Osage Osmanya Pau Cin Hau Phrygian Pisidian Runic AngloSaxon Cipher Dalecarlian Elder Futhark Younger Futhark Gothic Marcomannic Medieval Staveless Shavian Sidetic Sorang Sompeng Sunuwar Tifinagh Todhri Tolong Siki Vagindra Vellara Visible Speech Vithkuqi Wancho Warang Citi Yezidi Zaghawa Nonlinear Braille Maritime flags Telegraph code New York Point Flag semaphore Moon type Ideograms Adinkra Aztec Blissymbols Dongba Ersu Shaba Emoji Isotype Kaid Mikmaw Mixtec New Epoch Notation Painting Nsibidi Ojibwe Hieroglyphs Olmec Siglas poveiras Testerian Yerkish Zapotec Logograms Chinese family of scripts Chinese characters Simplified Traditional Oracle bone script Bronze scripts Seal script large small birdworm Hanja Idu Kanji Ch Nm Sawndip Bowen Chineseinfluenced Jurchen Khitan large script Sui Tangut Cuneiform Akkadian Assyrian Elamite Hittite Luwian Sumerian Other logosyllabic Anatolian Bagam Cretan Isthmian Maya ProtoElamite Tenevil Yi Classical Logoconsonantal Demotic Hieratic Hieroglyphs Numerals HinduArabic Abjad Attic Greek Muisca Roman Other Sitelen Pona Semisyllabaries Full Linear Elamite Celtiberian Northeastern Iberian Southeastern Iberian Khom Dunging Redundant Espanca script Pahawh Hmong Khitan small script Southwest Paleohispanic Bopomofo Quc m Tn T Sign languages ASLwrite SignWriting si
5 s Stokoe notation Syllabaries Afaka Bamum Bt Byblos Canadian Aboriginal Cherokee Cypriot CyproMinoan Ditema tsa Dinoko Eskayan Geba Great Lakes Algonquian Iban Idu Kana Hiragana Katakana Manygana Hentaigana Sgana Jindai moji Kikakui Kpelle Linear B Linear Elamite Lisu Loma Nshu Nwagu Aneke script Old Persian cuneiform Sumerian Vai Woleai Yi Yugtun v t e Braille  Braille cell 1829 braille International uniformity ASCII braille Unicode braille patterns Braille scripts Frenchordered Albanian Azerbaijani Cantonese Catalan Chinese mainland Mandarin largely reassigned Czech Dutch English Unified English Esperanto French German Ghanaian Guarani Hawaiian Hungarian Iupiaq IPA Irish Italian Latvian Lithuanian Luxembourgish extended to 
8 dot Maltese Mori Navajo Nigerian Philippine Polish Portuguese Romanian Samoan Slovak South African Spanish Taiwanese Mandarin largely reassigned Turkish Vietnamese Welsh Yugoslav Zambian Nordic family Estonian Faroese Icelandic Scandinavian Danish Finnish Greenlandic Northern Smi Norwegian Swedish Russian lineage family i.e. Cyrillicmediated scripts Belarusian Bulgarian Kazakh Kyrgyz Mongolian Russian Tatar Ukrainian Egyptian lineage family i.e. Arabicmediated scripts Arabic Persian Urdu Pakistan Indian lineage family i.e. Bharati Braille Devanagari Hindi  Marathi  Nepali Bengali Bangla  Assamese Gujarati Kannada Malayalam Odia Punjabi Sinhala Tamil Telugu Urdu India Other scripts Amharic Armenian Burmese Dzongkha Bhutanese Georgian Greek Hebrew Inuktitut reassigned vowels Khmer Thai and Lao Japanese vowels Tibetan Reordered Algerian Braille obsolete Frequencybased American Braille obsolete Independent Chinese semisyllabaries Cantonese Mainland Chinese Mandarin Taiwanese Mandarin Twocell Chinese Shuangpin Japanese Korean Eightdot Luxembourgish Kanji GardnerSalinas braille codes GS8 Symbols in braille Braille music Canadian currency marks Computer Braille Code GardnerSalinas braille codes science GS
8 GS6 International Phonetic Alphabet IPA Nemeth braille code Braille technology Braille ebook Braille embosser Braille translator Braille watch Mountbatten Brailler Optical braille recognition Perforation Perkins Brailler Refreshable braille display Slate and stylus Braigo People Louis Braille Charles Barbier Ra Czacka Valentin Hay Harris Mowbray Thakur Vishva Narain Singh Sabriye Tenberken William Bell Wait Organisations Braille Institute of America Braille Without Borders Japan Braille Library National Braille Association Blindness organizations Schools for the blind American Printing House for the Blind Other tactile alphabets Decapoint Moon type New York Point Night writing Vibratese Related topics Accessible publishing Braille literacy RoboBraille v t e Electronic writing systems Emoticons Emoji Kaomoji iConji Unicode v t e Internet slang variants Arabizi Alay Indonesia Denglisch Doge DoggoLingo Fingilish Persian Greeklish Gyarumoji Japan Jejemon Philippines Leet 1337 Lolspeak  LOLspeak  Kitteh Martian language Chinese Miguxs Portuguese Padonkaffsky jargon Russian PseudoChinese SMS language used in phones Yaminjeongeum Korean Authority control databases National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHieraticoldid1222705269 Categories 
4 thmillennium BC establishments Ancient Egyptian language Egyptian languages Writing systems Obsolete writing systems Writing systems of Africa Egyptian inventions Bronze Age writing systems Naqada III Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Scripts with ISO 15924 fourletter codes Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Koin Greeklanguage text CS1 long volume value Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers This page was last edited on 7 May 2024 at 1327 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width