Egyptian hieroglyphs - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 History and evolution Toggle History and evolution subsection 
2.1 Origin 
2.2 Mature writing system 
2.3 Late Period 
2.4 Late survival 
3 Decipherment 
4 Writing system Toggle Writing system subsection 
4.1 Phonetic reading 

4.1.1 Uniliteral signs 

4.1.2 Phonetic complements 
4.2 Semantic reading 

4.2.1 Logograms 

4.2.2 Determinatives 
4.3 Additional signs 

4.3.1 Cartouche 

4.3.2 Filling stroke 
4.4 Signs joined 

4.4.1 Doubling 
4.5 Grammatical signs 
5 Spelling 
6 Simple examples 
7 Encoding and font support 
8 See also 
9 Notes and references 
10 Further reading 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Egyptian hieroglyphs 87 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Anarkiel  Asturianu Azrbaycanca  Banjar   Bnlmg    Brezhoneg Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Estremeu Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Gaelg Gidhlig Galego    Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu slenska Italiano    Kiswahili Kurd  Latina Latvieu Lietuvi  Malagasy  Malti   Bahasa Melayu   Mngdngng Nederlands   Nordfriisk Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha     Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Slovenina Slovenina Soomaaliga    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Ting Vit Winaray   Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Formal writing system used by ancient Egyptians Hieroglyph redirects here. For other uses see Hieroglyph disambiguation. Egyptian hieroglyphs Hieroglyphs from the tomb of Seti I KV17 
13 th century BC Script type Logographic usable as abjad Time period c.3250 BC  c.400 AD Direction Righttoleft lefttoright Languages Egyptian language Related scripts Parent systems Protowriting Egyptian hieroglyphs Child systems Hieratic ProtoSinaitic ISO 15924 ISO 15924 Egyp 050 Egyptian hieroglyphs Unicode Unicode alias Egyptian Hieroglyphs Unicode range U130
00 U13
42 F Hieroglyphs U134
30 U13
43 F Controls This article contains phonetic transcriptions in the International Phonetic Alphabet IPA. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols see HelpIPA. For the distinction between     and   see IPA  Brackets and transcription delimiters. Egyptian hieroglyphs harlfs harolfs12 were the formal writing system used in Ancient Egypt for writing the Egyptian language. Hieroglyphs combined logographic syllabic and alphabetic elements with more than 100 distinct characters.34 Cursive hieroglyphs were used for religious literature on papyrus and wood. The later hieratic and demotic Egyptian scripts were derived from hieroglyphic writing as was the ProtoSinaitic script that later evolved into the Phoenician alphabet.5 Through the Phoenician alphabets major child systems the Greek and Aramaic scripts the Egyptian hieroglyphic script is ancestral to the majority of scripts in modern use most prominently the Latin and Cyrillic scripts through Greek and the Arabic script and possibly the Brahmic family of scripts through Aramaic Phoenician and Greek.not verified in body The use of hieroglyphic writing arose from protoliterate symbol systems in the Early Bronze Age around the 
33 rd century BC Naqada III6 with the first decipherable sentence written in the Egyptian language dating to the Second Dynasty 
28 th century BC. Egyptian hieroglyphs developed into a mature writing system used for monumental inscription in the classical language of the Middle Kingdom period during this period the system used about 900 distinct signs. The use of this writing system continued through the New Kingdom and Late Period and on into the Persian and Ptolemaic periods. Late survivals of hieroglyphic use are found well into the Roman period extending into the 
4 th century AD.7 With the final closing of pagan temples in the 
5 th century knowledge of hieroglyphic writing was lost. Although attempts were made the script remained undeciphered throughout the Middle Ages and the early modern period. The decipherment of hieroglyphic writing was finally accomplished in the 18
20 s by JeanFranois Champollion with the help of the Rosetta Stone.8 The number of words contained in all Ancient Egyptian i.e. hieroglyphic and hieratic texts known today is approximately 5 million and tends towards 10 million if counting duplicates such as the Book of the Dead and the Coffin Texts separatelyclarification needed. The most complete compendium of Ancient Egyptian Wrterbuch der gyptischen Sprache contains 
1.5 
1.7  million words.910 Etymologyedit The word hieroglyph comes from the Greek adjective  hieroglyphikos11 a compound of  hiers sacred12 and  glph  carve engrave see glyph13 meaning sacred carving. The glyphs themselves since the Ptolemaic period were called    t hieroglyphik grmmata the sacred engraved letters the Greek counterpart to the Egyptian expression of mdw.wnr gods words.14 Greek  meant a carver of hieroglyphs.15 In English hieroglyph as a noun is recorded from 1590 originally short for nominalized hieroglyphic 15
80 s with a plural hieroglyphics from adjectival use hieroglyphic character.1617 The Nag Hammadi texts written in Sahidic Coptic call the hieroglyphs writings of the magicians soothsayers Coptic   .18 History and evolutionedit Originedit See also History of writing and List of Egyptian hieroglyphs Paintings with symbols on Naqada II pottery 35003200 BCE Hieroglyphs may have emerged from the preliterate artistic traditions of Egypt. For example symbols on Gerzean pottery from c.4000 BC have been argued to resemble hieroglyphic writing.19 Designs on tokens from Abydos carbon dated to c.34003200 BC.2021 They are similar to contemporary tags from Uruk.22 Protowriting systems developed in the second half of the 
4 th millennium BC such as the clay labels of a Predynastic ruler called Scorpion I Naqada IIIA period c.
33 rd century BC recovered at Abydos modern Umm elQaab in 1998 or the Narmer Palette c.
31 st century BC.6 The first full sentence written in mature hieroglyphs so far discovered was found on a seal impression in the tomb of SethPeribsen at Umm elQaab which dates from the Second Dynasty 
28 th or 
27 th century BC. Around 800 hieroglyphs are known to date back to the Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom and New Kingdom Eras. By the GrecoRoman period there were more than 50
00.3  Geoffrey Sampson stated that Egyptian hieroglyphs came into existence a little after Sumerian script and probably were invented under the influence of the latter23 and that it is probable that the general idea of expressing words of a language in writing was brought to Egypt from Sumerian Mesopotamia.2425 There are many instances of early EgyptMesopotamia relations but due to the lack of direct evidence for the transfer of writing no definitive determination has been made as to the origin of hieroglyphics in ancient Egypt.26 Others have held that the evidence for such direct influence remains flimsy and that a very credible argument can also be made for the independent development of writing in Egypt...27 Since the 19
90 s the abovementioned discoveries of glyphs at Abydos dated to between 3400 and 3200 BCE have shed doubt on the classical notion that the Mesopotamian symbol system predates the Egyptian one. However Egyptian writing appeared suddenly at that time while Mesopotamia had a long evolutionary history of the usage of signsfor agricultural and accounting purposesin tokens dating as early back to c.8000 BC. Still a date of c.3400 BCE for the earliest Abydos glyphs challenges the hypothesis of diffusion from Mesopotamia to Egypt pointing to an independent development of writing in Egypt.21 Egyptian scholar Gamal Mokhtar argued that the inventory of hieroglyphic symbols derived from fauna and flora used in the signs which are essentially African and in regards to writing we have seen that a purely Nilotic hence African origin not only is not excluded but probably reflects the reality although he acknowledged the geographical location of Egypt made it a receptacle for many influences.28 Rosalie David also stated that If Egypt did adopt the idea of writing from elsewhere it was presumably only the concept which was taken over since the forms of the hieroglyphs are entirely Egyptian in origin and reflect the distinctive flora fauna and images of Egypts own landscape.29 Labels with early inscriptions from the tomb of Menes 32003000 BCE Ivory plaque of Menes 32003000 BCE Ivory plaque of Menes drawing The oldest known full sentence written in mature hieroglyphs. Seal impression of SethPeribsen Second Dynasty c.28
27 th century BCE Mature writing systemedit Further information Middle Egyptian language Hieroglyphs on stela in Louvre c.1321 BCE Artists scaled drawing of hieroglyphs meaning life stability and dominion. The grid lines allowed the artist to draw the hieroglyphs at whatever scale was needed. ca. 14791458 B.C.30 Hieroglyphs consist of three kinds of glyphs phonetic glyphs including singleconsonant characters that function like an alphabet logographs representing morphemes and determinatives which narrow down the meaning of logographic or phonetic words. Late Periodedit Further information Late Egyptian language As writing developed and became more widespread among the Egyptian people simplified glyph forms developed resulting in the hieratic priestly and demotic popular scripts. These variants were also more suited than hieroglyphs for use on papyrus. Hieroglyphic writing was not however eclipsed but existed alongside the other forms especially in monumental and other formal writing. The Rosetta Stone contains three parallel scripts  hieroglyphic demotic and Greek. Late survivaledit Hieroglyphs continued to be used under Persian rule intermittent in the 
6 th and 
5 th centuries BCE and after Alexander the Greats conquest of Egypt during the ensuing Ptolemaic and Roman periods. It appears that the misleading quality of comments from Greek and Roman writers about hieroglyphs came about at least in part as a response to the changed political situation. Some believed that hieroglyphs may have functioned as a way to distinguish true Egyptians from some of the foreign conquerors. Another reason may be the refusal to tackle a foreign culture on its own terms which characterized GrecoRoman approaches to Egyptian culture generally.citation needed Having learned that hieroglyphs were sacred writing GrecoRoman authors imagined the complex but rational system as an allegorical even magical system transmitting secret mystical knowledge.7 By the 
4 th century CE few Egyptians were capable of reading hieroglyphs and the myth of allegorical hieroglyphs was ascendant.7 Monumental use of hieroglyphs ceased after the closing of all nonChristian temples in 391 by the Roman Emperor Theodosius I the last known inscription is from Philae known as the Graffito of EsmetAkhom from 3
94.7 31 The Hieroglyphica of Horapollo c. 
5 th century appears to retain some genuine knowledge about the writing system. It offers an explanation of close to 200 signs. Some are identified correctly such as the goose hieroglyph z representing the word for son.7 A halfdozen Demotic glyphs are still in use added to the Greek alphabet when writing Coptic. Deciphermentedit Main article Decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts Ibn Wahshiyyas attempt at a translation of a hieroglyphic text Knowledge of the hieroglyphs had been lost completely in the medieval period. Early attempts at decipherment are due to DhulNun alMisri and Ibn Wahshiyya 
9 th and 
10 th century respectively.32 All medieval and early modern attempts were hampered by the fundamental assumption that hieroglyphs recorded ideas and not the sounds of the language. As no bilingual texts were available any such symbolic translation could be proposed without the possibility of verification.33 It was not until Athanasius Kircher in the mid 
17 th century that scholars began to think the hieroglyphs might also represent sounds. Kircher was familiar with Coptic and thought that it might be the key to deciphering the hieroglyphs but was held back by a belief in the mystical nature of the symbols.7 The Rosetta Stone in the British Museum The breakthrough in decipherment came only with the discovery of the Rosetta Stone by Napoleons troops in 1799 during Napoleons Egyptian invasion. As the stone presented a hieroglyphic and a demotic version of the same text in parallel with a Greek translation plenty of material for falsifiable studies in translation was suddenly available. In the early 
19 th century scholars such as Silvestre de Sacy Johan David kerblad and Thomas Young studied the inscriptions on the stone and were able to make some headway. Finally JeanFranois Champollion made the complete decipherment by the 18
20 s. In his Lettre  M. Dacier 1822 he wrote It is a complex system writing figurative symbolic and phonetic all at once in the same text the same phrase I would almost say in the same word.34 Illustration from Tabula Aegyptiaca hieroglyphicis exornata published in Acta Eruditorum 1714 Writing systemedit Visually hieroglyphs are all more or less figurative they represent real or abstract elements sometimes stylized and simplified but all generally perfectly recognizable in form. However the same sign can according to context be interpreted in diverse ways as a phonogram phonetic reading as a logogram or as an ideogram semagram determinative semantic reading. The determinative was not read as a phonetic constituent but facilitated understanding by differentiating the word from its homophones. Phonetic readingedit Hieroglyphs typical of the GraecoRoman period Most nondeterminative hieroglyphic signs are phonograms whose meaning is determined by pronunciation independent of visual characteristics. This follows the rebus principle where for example the picture of an eye could stand not only for the English word eye but also for its phonetic equivalent the first person pronoun I. Phonograms formed with one consonant are called uniliteral signs with two consonants biliteral signs with three triliteral signs. Twentyfour uniliteral signs make up the socalled hieroglyphic alphabet. Egyptian hieroglyphic writing does not normally indicate vowels unlike cuneiform and for that reason has been labelled by some as an abjad i.e. an alphabet without vowels. Thus hieroglyphic writing representing a pintail duck is read in Egyptian as s derived from the main consonants of the Egyptian word for this duck s  and t. Note that  or  two halfrings opening to the left sometimes replaced by the digit 3 is the Egyptian alef. It is also possible to use the hieroglyph of the pintail duck without a link to its meaning in order to represent the two phonemes s and  independently of any vowels that could accompany these consonants and in this way write the word s son or when complemented by other signs detailed belowclarification needed s keep watch and s.w hard ground. For example  the characters s  the same character used only in order to signify according to the context pintail duck or with the appropriate determinative son two words having the same or similar consonants the meaning of the little vertical stroke will be explained further on under Logograms  the character s as used in the word sw keep watchclarification needed As in the Arabic script not all vowels were written in Egyptian hieroglyphs it is debatable whether vowels were written at all. Possibly as with Arabic the semivowels w and j as in English W and Y could double as the vowels u and i. In modern transcriptions an e is added between consonants to aid in their pronunciation. For example nfr good is typically written nefer. This does not reflect Egyptian vowels which are obscure but is merely a modern convention. Likewise the  and  are commonly transliterated as a as in Ra r. Hieroglyphs are inscribed in rows of pictures arranged in horizontal lines or vertical columns.35 Both hieroglyph lines as well as signs contained in the lines are read with upper content having precedence over content below.35 The lines or columns and the individual inscriptions within them read from left to right in rare instances only and for particular reasons at that ordinarily however they read from right to leftthe Egyptians preferred direction of writing although for convenience modern texts are often normalized into lefttoright order.35 The direction toward which asymmetrical hieroglyphs face indicate their proper reading order. For example when human and animal hieroglyphs face or look toward the left they almost always must be read from left to right and vice versa. As in many ancient writing systems words are not separated by blanks or punctuation marks. However certain hieroglyphs appear particularly common only at the end of words making it possible to readily distinguish words. Uniliteral signsedit Hieroglyphs at Amada at temple founded by Tuthmosis III Main article Transliteration of Ancient Egyptian  Uniliteral signs The Egyptian hieroglyphic script contained 24 uniliterals symbols that stood for single consonants much like letters in English. It would have been possible to write all Egyptian words in the manner of these signs but the Egyptians never did so and never simplified their complex writing into a true alphabet.36 Each uniliteral glyph once had a unique reading but several of these fell together as Old Egyptian developed into Middle Egyptian. For example the foldedcloth glyph  seems to have been originally an s and the doorbolt glyph  a  sound but these both came to be pronounced s as the  sound was lost.clarification needed A few uniliterals first appear in Middle Egyptian texts. Besides the uniliteral glyphs there are also the biliteral and triliteral signs to represent a specific sequence of two or three consonants consonants and vowels and a few as vowel combinations only in the language. Phonetic complementsedit Egyptian writing is often redundant in fact it happens very frequently that a word is followed by several characters writing the same sounds in order to guide the reader. For example the word nfr beautiful good perfect was written with a unique triliteral that was read as nfr However it is considerably more common to add to that triliteral the uniliterals for f and r. The word can thus be written as nfrfr but one still reads it as merely nfr. The two alphabetic characters are adding clarity to the spelling of the preceding triliteral hieroglyph. Redundant characters accompanying biliteral or triliteral signs are called phonetic complements or complementaries. They can be placed in front of the sign rarely after the sign as a general rule or even framing it appearing both before and after. Ancient Egyptian scribes consistently avoided leaving large areas of blank space in their writing and might add additional phonetic complements or sometimes even invert the order of signs if this would result in a more aesthetically pleasing appearance good scribes attended to the artistic and even religious aspects of the hieroglyphs and would not simply view them as a communication tool. Various examples of the use of phonetic complements can be seen below  md d w the complementary d is placed after the sign  it reads mdw meaning tongue.   p pr r j the four complementaries frame the triliteral sign of the scarab beetle  it reads pr.j meaning the name Khepri with the final glyph being the determinative for ruler or god. Notably phonetic complements were also used to allow the reader to differentiate between signs that are homophones or which do not always have a unique reading. For example the symbol of the seat or chair  This can be read st ws or tm according to the word in which it is found. The presence of phonetic complementsand of the suitable determinativeallows the reader to know which of the three readings to choose 
1 st Reading st   st written stt the last character is the determinative of the house or that which is found there meaning seat throne place  st written stt the egg determinative is used for female personal names in some periods meaning Isis 
2 nd Reading ws   wsjr written wsjr with as a phonetic complement the eye which is read jr following the determinative of god meaning Osiris 
3 rd Reading tm   tm.t written tmmt with the determinative of Anubis or the jackal meaning a kind of wild animal  tm written  tm t with the determinative of the flying bird meaning to disappear. Finally it sometimes happens that the pronunciation of words might be changed because of their connection to Ancient Egyptian in this case it is not rare for writing to adopt a compromise in notation the two readings being indicated jointly. For example the adjective bnj sweet became bnr. In Middle Egyptian one can write  bnrj written bnri with determinative which is fully read as bnr the j not being pronounced but retained in order to keep a written connection with the ancient word in the same fashion as the English language words through knife or victuals which are no longer pronounced the way they are written. Semantic readingedit Comparative evolution from pictograms to abstract shapes in cuneiform Egyptian and Chinese characters Besides a phonetic interpretation characters can also be read for their meaning in this instance logograms are being spoken or ideograms and semagrams the latter are also called determinatives.clarification needed37 Logogramsedit A hieroglyph used as a logogram defines the object of which it is an image. Logograms are therefore the most frequently used common nouns they are always accompanied by a mute vertical stroke indicating their status as a logogram the usage of a vertical stroke is further explained below in theory all hieroglyphs would have the ability to be used as logograms. Logograms can be accompanied by phonetic complements. Here are some examples  r meaning sun  pr meaning house  swt swt meaning reed  w meaning mountain. In some cases the semantic connection is indirect metonymic or metaphoric  nr meaning god the character in fact represents a temple flag standard  b meaning B soul the character is the traditional representation of a b a bird with a human head  dr meaning flamingo the corresponding phonogram means red and the bird is associated by metonymy with this color. Determinativesedit Determinatives or semagrams semantic symbols specifying meaning are placed at the end of a word. These mute characters serve to clarify what the word is about as homophonic glyphs are common. If a similar procedure existed in English words with the same spelling would be followed by an indicator that would not be read but which would finetune the meaning retort chemistry and retort rhetoric would thus be distinguished. A number of determinatives exist divinities humans parts of the human body animals plants etc. Certain determinatives possess a literal and a figurative meaning. For example a roll of papyrus is used to define books but also abstract ideas. The determinative of the plural is a shortcut to signal three occurrences of the word that is to say its plural since the Egyptian language had a dual sometimes indicated by two strokes. This special character is explained below. Extract from the Tale of the Two Brothers.38 Here are several examples of the use of determinatives borrowed from the book Je lis les hiroglyphes I am reading hieroglyphs by Jean Capart which illustrate their importance  nfrw w and the three strokes are the marks of the plural literally the beautiful young people that is to say the young military recruits. The word has a youngperson determinative symbol  which is the determinative indicating babies and children  nfr.t .t is here the suffix that forms the feminine meaning the nubile young woman with as the determinative indicating a woman  nfrw the tripling of the character serving to express the plural flexional ending w  meaning foundations of a house with the house as a determinative   nfr  meaning clothing with as the determinative for lengths of cloth  nfr  meaning wine or beer with a jug as the determinative. All these words have a meliorative connotation good beautiful perfect.citation needed The Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian by Raymond A. Faulkner gives some twenty words that are read nfr or which are formed from this word. Additional signsedit Cartoucheedit Egyptian hieroglyphs with cartouches for the name Ramesses II from the Luxor Temple New Kingdom Rarely the names of gods are placed within a cartouche the two last names of the sitting king are always placed within a cartouche jmnr AmonRa qljwpdr.t Cleopatra Filling strokeedit A filling stroke is a character indicating the end of a quadrat that would otherwise be incomplete. Signs joinededit Some signs are the contraction of several others. These signs have however a function and existence of their own for example a forearm where the hand holds a scepter is used as a determinative for words meaning to direct to drive and their derivatives. Doublingedit The doubling of a sign indicates its dual the tripling of a sign indicates its plural. Grammatical signsedit The vertical stroke indicates that the sign is a logogram. Two strokes indicate the dual number and the three strokes the plural. The direct notation of flexional endings for example Spellingedit Standard orthographycorrect spellingin Egyptian is much looser than in modern languages. In fact one or several variants exist for almost every word. One finds Redundancies Omission of graphemes which are ignored whether or not they are intentional Substitutions of one grapheme for another such that it is impossible to distinguish a mistake from an alternate spelling Errors of omission in the drawing of signs which are much more problematic when the writing is cursive hieratic writing but especially demotic where the schematization of the signs is extreme. However many of these apparent spelling errors constitute an issue of chronology. Spelling and standards varied over time so the writing of a word during the Old Kingdom might be considerably different during the New Kingdom. Furthermore the Egyptians were perfectly content to include older orthography historical spelling alongside newer practices as though it were acceptable in English to use archaic spellings in modern texts. Most often ancient spelling errors are simply misinterpretations of context.citation needed Today hieroglyphicists use numerous cataloguing systems notably the Manuel de Codage and Gardiners Sign List to clarify the presence of determinatives ideograms and other ambiguous signs in transliteration. Simple examplesedit nomen or birth name Ptolemy in hieroglyphs Era Ptolemaic dynasty 30530 BC The glyphs in this cartouche are transliterated as p t ua l m y ii s Ptolmys though ii is considered a single letter and transliterated y. Another way in which hieroglyphs work is illustrated by the two Egyptian words pronounced pr usually vocalised as per. One word is house and its hieroglyphic representation is straightforward Name of Alexander the Great in hieroglyphs c.332 BC Egypt. Louvre Museum Here the house hieroglyph works as a logogram it represents the word with a single sign. The vertical stroke below the hieroglyph is a common way of indicating that a glyph is working as a logogram. Another word pr is the verb to go out leave. When this word is written the house hieroglyph is used as a phonetic symbol Here the house glyph stands for the consonants pr. The mouth glyph below it is a phonetic complement it is read as r reinforcing the phonetic reading of pr. The third hieroglyph is a determinative it is an ideogram for verbs of motion that gives the reader an idea of the meaning of the word. Encoding and font supportedit Main article Egyptian Hieroglyphs Unicode block Egyptian hieroglyphs were added to the Unicode Standard in October 2009 with the release of version 
5.2  which introduced the Egyptian Hieroglyphs block U130
00 U13
42 F. As of July 20
13 update four fonts Aegyptus NewGardiner Noto Sans Egyptian Hieroglyphs and JSeshFont support this range. Another font Segoe UI Historic comes bundled with Windows 10 and also contains glyphs for the Egyptian Hieroglyphs block. Segoe UI Historic excludes three glyphs depicting phallus Gardiners D52 D
52 A D53 Unicode code points U1
30 B
8 U1
30 BA.39 See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal List of Egyptian hieroglyphs Gardiners sign list Egyptian numerals Egyptian language ProtoSinaitic script Manuel de Codage Champollion Museum Notes and referencesedit  Jones Daniel 2003 1917 Peter Roach James Hartmann Jane Setter eds. English Pronouncing Dictionary Cambridge Cambridge University Press ISBN 9783125396838  hieroglyph. MerriamWebster.com Dictionary.  a b There were about 1000 graphemes in the Old Kingdom period reduced to around 750 to 850 in the classical language of the Middle Kingdom but inflated to the order of some 5000 signs in the Ptolemaic period. Antonio Loprieno Ancient Egyptian A Linguistic Introduction Cambridge Cambridge UP 1995 p. 12.  The standard inventory of characters used in Egyptology is Gardiners sign list 19281953. A.H. Gardiner 1928 Catalogue of the Egyptian hieroglyphic printing type from matrices owned and controlled by Dr. Alan Gardiner Additions to the new hieroglyphic fount 1928 in The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 15 1929 p. 95 Additions to the new hieroglyphic fount 1931 in The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 17 1931 pp. 245247 A.H. Gardiner Supplement to the catalogue of the Egyptian hieroglyphic printing type showing acquisitions to December 1953 1953. Unicode Egyptian Hieroglyphs as of version 
5.2  2009 assigned 1070 Unicode characters.  Michael C. Howard 2012. Transnationalism in Ancient and Medieval Societies. P. 23.  a b Richard Mattessich 2002. The oldest writings and inventory tags of Egypt. Accounting Historians Journal. 29 1 195208. doi
10.2 30801484184.

29.1.1 95. JSTOR 40698264. S
2 CID 160704269. Archived from the original on 20181119. Retrieved 20160827.  a b c d e f Allen James P. 2010. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge University Press. p. 8. ISBN 9781139486354.  Houston Stephen Baines John Cooper Jerrold July 2003. Last Writing Script Obsolescence in Egypt Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica. Comparative Studies in Society and History. 45 3. doi
10.1 0
17 s0010417503000227. ISSN 00104175. S
2 CID 145542213.  Carsten Peust ber gyptische Lexikographie. 1 Zum Ptolemaic Lexikon von Penelope Wilson 2 Versuch eines quantitativen Vergleichs der Textkorpora antiker Sprachen in Lingua Aegyptia 7 2000 245260 Nach einer von W. F. Reineke in S. Grunert  L Hafemann Hrsgg. Textcorpus und Wrterbuch Problemeder gyptologie 14 Leiden 1999 S.xiii verffentlichten Schtzung W. Schenkels betrgt die Zahl der in allen heute bekannten gyptischen d.h. hieroglyphischen und hieratischen Texten enthaltenen Wortformen annhernd 5 Millio nen und tendiert wenn man die Flle von Mehrfachberlieferung u.a. des Toten buchs und der Sargtexte separat zhlt gegen 10 Millionen das Berliner Zettelarchiv des Wrterbuchs der gyptischen Sprache von A. Erman  H. Grapow Wb das sei nerzeit Vollstndigkeit anstrebte umfasst nur 17 Millionen nach anderen Angaben 15 Millionen Zettel. p.246  W. Schenkel 1995. Die Lexikographie des AltgyptischKoptischen. The lexicography of the Ancient Near Eastern languages PDF. Verona Essedue. p. 197. ISBN 8885697437. OCLC 34816015.  . Liddell Henry George Scott Robert A GreekEnglish Lexicon at the Perseus Project.   in Liddell and Scott.   in Liddell and Scott  Antonio Loprieno Ancient Egyptian A Linguistic Introduction Cambridge Cambridge UP 1995 p. 11.   in Liddell and Scott.  Hieroglyphic  Definition of Hieroglyphic by MerriamWebster. Retrieved 20160827.  Harper Douglas. hieroglyphic. Online Etymology Dictionary.  The Discourse on the Eighth and Ninth VI 6120 6130 6215  Joly Marcel 2003. Sayles George Sr.. Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online. Oxford University Press. doi
10.1 0
93 gmo9781561592630.article.j397600.  Scarre Chris Fagan Brian M. 2016. Ancient Civilizations. Routledge. p. 106. ISBN 9781317296089.  a b The seal impressions from various tombs date even further back to 3400 B.C. These dates challenge the commonly held belief that early logographs pictographic symbols representing a specific place object or quantity first evolved into more complex phonetic symbols in Mesopotamia. Mitchell Larkin. Earliest Egyptian Glyphs. Archaeology. Archaeological Institute of America. Retrieved 29 February 2012.  Conference William Foxwell Albright Centennial 1996. The Study of the Ancient Near East in the Twentyfirst Century The William Foxwell Albright Centennial Conference. Eisenbrauns. pp. 2425. ISBN 9780931464966.  Geoffrey Sampson 1990. Writing Systems A Linguistic Introduction. Stanford University Press. pp. 78. ISBN 9780804717564. Retrieved 31 October 2011.  Geoffrey W. Bromiley 1995. The international standard Bible encyclopedia. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 1150. ISBN 9780802837844. Retrieved 31 October 2011.  Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards et al. The Cambridge Ancient History 
3 d ed. 1970 pp. 4344.  Robert E. Krebs Carolyn A. Krebs 2003. Groundbreaking scientific experiments inventions and discoveries of the ancient world. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 91. ISBN 9780313313424. Retrieved 31 October 2011.  Simson Najovits Egypt Trunk of the Tree A Modern Survey of an Ancient Land Algora Publishing 2004 pp. 5556.  Ancient Civilizations of Africa Vol 2 Unesco General History of Africa abridged Abridged ed.. London England J. Currey. 1990. pp. 1112. ISBN 0852550928.  David Rosalie 2002. The Experience of Ancient Egypt. Routledge. ISBN 9781134967995. Retrieved 18 April 2022.  Artists Scaled Drawing of Hieroglyphs ca. 14791458 B.C. metmuseum.org. Retrieved 4 November 2022.  The latest presently known hieroglyphic inscription date Birthday of Osiris year 110 of Diocletian dated to August 24 394  Ahmed ibn Ali ibn al Mukhtar ibn Abd al Karim called Ibn Wahshiyah 1806. Ancient alphabets  hieroglyphic characters explained with an account of the Egyptian priests their classes initiation time  sacrifices by the aztecs and their birds in the Arabic language. W. Bulmer  co. Retrieved 31 October 2011.  Tabula Aegyptiaca hieroglyphics exornata. Acta Eruditorum in Latin. Leipzig 127128. March 1714.  JeanFranois Champollion Letter to M. Dacier September 27 1822  a b c Sir Alan H. Gardiner Egyptian Grammar Third Edition Revised Griffith Institute 2005 p. 25.  Gardiner Sir Alan H. 1973. Egyptian Grammar. Griffith Institute. ISBN 9780900416354.  Antonio Loprieno Ancient Egyptian A Linguistic Introduction Cambridge University Press 1995 p. 13  Budge Wallis 1889. Egyptian Language. pp. 3842.  Segoe UI Historic Phallus Microsoft Censorship  Fonts in the Spludlow Framework. www.spludlow.co.uk. Retrieved 20190513. Further readingedit Adkins Lesley Adkins Roy 2000. The Keys of Egypt The Obsession to Decipher Egyptian Hieroglyphs. HarperCollins Publishers. ISBN 9780060194390. Allen James P. 1999. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521774833. Collier Mark  Bill Manley 1998. How to Read Egyptian Hieroglyphs a stepbystep guide to teach yourself. British Museum Press. ISBN 9780714119106. Davidson James At the British Museum London Review of Books vol. 45 no.3 2 February 2023 pp. 2627. Selden Daniel L. 2013. Hieroglyphic Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Literature of the Middle Kingdom. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520275461. Faulkner Raymond O. 1962. Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian. Griffith Institute. ISBN 9780900416323. Gardiner Sir Alan H. 1957. Egyptian Grammar Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs 
3 rd ed. revised. The Griffith Institute. Hill Marsha 2007. Gifts for the gods images from Egyptian temples. New York The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9781588392312. Kamrin Janice 2004. Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphs A Practical Guide. Harry N. Abrams Inc. ISBN 9780810949614. McDonald Angela. Write Your Own Egyptian Hieroglyphs. Berkeley University of California Press 2007 paperback ISBN 0520252357. Erman Adolf 1894. Egyptian Grammar with table of signs bibliography exercises for reading and glossary. Williams and Norgate. ISBN 9783862882045. External linksedit Look up hieroglyph in Wiktionary the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Egyptian hieroglyphs. Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphics  Aldokkan Glyphs and Grammars  Resources for those interested in learning hieroglyphs compiled by Aayko Eyma Hieroglyphics  Annotated directory of popular and scholarly resources Egyptian Language and Writing Fulltext of The stela of Menthuweser Unicode Fonts for Ancient Scripts  Ancient scripts free software fonts v t e Egyptian hieroglyphs Characteristics Determinative Uniliteral Biliteral Triliteral Numerals Topics Decipherment Rosetta Stone Transliteration Research Gardiners sign list 1927 Manuel de Codage 1988 People List of Egyptologists CategoryEgyptologists Lists List of Egyptian hieroglyphs Egyptian Hieroglyphs Unicode block CategoryEgyptian hieroglyphs 40 v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Types of writing systems Overview History of writing Grapheme Hieroglyph Lists Writing systems undeciphered inventors constructed Languages by writing system  by first written accounts Types Abjads Numerals Aramaic Hatran Arabic Elifba Egyptian hieroglyphs Elymaic Hebrew Ashuri Cursive Rashi Solitreo Tifinagh Mandaic Manichaean Nabataean Ancient North Arabian Pahlavi Book Inscriptional Inscriptional Parthian Psalter Pegon Phoenician PaleoHebrew Pitman shorthand ProtoSinaitic Punic Samaritan South Arabian Zabur Musnad Sogdian Syriac Esrangl Ser Many Teeline Shorthand Ugaritic Abugidas Brahmic Northern BengaliAssamese Bhaiksuki Brahmi script Devanagari Dogri Gujarati Gupta Gurmukhi Kaithi Kalinga Khema Khojki Khudabadi La Lepcha Mahajani Marchen Meitei Modi Multani Nagari Nandinagari Nepalese scripts Bhujimol Golmol Himmol Kummol Kvemmol Pachumol Pracalit Ranjana Tamyig Tirhuta Limbu Litumol Odia Karani Phagspa Sharada Siddha Soyombo Sylheti Nagri Takri Tibetan Uchen Um Tocharian Zanabazar square Southern Ahom Balinese Batak Baybayin Bhattiprolu Buda Buhid Chakma Cham Fakkham Grantha Goykanadi Hanunoo Javanese Kadamba Kannada Karen Kawi Khmer Khom Thai Kulitan Lanna Langdi Lao Leke Lontara Bilangbilang Makasar Malayalam Old Maldivian Dhives Akuru Eveyla Akuru MonBurmese Pallava Pyu Saurashtra Shan Sinhala Sukhothai Sundanese Old Sundanese Tagbanwa Tai Le New Tai Lue Tai Noi Tai Tham Tai Viet Lai Tay Tamil TamilBrahmi Tanchangya Telugu Thai Tigalari Ulu scripts Incung Lampung Lembak Ogan Pasemah Rejang Serawai Vatteluttu Kolezhuthu Malayanma Others Bharati Boyds syllabic shorthand Canadian syllabics Blackfoot Dn syllabics Dham Fox I Geez Gunjala Gondi Japanese Braille Sarati Jenticha Kharosthi Mandombe Masaram Gondi Meroitic Miao Mwangwego Pahawh Hmong Sorang Sompeng Tengwar Thaana Thomas Natural Shorthand Warang Citi Mwangwego Rma Alphabets Linear Adlam Ariyaka Armenian Avestan Pazend Avoiuli Bassa Vah Carian Caucasian Albanian Cirth Coelbren CoorgiCox alphabet Coptic Cyrillic Bosnian Early Deseret Duployan shorthand Chinook Eclectic shorthand Elbasan Enochian Etruscan Evenki Formosan Fox II Fraser Gabelsberger shorthand Gadabuursi Garay alphabet Georgian Asomtavruli Nuskhuri Mkhedruli Veso Bey Glagolitic Gothic Gregg shorthand Greek Archaic GrecoIberian alphabet Hangul Hanifi Jenticha Kaddare Kayah Li Klingon Latin Beneventan Blackletter Carolingian minuscule Fraktur Gaelic Insular Interlac IPA Kurrent Merovingian Sigla Stterlin Tironian notes Visigothic Luo Lycian Lydian Manchu Medefaidrin Molodtsov Mongolian Mru Mundari Bani NKo Ogham Oirat Ol Chiki Old Hungarian Old Italic Old Permic Orkhon Old Uyghur Ol Onal Osage Osmanya Pau Cin Hau Phrygian Pisidian Runic AngloSaxon Cipher Dalecarlian Elder Futhark Younger Futhark Gothic Marcomannic Medieval Staveless Shavian Sidetic Sorang Sompeng Sunuwar Tifinagh Todhri Tolong Siki Vagindra Vellara Visible Speech Vithkuqi Wancho Warang Citi Yezidi Zaghawa Nonlinear Braille Maritime flags Telegraph code New York Point Flag semaphore Moon type Ideograms Adinkra Aztec Blissymbols Dongba Ersu Shaba Emoji Isotype Kaid Mikmaw Mixtec New Epoch Notation Painting Nsibidi Ojibwe Hieroglyphs Olmec Siglas poveiras Testerian Yerkish Zapotec Logograms Chinese family of scripts Chinese characters Simplified Traditional Oracle bone script Bronze scripts Seal script large small birdworm Hanja Idu Kanji Ch Nm Sawndip Bowen Chineseinfluenced Jurchen Khitan large script Sui Tangut Cuneiform Akkadian Assyrian Elamite Hittite Luwian Sumerian Other logosyllabic Anatolian Bagam Cretan Isthmian Maya ProtoElamite Tenevil Yi Classical Logoconsonantal Demotic Hieratic Hieroglyphs Numerals HinduArabic Abjad Attic Greek Muisca Roman Other Sitelen Pona Semisyllabaries Full Linear Elamite Celtiberian Northeastern Iberian Southeastern Iberian Khom Dunging Redundant Espanca script Pahawh Hmong Khitan small script Southwest Paleohispanic Bopomofo Quc m Tn T Sign languages ASLwrite SignWriting si
5 s Stokoe notation Syllabaries Afaka Bamum Bt Byblos Canadian Aboriginal Cherokee Cypriot CyproMinoan Ditema tsa Dinoko Eskayan Geba Great Lakes Algonquian Iban Idu Kana Hiragana Katakana Manygana Hentaigana Sgana Jindai moji Kikakui Kpelle Linear B Linear Elamite Lisu Loma Nshu Nwagu Aneke script Old Persian cuneiform Sumerian Vai Woleai Yi Yugtun v t e Braille  Braille cell 1829 braille International uniformity ASCII braille Unicode braille patterns Braille scripts Frenchordered Albanian Azerbaijani Cantonese Catalan Chinese mainland Mandarin largely reassigned Czech Dutch English Unified English Esperanto French German Ghanaian Guarani Hawaiian Hungarian Iupiaq IPA Irish Italian Latvian Lithuanian Luxembourgish extended to 
8 dot Maltese Mori Navajo Nigerian Philippine Polish Portuguese Romanian Samoan Slovak South African Spanish Taiwanese Mandarin largely reassigned Turkish Vietnamese Welsh Yugoslav Zambian Nordic family Estonian Faroese Icelandic Scandinavian Danish Finnish Greenlandic Northern Smi Norwegian Swedish Russian lineage family i.e. Cyrillicmediated scripts Belarusian Bulgarian Kazakh Kyrgyz Mongolian Russian Tatar Ukrainian Egyptian lineage family i.e. Arabicmediated scripts Arabic Persian Urdu Pakistan Indian lineage family i.e. Bharati Braille Devanagari Hindi  Marathi  Nepali Bengali Bangla  Assamese Gujarati Kannada Malayalam Odia Punjabi Sinhala Tamil Telugu Urdu India Other scripts Amharic Armenian Burmese Dzongkha Bhutanese Georgian Greek Hebrew Inuktitut reassigned vowels Khmer Thai and Lao Japanese vowels Tibetan Reordered Algerian Braille obsolete Frequencybased American Braille obsolete Independent Chinese semisyllabaries Cantonese Mainland Chinese Mandarin Taiwanese Mandarin Twocell Chinese Shuangpin Japanese Korean Eightdot Luxembourgish Kanji GardnerSalinas braille codes GS8 Symbols in braille Braille music Canadian currency marks Computer Braille Code GardnerSalinas braille codes science GS
8 GS6 International Phonetic Alphabet IPA Nemeth braille code Braille technology Braille ebook Braille embosser Braille translator Braille watch Mountbatten Brailler Optical braille recognition Perforation Perkins Brailler Refreshable braille display Slate and stylus Braigo People Louis Braille Charles Barbier Ra Czacka Valentin Hay Harris Mowbray Thakur Vishva Narain Singh Sabriye Tenberken William Bell Wait Organisations Braille Institute of America Braille Without Borders Japan Braille Library National Braille Association Blindness organizations Schools for the blind American Printing House for the Blind Other tactile alphabets Decapoint Moon type New York Point Night writing Vibratese Related topics Accessible publishing Braille literacy RoboBraille v t e Electronic writing systems Emoticons Emoji Kaomoji iConji Unicode v t e Internet slang variants Arabizi Alay Indonesia Denglisch Doge DoggoLingo Fingilish Persian Greeklish Gyarumoji Japan Jejemon Philippines Leet 1337 Lolspeak  LOLspeak  Kitteh Martian language Chinese Miguxs Portuguese Padonkaffsky jargon Russian PseudoChinese SMS language used in phones Yaminjeongeum Korean Authority control databases National France BnF data Israel United States Latvia Japan Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEgyptianhieroglyphsoldid1222959104 Categories Egyptian hieroglyphs 
4 thmillennium BC establishments History of writing Writing systems of Africa Abjad writing systems Ancient Egyptian culture Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text CS1 Latinlanguage sources la Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Scripts with ISO 15924 fourletter codes Pages with plain IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2024 Articles containing Copticlanguage text Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 0029 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width