Military of ancient Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 The Old Kingdom 26862181 BC 
2 The First Intermediate Period 21812055 BC and Middle Kingdom 20551650 BC 
3 The Second Intermediate Period 16501550 BC 
4 The New Kingdom 15501069 BC 
5 Old and Middle Kingdom armies 
6 New Kingdom armies 
7 Late Period armies 
8 Military organization Toggle Military organization subsection 
8.1 Soldiers of Egypt 

8.1.1 Military standards 
8.2 Infantry 
8.3 Chariotry 
8.4 Navy 
9 Projectile weapons Toggle Projectile weapons subsection 
9.1 Throw stick 
9.2 Spear 
9.3 Bow and arrow 
9.4 Composite bow 
9.5 Sling 
10 See also 
11 Notes and references 
12 Further reading 
13 External links Toggle the table of contents Military of ancient Egypt 16 languages  Azrbaycanca  Catal Deutsch Espaol Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands    srpski  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Overview of the military of ancient Egypt Ancient Egyptian War Wheels Ancient Egypt was an ancient civilization of eastern North Africa concentrated along the northern reaches of the Nile River in Egypt. The civilization coalesced around 3150 BC1 with the political unification of Upper and Lower Egypt under the first pharaoh and it developed over the next three millennia.2 Its history occurred in a series of stable kingdoms separated by periods of relative instability known as intermediate periods. Ancient Egypt reached its pinnacle during the New Kingdom after which it entered a period of slow decline. Egypt was conquered by a succession of foreign powers in the late period and the rule of the pharaohs officially ended in 31 BC when the early Roman Empire conquered Egypt and made it a province.3 Although the Egyptian military forces in the Old and Middle kingdoms were well maintained the new form that emerged in the New Kingdom showed the state becoming more organized to serve its needs.4 For most parts of its long history ancient Egypt was unified under one government. The main military concern for the nation was to keep enemies out. The arid plains and deserts surrounding Egypt were inhabited by nomadic tribes who occasionally tried to raid or settle in the fertile Nile River valley. Nevertheless the great expanses of the desert formed a barrier that protected the river valley and was almost impossible for massive armies to cross. The Egyptians built fortresses and outposts along the borders east and west of the Nile Delta in the Eastern Desert and in Nubia to the south. Small garrisons could prevent minor incursions but if a large force was detected a message was sent for the main army corps. Most Egyptian cities lacked city walls and other defenses. The history of ancient Egypt is divided into three kingdoms and two intermediate periods. During the three kingdoms Egypt was unified under one government. During the intermediate periods the periods of time between kingdoms government control was in the hands of the various nomes provinces within Egypt and various foreigners. The geography of Egypt served to isolate the country and allowed it to thrive. This circumstance set the stage for many of Egypts military conquests. They enfeebled their enemies by using small projectile weapons like bows and arrows. They also had chariots which they used to charge at the enemy. The Old Kingdom 26862181 BCedit The Old Kingdom was one of the greatest times in Egypts history. Because of this affluence it allowed the government to stabilize and in turn organize a functioning military. During this period most military conflict was limited to the consolidation of power within Egypt and defending Egypts territories.5 At first during the Old Kingdom there was no professional army in Egypt the governor of each nome administrative division had to raise his own volunteer army.6 Then all the armies would come together under the Pharaoh to battle. Djoser was the first to make a professional army by getting volunteers every year to join most of them were lowerclass men who could not afford to train in other jobs.7 Old Kingdom soldiers were equipped with many types of weapons including shields spears cudgels maces daggers and bows and arrows. The most common Egyptian weapon was the bow and arrow. During the Old Kingdom a singlearched bow was often used. This type of bow was difficult to draw and there was less draw length. After the composite bow was introduced by the Hyksos Egyptian soldiers used this weapon as well.8 The First Intermediate Period 21812055 BC and Middle Kingdom 20551650 BCedit Further information Middle Kingdom of Egypt The pharaoh Mentuhotep II commanded military campaigns south as far as the Second Cataract in Nubia which had gained its independence during the First Intermediate Period. He also restored Egyptian hegemony over the Sinai region which had been lost to Egypt since the end of the Old Kingdom.9 From the Twelfth Dynasty onwards pharaohs often kept welltrained standing armies which formed the basis of larger forces raised for defense against invasion. Under the rule of Senusret I Egyptian armies built a border fort at Buhen and incorporated all of lower Nubia as an Egyptian colony.10 The Second Intermediate Period 16501550 BCedit The Hyksos of Ancient Egypt drove chariots. After Merneferre Ay of the mid
13 th dynasty fled his palace a Canaanite tribe called the Hyksos sacked Memphis the Egyptians capital city and claimed dominion over Upper and Lower Egypt. After the Hyksos took control many Egyptians fled to Thebes where they eventually began to oppose the Hyksos rule.11 The Hyksos Asiatics from the Northeast set up a fortified capital at Avaris. The Egyptians were trapped at this time their government had collapsed. They were sandwiched between the Hyksos in the north and the Kushite Nubians in the south. This period marked a great change for Egypts military. The Hyksos have been credited with bringing to Egypt the horse the Ourarit chariot and the composite bowtools that drastically altered the way Egypts military functioned. Some evidence suggests that horses and chariots were present earlier.121314 The composite bow which allowed for more accuracy and greater kill distance with arrows along with horses and chariots eventually assisted the Egyptian military in ousting the Hyksos from Egypt beginning when Seqenenre Tao became ruler of Thebes and opened a struggle that claimed his own life in battle. Seqenenre was succeeded by Kamose who continued to battle the Hyksos before his brother Ahmose finally succeeded in driving them out.11 This marked the beginning of the New Kingdom. The New Kingdom 15501069 BCedit A New Kingdom khopesh In the New Kingdom new threats emerged. However the military contributions of the Hyksos allowed Egypt to defend themselves from these foreign invasions successfully. The Hittites hailed from further northeast than had been previously encountered. They attempted to conquer Egypt but were defeated and a peace treaty was made. Also the mysterious Sea Peoples invaded the entire ancient Near East during this time. The Sea Peoples caused many problems but ultimately the military was strong enough at this time to prevent a collapse of the government. The Egyptians were strongly vested in their infantry unlike the Hittites who were dependent on their chariots. It is in this way the New Kingdom army was different than its two preceding kingdoms.15 Old and Middle Kingdom armiesedit Before the New Kingdom the Egyptian armies were composed of conscripted peasants and artisans who would then mass under the banner of the pharaoh.6 During the Old and Middle Kingdom The armies of Egypt were very basic. The Egyptian soldiers carried a simple armament consisting of a spear with a copper spearhead and a large wooden shield covered by leather hides. A stone mace was also carried in the Archaic period though later this weapon was probably only in ceremonial use and was replaced with the bronze battle axe. The spearmen were supported by archers carrying a simple curved bow and arrows with arrowheads made of flint or copper. No armor was used during the 
3 rd and early 
2 nd Millennium BC. citation needed Foreigners were also incorporated into the army Nubians Medjay entered Egyptian armies as mercenaries and formed the best archery units.8 New Kingdom armiesedit Tutankhamun depicted in a triumphant battle against Asiatic enemies The major advance in weapons technology and warfare began around 1600 BC when the Egyptians fought and finally defeated the Hyksos people who had made themselves lords of Lower Egypt.6 It was during this period the horse and chariot were introduced into Egypt which the Egyptians had no answer to until they introduced their own version of the war chariot at the beginning of the 
18 th Dynasty.6 The Egyptians then improved the design of the chariot to suit their own requirements. That made the Egyptian chariots lighter and faster than those of other major powers in the Middle East. Egyptian war chariots were manned by a driver holding a whip and the reins and a fighter generally wielding a composite bow or after spending all his arrows a short spear of which he had a few.8 The charioteers wore occasionally scale armor but many preferred broad leather bands crossed over the chest or carried a shield. Their torso was thus more or less protected while the lower body was shielded by the chariot itself. The pharaohs often wore scale armour with inlaid semiprecious stones which offered better protection the stones being harder than the metal used for arrow tips.16 Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II in his war chariot charging into battle against the Nubians The principal weapon of the Egyptian army was the bow and arrow it was transformed into a formidable weapon with the introduction by the Hyksos of the composite bow. These bows combined with the war chariot enabled the Egyptian army to attack quickly and from a distance.citation needed Other new technologies included the khopeshcitation needed which temple scenes show being presented to the king by the gods with a promise of victory body armour and improved bronze casting in the 
18 th Dynasty soldiers began wearing helmets and leather or cloth tunics with metal scale coverings.
17 citation needed These changes also caused changes in the role of the military in Egyptian society and so during the New Kingdom the Egyptian military changed from levy troops into a firm organization of professional soldiers.618 Conquests of foreign territories like Nubia required a permanent force to be garrisoned abroad. The encounter with other powerful Near Eastern kingdoms like the Mitanni the Hittites and later the Assyrians and Babylonians made it necessary for the Egyptians to conduct campaigns far from home. Over 4000 infantry of an army corps were organized into 20 companies between 200 and 250 men each.19 The Egyptian army is estimated to have had over 100000 soldiers at the time of Ramesses II c. 1300 BC.20 There were also companies of Libyans Nubians Canaanite and Sherdens Greeks who served in the Egyptian army. They were often described as mercenaries but they were most likely impressed prisoners who preferred the life of a soldier instead of slavery.21 Late Period armiesedit The next leap forward came in the Late Period 712332 BC when mounted troops and weapons made of iron came into use. After the conquest by Alexander the Great Egypt was heavily hellenised and the main military force became the infantry phalanx. The ancient Egyptians were not great innovators in weapons technology and most weapons technology innovation came from Western Asia and the Greek world. Military organizationedit As early as the Old Kingdom c.26862160 BC Egypt used specific military units with military hierarchy appearing in the Middle Kingdom c.20551650 BC. By the New Kingdom c.15501069 BC the Egyptian military consisted of three major branches the infantry the chariotry and the navy.22 Soldiers of Egyptedit During the Egyptian conquest the Pharaoh would divide his army into two parts the North and the South. They would then be further divided into four more armies named after the Egyptian gods Ra Amen Ptah and Sutekh of all the armies the Pharaoh would align himself with Amen. From there he would pick a commanderinchief generally a prince of the royal house who would then pick captains to enforce orders given down the chain of command. During war times the commanderinchief was given the job of selecting their captains who were usually lowerranking princes of the royal house. They generally achieved these positions using tools of bribery and appealing to the interest courts. Another major factor in choosing both officers and captains was the degree of education they received most officials were oftentimes diplomatists with extensive educational backgrounds. Later after receiving the official position the divided armies would ally themselves with mercenaries who would be trained with them as one of their own but never a part of the native Egyptian military. Each regiment in the Egyptian army could have been identified by the weapon they carried archers lancers spearmen and infantry. The lancers not only carried their longrange weapon the lance but also a dagger on their belt and a shortcurved sword. Depicted in Egyptian art is a cane or wandtype object that has been assigned to each fifth member in a group. This may indicate that the man carrying the cane or wand was in charge of a unit of men beside him Girard. Military standardsedit A military standard is the code or sign used to signify a standard among a group of militarized individuals to show distinction from other groups but not from one another. This only became prevalent in armies that were large enough to require division to be better controlled. This recognized division started as early as the Unification period in Egypt in the Protodynastic period Faulkner. The most common symbol in Egyptian military history would be the semicircular fan sitting on top of a large long staff as shown by the sunshade hieroglyph . This symbol represented the Egyptian naval fleet. During later dynasties such as the 
18 th dynasty it was the most common military standard symbolparticularly under the reign of Queen Hatshepsut. Another type of standard was the rectangular mounted on a long and large staff. The staff may have been decorated with ornaments such as ostrich feathers.23 Infantryedit Wooden figures found in the tomb of Mesehti Egyptian army of the 
11 th Dynasty Infantry troops were partially conscripted voluntary.24 Egyptian soldiers worked for pay both natives and mercenaries.25 Of mercenary troops Nubians were used beginning in the late Old Kingdom Asiatic maryannu troops were used in the Middle and New Kingdoms the Sherden Libyans and the Naarn were used in the Ramesside Period26 New Kingdom Dynasties XIX and XX c.12921075 BC27 and Phoenicians Carians and Greeks were used during the Late Period.28 Chariotryedit Main article Chariotry in ancient Egypt The pharaoh on a Hittite war chariot Leader riding a chariot holding a bow. Chariotry the backbone of the Egyptian army was introduced into ancient Egypt from Western Asia at the end of the Second Intermediate Period c.16501550 BC  the beginning of the New Kingdom c.15501069 BC.29 Charioteers were drawn from the upper classes in Egypt. Chariots were generally used as a mobile platform from which to use projectile weapons and were generally pulled by two horses30 and manned by two charioteers a driver who carried a shield and a man with a bow or javelin. Chariots also had infantry support.31 By the time of Qadesh the chariot arm was at the height of its development. It was designed for speed and maneuverability being lightweight and delicate in appearance. Its offensive power was in its capacity to rapidly turn wheel and repeatedly charge penetrating the enemy line and functioning as a mobile firing platform that afforded the fighting crewmen the opportunity to shoot many arrows from the composite bow. The chariot corps served as an independent arm but were attached to the infantry corps. At Qadesh there were 25 vehicles per company. Many of the lighter vehicles were retained for scouting and communication duties. In combat the chariots were deployed in troops of 10 squadrons of 50 and the larger unit was called the pedjet commanded by an officer with the title Commander of a chariotry host and numbering about 250 chariots.32 Chariots are best defined as horsedrawn vehicles with two spoked wheels that require their drivers and passengers to stand whilst in motion Archer 1. Simply described the chariot has been around for centuries in the near East not only showing the owners status in societies but also in times of war. This became the most predominate in the time of the 
16 th century when the chariot was introduced to the Egyptians during a war with the Hyksos army Shulman. The chariot aided in many battles they could be used in a multitude of ways from a glorified product mover or transportation for soldiers to be moved to and from the battle fields in a battle taxi type manner and a variety of other ways Archer 2. A weapon that accompanied the soldiers and their passengers were objects such as the composite bows arrows and a variety of other object such as spears and swords. The role of an archer was one of value when place on the back of a chariot literally making this a target almost unable to hit due to the amount of movement. Chariots were used to ferry bowmen to suitable firing positions where they dismounted and fired their bows on foot climbing back into their chariots and speeding away when threatened Archer 6. One major usage of the chariot was to ram into the front lines of the enemy to scare them into breaking formation giving the army the opportunity to get behind their lines and start fighting. Due to the fact that war horses although trained still became scared. Horses will not willingly charge into massed ranks of infantry always preferring to pull up and stop just short of their lines regardless of the intentions of the riders and handlers Archer 4. Even if the horsedrawn chariot did follow through and attempt to break the enemys lines would have been a terrible idea if they were using the lighter Bronze Age type war chariots. The chariots proved themselves most useful on flat unbroken ground this is where their speed and maneuvering capabilities were at their height. This did however become a thorn in the side of Egyptians during the eighth and ninth centuries when the battle between Egypt and Syria Palestine Empire broke out causing the Egyptian chariots to become virtually incapable of performing its intended duties due to the very nature of the landscape mountainous and rocky. There are many theories as to how chariots aided in the rise and fall of Egypt the most prominent of these was created by Robert Drews. He claims that chariots were responsible for the end of the Late Bronze Age. His claim is that the mercenaries in the area at this time spent a great amount of effort and time watching and learning the strength and weaknesses of the warfare styles of the Egyptian military to aid in the future rebellions they would hold to overthrow the government.33 Navyedit Main article Ancient Egyptian navy Model of a warship fleet of Ramses III Before the New Kingdom the Egyptian military was mainly aquatic and the high ranks were composed of elite middleclass Egyptians.34 Egyptian troops were transported by naval vessels as early as the Late Old Kingdom.35 By the later intermediate period the navy was highly sophisticated and used complicated naval maneuvers such as Kamoses campaign against the Hyksos in the harbor of Avaris c.15551550 BC36 There were two different types of ship in Ancient Egypt the reed boat and the vessel made from large wooden planks. The planked ships created the naval fleet and gave it its fierce reputation. These early ships lacked an internal rib for support. Each boat had a designated section generally under the main deck where the slave rowers would sit. The steering oar was operated by one man.37 Projectile weaponsedit Projectile weapons were used by the ancient Egyptians to weaken the enemy before an infantry assault. Slings throw sticks spears and javelins were used but the bow and arrow was the primary projectile weapon for most of Egypts history. A catapult dating to the 
19 th century BC. was found on the walls of the fortress of Buhen.38 Throw stickedit The throw stick does appear to have been used to some extent during Egypts predynastic period as a weapon but it seems to have not been very effective for this purpose. Because of their simplicity skilled infantry continued to use this weapon at least with some regularity through the end of the New Kingdom. It was used extensively for hunting fowl through much of Egypts dynastic period. Most of the Egyptians were intent on using this weapon for it had a holy effect as well. Spearedit The spear does not fit comfortably into either the close combat class or the projectile type of weapons. It could be either. During the Old and Middle Kingdom of Egypts Dynastic period it typically consisted of a pointed blade made of copper or flint that was attached to a long wooden shaft by a tang. Conventional spears were made for throwing or thrusting but there was also a form of a spear halberd which was fitted with an axe blade and thus used for cutting and slashing. The spear was used in Egypt since the earliest times for hunting larger animals such as lions. In its form of javelin throwing spears it was replaced early on by the bow and arrow. Because of its greater weight the spear was better at penetration than the arrow but in a region where armour consisted mostly of shields this was only a slight advantage. On the other hand arrows were much easier to massproduce. During the New Kingdom it was often an auxiliary weapon of the charioteers who were thus not left unarmed after spending all their arrows. It was also most useful in their hands when they chased down fleeing enemies stabbing them in their backs. Amenhotep IIs victory at ShemeshEdom in Canaan is described at Karnak Bronze spearhead from Leontopolis 
2 nd millennium BC National Archaeological Museum France. ... Behold His Majesty was armed with his weapons and His Majesty fought like Set in his hour. They gave way when His Majesty looked at one of them and they fled. His majesty took all their goods himself with his spear... The spear was appreciated enough to be depicted in the hands of Ramesses III killing a Libyan. It remained short and javelinlike just about the height of a man.39 Bow and arrowedit Egyptian archer on a chariot from an ancient engraving at Thebes The bow and arrow is one of ancient Egypts most crucial weapons used from Predynastic times through the Dynastic age and into the Christian and Islamic periods. The first bows were commonly horn bows made by joining a pair of antelope horns with a central piece of wood. By the beginning of the Dynastic Period bows were made of wood. They had a single curvature and were strung with animal sinews or strings made of plant fiber. In the predynastic period bows often had a double curvature but during the Old Kingdom a singlearched bow known as a self or simple bow was adopted. These were used to fire reed arrows fletched with three feathers and tipped with flint or hardwood and later bronze. The bow itself was usually between one and two meters in length and made up of a wooden rod narrowing at either end. Some of the longer self bows were strengthened at certain points by binding the wooden rod with cord. Drawing a singlearched bow was harder and one lost the advantage of drawlength double curvature provided. During the New Kingdom the composite bow came into use having been introduced by the Asiatic Hyksos. Often these bows were not made in Egypt itself but imported from the Middle East like other modern weapons. The older singlecurved bow was not completely abandoned however. For example it would appear that Thutmose III and Amenhotep II continued to use these earlierstyled bows. A difficult weapon to use successfully it demanded strength dexterity and years of practice. The experienced archer chose his weapon with care. The Egyptian craftsmen never limited themselves to one type of wood it was very common for them to be using woods both foreign and domestic to their lands. The handmade arrows we created using mature branches or twigs and in some rare cases some immature pieces of wood that would have its bark scraped off. Each arrow was built with consisted of a reed main shaft with a wooden fore shift attached to the distal end. The arrow head was either attached or was already in place without the help of an outside stabilizer. The size of the arrows were 
80.1  to 
85.1  centimeters or 
31.5  to 
33.5  inches. There are four types of arrow that are further categorized under two groups stone heads which consisted of the chiselended and leaf shaped and the wooden heads under which the pointed and blunt or flaring arrows have been categorized.40 Composite bowedit Ramses II at the Battle of Kadesh The composite bow achieved the greatest possible range with a bow as small and light as possible. The maximum draw length was that of the archers arm. The bow while unstrung curved outward and was under an initial tension dramatically increasing the draw weight. A simple wooden bow was no match for the composite bow in range or power. The wood had to be supported otherwise it would break. This was achieved by adding horn to the belly of the bow the part facing the archer which would be compressed during the draw. Sinew was added to the back of the bow to withstand the tension. All these layers were glued together and covered with birch bark. Composite bows needed more care than simple basic bows and were much more difficult and expensive to produce. They were more vulnerable to moisture requiring them to be covered. They had to be unstrung when not in use and restrung for action a feat which required not a little force and generally the help of a second person. As a result they were not used as much as one might expect. The simple stave bow never disappeared from the battlefield even in the New Kingdom. The simpler bows were used by the bulk of the archers while the composite bows went first to the chariots where their penetrative power was needed to pierce scale armor. The first arrowheads were flint which was replaced by bronze in the 
2 nd millennium. Arrowheads were mostly made for piercing having a sharp point. However the arrow heads could vary considerably and some were even blunt probably used more for hunting small game. Slingedit Hurling stones with a sling demanded little equipment or practice in order to be effective. Secondary to the bow and arrow in battle the sling was rarely depicted. The first drawings date to the 
20 th century BC. Made of perishable materials few ancient slings have survived. It relied on the impact the missile made and like most impact weapons was relegated to play a subsidiary role. In the hands of lightly armed skirmishers it was used to distract the attention of the enemy. One of its main advantages was the easy availability of ammunition in many locations. When lead became more widely available during the Late Period sling bullets were cast. These were preferred to pebbles because of their greater weight which made them more effective.41 They often bore a mark. See alsoedit Egyptian Army Egyptian Armed Forces Military Industry of Egypt Notes and referencesedit  Only after 664 BC are dates secure. See Egyptian chronology for details. Chronology. Digital Egypt for Universities University College London. Retrieved 20080325.  Dodson 2004 p. 46  Clayton 1994 p. 217  Healy Mark 2005. Qadesh 1300 BC. London Osprey. pp. 2728.  Ancient Egyptian Warfare. World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 20201207.  a b c d e Egyptology Online Archived 20071020 at the Wayback Machine  Benson Douglas S. Ancient Egypts Warfare A survey of armed conflict in the chronology of ancient Egypt 1600 BC30 BC Bookmasters Inc. Ashland Ohio 1995  a b c Ancient Egyptian Weapons. Archived from the original on 20180210. Retrieved 20080106.  Grimal Nicolas 1988. A History of Ancient Egypt. Librairie Arthme Fayard.  Shaw Ian 2000. The Oxford history of ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0192804588.  a b Tyldesley Joyce A. Egypts Golden Empire Headline Book Publishing London 2001. ISBN 0747251606  W. Helck Ein indirekter Beleg fr die Benutzung des leichten Streitwagens in gypten zu Ende der 13. Dynastie in JNES 37 pp. 33740  see Egyptian Archaeology 4 1994  see KMT 13 1990 p. 5  Healy Mark 2005. Qadesh 1300 BC. London Osprey. p. 35.  Body armour. Archived from the original on 20180215. Retrieved 20080106.  Pollastrini A. M. 2017. Some remarks on the Egyptian reception of foreign military technology during the 
18 th Dynasty a brief survey of the armour. Proceedings of the XI International Congress of Egyptologists. Florence Egyptian Museum. Florence 2330 August 2015 513518. ISBN 9781784916008.  Ancient Egyptian Army  Healy Mark 2005. Qadesh 1300 BC. London Osprey. p. 37.  Gabriel Richard A. 2002. The Great Armies of Antiquity. ISBN 9780275978099.  Healy Mark 2005. Qadesh 1300 BC. London Osprey. pp. 3738.  Darnell John Colemen Menassa Colleen. Tutankhamuns Armies. John Wiley and Sons Inc. New Jersey 2007. p.60  Faulkner R. O. 19410101. Egyptian Military Standards. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 27 1218. doi
10.2 3073854558. JSTOR 3854558.  Darnell John Colemen Menassa Colleen. TutanKhamuns Armies. John Wiley and Sons Inc. New Jersey 2007. pp.6063  Spalinger Anthony J.. War in Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Publishing Malden MA 2005. p.7  Spalinger Anthony J.. War in Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Publishing Malden MA 2005. pp.67  Hornung Erik. History of Ancient Egypt. trans. Lorton David. Cornell University Press Ithaca New York 1999. p.xvii  Allen James Hill Marsha October 2004. Egypt in the Late Period ca. 712332 B.C.. Metropolitan Museum of Art.  Spalinger Anthony J.. War in Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Publishing Malden Massachusetts 2005. p.8  Spalinger Anthony J.. War in Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Publishing Malden Massachusetts 2005. p.36  Darnell John Colemen Menassa Colleen. TutanKhamuns Armies. John Wiley and Sons Inc. New Jersey 2007. pp.6365  Healy Mark 2005. Qadesh 1300 BC. London Osprey. p. 39.  Archer Robin 2010. Chariotry to Cavalry Developments in the Early First Millennium. History of Warfare.  Spalinger Anthony J.. War in Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Publishing Malden MA 2005. p.6  Darnell John Colemen Menassa Colleen. TutanKhamuns Armies. John Wiley and Sons Inc. New Jersey 2007. p.65  Darnell John Colemen Menassa Colleen. TutanKhamuns Armies. John Wiley and Sons Inc. New Jersey 2007. pp.6566  IV William Walter Warwick. Egyptian Warfare Weapons. cite journal Cite journal requires journal help  Lewis Leo Richard Tenney Charles R. 2010. The Compendium of Weapons Armor  Castles. Nabu Press. p. 139. ISBN 9781146066846.  Edged Weapons The Spear. Archived from the original on 20180131. Retrieved 20090624.  Western A. C. McLeod W. 19950101. Woods Used in Egyptian Bows and Arrows. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 81 7794. doi
10.2 3073821809. JSTOR 3821809.  Projectiles. Archived from the original on 20180131. Retrieved 20090624. Further readingedit Schulman Alan Richard 19570101. Egyptian Representations of Horsemen and Riding in the New Kingdom. Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 16 4 263271. doi
10.1 086371411. JSTOR 542186. S
2 CID 161191663. Tirard H. M. 19150101. The Soldiers of Ancient Egypt. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 2 4 229233. doi
10.2 3073853476. JSTOR 3853476. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancient Egyptian military equipment. The Egyptian Army In The Ancient Pharaonic History v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Portal Ancient Egypt Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMilitaryofancientEgyptoldid1217376358 Category Military history of ancient Egypt Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 April 2024 at 1332 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width