Ancient Egyptian philosophy - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Notable works 
2 Theology and cosmology 
3 Historical accounts 
4 Notes and references 
5 Further reading 
6 See also Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian philosophy 14 languages  Azrbaycanca  etina Espaol  Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Portugus    srpski  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Philosophical works and beliefs of ancient Egypt Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Cosmology Duat Maat Mythology Index Numerology Philosophy Soul Practices Funerals Offerings Offering formula Temples Priestess of Hathor Pyramids Deities list Ogdoad Amun Amunet Hauhet Heh Kauket Kek Naunet Nu Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun Duau god F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mandulis Medjed Mafdet Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nemty Nekhbet Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Locations Aaru Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Aani Abtu Ankh Atef Atet Book of Thoth Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Griffin Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Hieracosphinx Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Matet boat Medjed Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Serpopard Set animal Shen ring Sphinx Tyet Uraeus Ushabti Wassceptre Winged sun Texts Funerary texts Amduat  Books of Breathing  Book of Caverns  Book of the Dead  Book of the Earth  Book of Gates Related religions Atenism Hermeticism Thelema Kemeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy  Church of the Most High Goddess Ancient Egypt portal v t e Ancient Egyptian philosophy is a term used by some authors to refer to ancient Egyptian literature which is considered to have a philosophical aspect commonly referred to as wisdom literature. There is some debate regarding its true scope and nature.1 Notable worksedit Further information Wisdom literature  Ancient Egyptian literature One Egyptian figure sometimes considered an early philosopher is Ptahhotep.2 He served as vizier to the pharaoh in the late 
25 th early 
24 th century BC. Ptahhotep is known for his work on ethical behavior called The Maxims of Ptahhotep. The work which is believed to have been compiled by his grandson Ptahhotep Tjefi is a series of 37 letters or maxims addressed to his son Akhethotep speaking on such topics as daily behavior and ethical practices.34 Dag Herbjrnsrud writing for the American Philosophical Association describes the 32
00 yearold manuscript The Immortality of Writers or Be a Writer c. 1200 BC as a remarkable example of classical Egyptian philosophy.5 The manuscript attributed to the writer Irsesh states Man perishes his corpse turns to dust all his relatives return to the earth. But writings make him remembered in the mouth of the reader. A book is more effective than a wellbuilt house or a tombchapel better than an established villa or a stela in the temple ... They gave themselves a book as their lectorpriest a writingboard as their dutiful son. Teachings are their mausolea the reedpen their child the burnishingstone their wife. Both great and small are given them as their children for the writer is chief.6 Herbjrnsrud writes In 2018 projects are under way to translate several ancient Egyptian texts for the first time. Yet we already have a wide variety of genres to choose from in order to study the manuscripts from a philosophical perspective The many maxims in The Teaching of Ptahhotep the earliest preserved manuscript of this vizier of the fifth dynasty is from the 
19 th century BC in which he also argues that you should follow your heart The Teaching of Ani written by a humble middleclass scribe in the 
13 th century BC which gives advice to the ordinary man The Satire of the Trades by Khety who tries to convince his son Pepy to love books more than your mother as there is nothing on earth like being a scribe the masterpiece The Dispute Between a Man and His Ba of the 
19 th century BC  in which a man laments the misery of life while his ba personalitysoul replies that life is good that he should rather ponder life as it is a burial that is miserable ... Or we can read Amennakht active in 11701140 BC the leading intellectual of the scribal town Deir ElMedina whose teaching states that it is good to finish school better than the smell of lotus blossoms in summer.5 Theology and cosmologyedit Theology and cosmology were central concerns in Egyptian thought. Perhaps the earliest form of a monotheistic theology also emerged in Egypt with the rise of the Amarna theology or Atenism of Akhenaten 
14 th century BCE which held that the solar creation deity Aten was the only god. This has been described as a monotheistic revolution by egyptologist Jan Assmann though it also drew on previous developments in Egyptian thought particularly the New Solar Theology based around AmunRa.78 These theological developments also influenced the postAmarna Ramesside theology which retained a focus on a single creative solar deity though without outright rejection of other gods which are now seen as manifestations of the main solar deity. This period also saw the development of the concept of the ba soul and its relation to god.8 According to Goldwasser 2006 the Hyksos king Apophis c. 1550 BC may have been the first to introduce into the history of ideas the option of a single god and no other the first step on the long winding road of monotheism.9 Historical accountsedit In his fictional account of the Egyptian character Busiris the Greek rhetorican Isocrates b. 436 BC states that Furthermore the cultivation of practical wisdom may also reasonably be attributed to Busiris. For example he saw to it that from the revenues of the sacrifices the priests should acquire affluence but selfcontrol through the purifications prescribed by the laws and leisure by exemption from the hazards of fighting and from all work. And the priests because they enjoyed such conditions of life discovered for the body the aid which the medical art affords not that which uses dangerous drugs but drugs of such a nature that they are as harmless as daily food yet in their effects are so beneficial that all men agree the Egyptians are the healthiest and most long of life among men and then for the soul they introduced philosophys training a pursuit which has the power not only to establish laws but also to investigate the nature of the universe.10 Notes and referencesedit  Juan Jos Castillos Ancient Egyptian Philosophy RSUE 31 2014 2937.  Fontaine Carole R. A Modern Look at Ancient Wisdom The Instruction of Ptahhotep Revisited. The Biblical Archaeologist 44 no. 3 1981 15560. doi
10.2 3073209606.  Browder Anthony 1988. Nile Valley Contributions to Civilization. Karmaic Institute.  Simpson W. K. ed. The Maxims of Ptahhotep. Las Vegas Nevada Evan Blythin 1986.  a b Herbjrnsrud Dag 20181217. The Radical Philosophy of Egypt Forget God and Family Write. Blog of the APA. Retrieved 20190619.  Writings from Ancient Egypt Be a Writer. www.penguin.co.uk. Retrieved 20190619.  Najovits Simson 2004. Egypt the Trunk of the Tree A Modern Survey of and Ancient Land Vol. II. New York Algora Publishing. p. 131. ISBN 9780875862569.  a b Assmann Jan 2004. Theological Responses to Amarna PDF. In Knoppers Gary N. Hirsch Antoine eds.. Egypt Israel and the Ancient Mediterranean World. Studies in Honor of Donald B. Redford. LeidenBoston. pp. 179191. Archived PDF from the original on 18 May 2020.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Goldwasser Orly 2006. King Apophis of Avaris and the emergence of Monotheism. In Timelines ed. E. Czerny et al. vol. II Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 1
49 II 129133.  Isocrates Busiris section 22. www.perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 20190619. Further readingedit Allen James P. 1988. Genesis in Egypt the philosophy of ancient Egyptian creation accounts. New Haven Conn Yale Egyptological Seminar Dept. of Near Estern Languages and Literatures The Graduate School Yale Univ. ISBN 9780912532141. See alsoedit African philosophy Book of Thoth Egyptology Isfet Egyptian mythology Maat Maxims of Ptahhotep Middle Eastern philosophy Philosophy in Coptic Sebayt v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientEgyptianphilosophyoldid1220833682 Categories Ancient Egyptian philosophy Ancient philosophy by culture Hidden categories CS1 maint location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 April 2024 at 0542 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width