Music of Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History Toggle History subsection 
1.1 Neolithic period 
1.2 Predynastic period 
1.3 Old Kingdom 
1.4 Medieval music 
1.5 Modern Egyptian classical and pop music 
2 Western classical music 
3 Religious music in Egypt 
4 Folkloric music 
5 Folk and roots revival Toggle Folk and roots revival subsection 
5.1 Saidi Upper Egyptian 
5.2 Nubian 
6 Egyptian musical instruments 
7 Electronic music 
8 Reconstruction of ancient Egyptian music 
9 See also 
10 Notes and references 
11 Further reading 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Music of Egypt 16 languages  etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto  Franais  Italiano  Bahasa Melayu Portugus Romn    srpski  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Musical culture of Egypt This article is part of a series on Life in Egypt Culture Architecture Ancient Egyptian art Contemporary Cinema Cuisine Dance Belly dance Raqs sharqi Baladi Tahtib Tanoura Fashion History Holidays Language Literature Music Mythology Radio Sculpture Sport Symbols Flag Anthem Television Society People Identity Education Demographics Health Media Human rights Religion Wildlife World Heritage Sites Politics Presidency Government Parliament Political parties Military Corruption Law enforcement Foreign relations Law Economy Energy Tourism Telecommunications Transportation Egypt portal v t e Music has been an integral part of Egyptian culture since antiquity in Egypt. Egyptian music had a significant impact on the development of ancient Greek music and via the Greeks it was important to early European music well into the Middle Ages. Due to the thousands ofyears long dominance of Egypt over its neighbors Egyptian culture including music and musical instruments was very influential in the surrounding regions for instance the instruments claimed in the Bible to have been played by the ancient Hebrews are all Egyptian instruments as established by Egyptian archaeology. Egyptian modern music is considered as a main core of Middle Eastern and Oriental music as it has a huge influence on the region due to the popularity and huge influence of Egyptian cinema and music industries owing to the political influence Egypt has on its neighboring countries as well as Egypt producing the most accomplished musicians and composers in the region specially in the 
20 th century a lot of them are of international stature.1 The tonal structure music in the East is defined by the maqamat loosely similar to the Western modes while the rhythm in the East is governed by the iqaat standard rhythmic modes formed by combinations of accented and unaccented beats and rests. Historyedit Egyptian instrumentals Lute and double pipe players and female dancers from a mural found in the Theban tomb of Nebamun a nobleman of the 
18 th Dynasty of the New Kingdom c. 1350 BC The ancient Egyptians credited the goddess Bat with the invention of music. The cult of Bat was eventually syncretised into that of Hathor because both were depicted as cows. Hathors music was believed to have been used by Osiris as part of his effort to civilise the world. The liongoddess Bastet was also considered a goddess of music in ancient Egypt. Neolithic periodedit In prehistoric Egypt music and chanting were commonly used in magic and rituals. Rhythms during this time were unvaried and music served to create rhythm. Small shells were used as whistles.22630 Predynastic periodedit During the predynastic period of Egyptian history funerary chants continued to play an important role in Egyptian religion and were accompanied by clappers or a flute. Despite the lack of physical evidence in some cases Egyptologists theorise that the development of certain instruments known of the Old Kingdom period such as the endblown flute took place during this time.23334 Old Kingdomedit The evidence for instruments played is more securely attested in the Old Kingdom when arched harps flutes and double clarinets were played.citation needed Percussion instruments and lutes were added to orchestras by the Middle Kingdom. Cymbals frequently accompanied music and dance much as they still do in Egypt today. Medieval musicedit Early Middle Eastern music was influenced by Byzantine and Roman forms which were themselves heavily influenced by earlier Greek Semitic and Ancient Egyptian music. Egyptians in Medieval Cairo believed that music exercised too powerful an effect upon the passions and leading men into gaiety dissipation and vice. However Egyptians generally were very fond of music. Though according to E.W. Lane no man of sense would ever become a musician music was a key part of society. Tradesmen of every occupation used music during work and schools taught the Quran by chanting.3359 The music of Medieval Egypt was derived from Ancient Egyptian and Byzantine traditions. Lane said that the most remarkable peculiarity of the Arabic system of music is the division of tones into thirds although today Western musicologists prefer to say that Arabic musics tones are divided into quarters. The songs of this period were similar in sound and simple within a small range of tones. Egyptian song though simple in form is embellished by the singer. Distinct enunciation and a quavering voice are also characteristics of Egyptian singing.3360361 Male professional musicians during this period were called Alateeyeh plural or Alatee singular which means a player upon an instrument. However this name applies to both vocalists as well as instrumentalists. This position was considered disreputable and lowly. However musicians found work singing or playing at parties to entertain the company. They generally made three shillings a night but earned more by the guests givings. Female professional musicians were called Awalim pl or Almeh which means a learned female. These singers were often hired on the occasion of a celebration in the harem of a wealthy person. They were not with the harem but in an elevated room that was concealed by a screen so as not to be seen by either the harem or the master of the house. The female Awalim were more highly paid than male performers and more highly regarded than the Alateeyeh as well. Lane relates an instance of a female performer who so enraptured her audience that she earned up to fifty guineas for one nights performance from the guests and host themselves not considered wealthy. Modern Egyptian classical and pop musicedit In the second half of the 
19 th century the Egyptian folk street music band Hasaballah a genre of popular improvisational brass band folk music emerged initiated by clarinettist Mohamed Hasaballah and his band based on the traditional music of the Egyptians and is shortly called Hasaballah a band playing in Cairos music and entertainment quarter on Mohammed Ali Street. The typical lineup of trumpet trombone bass and snare drums was popular such as at family events for well over a century and is still played.45 Egyptian music began to be recorded as early as in the 19
10 s. The Egyptians have always expressed themselves and daily lives and even struggles with their music and traditional folk music. By the 19
30 s Egypts classical musical tradition was already thriving centered on the city of Cairo. In general modern Egyptian music blends its rich indigenous traditions with some western elements that helped create Egyptian pop music. Umm Kulthum Since the end of World War I some of the Middle Easts biggest musical stars have been Egyptian. Contemporary classical Egyptian music traces its beginnings to the creative work of traditiondal classical Egyptian musicians Abdu El Hamouly Almaz and Mahmud Osman as well as the later work of the 
20 th centurys most important Egyptian composers and singers like Sayed Darwish Umm Kulthum Mohammed Abdel Wahab Abdel Halim Hafez and Baligh Hamdy. Most of these stars including Umm Kulthum Abdel Halim Fawzi and many others were part of the traditional Egyptian music. Some like Abd elHalim Hafez were associated with the Egyptian nationalist movement from 1952 onward.citation needed Cairoborn Fatma Said was the first Egyptian soprano to sing at the Teatro alla Scala in Milan.6 and from 2016 to 2018 took part in BBC Radio 3 New Generation Artists scheme.7 Western classical musicedit Cairo Opera House a landmark in the cultural landscape of Egypt and the Middle East Western classical music was introduced to Egypt and in the middle of the 
18 th century instruments such as the piano and violin were gradually adopted by Egyptians. Opera also became increasingly popular during the 
18 th century and Giuseppe Verdis Egyptianthemed Aida was premiered in Cairo on December 24 1871. By the early 
20 th century the first generation of Egyptian composers including Yusef Greiss Abu Bakr Khairat and Hasan Rashid began writing for Western instruments. The second generation of Egyptian composers included notable artists such as Gamal Abdelrahim. Representative composers of the third generation are Ahmed ElSaedi and Rageh Daoud. In the early 
21 st century even fourth generation composers such as Mohamed Abdelwahab Abdelfattah of the Cairo Conservatory have gained international attention. Religious music in Egyptedit Religious music remains an essential part of traditional Sufi Muslim and Coptic Christian celebrations called mulids. Mulids are held in Egypt to celebrate the saint of a particular church or an exalted local Muslim figure. Muslim mulids are related to the Sufi zikr ritual. The Egyptian flute called the ney is commonly played at mulids. The liturgical music of the Alexandrian Rite also constitutes an important element of Egyptian music and is said to have preserved many features of ancient Egyptian music. Folkloric musicedit Egyptian folk music including the traditional Sufi dhikr rituals in Egypt are the closest contemporary music genre to ancient Egyptian music having preserved many of its features rhythms and instruments.89 Folk and roots revivaledit The 
20 th century has seen Cairo become associated with a roots revival. Musicians from across Egypt are keeping folk traditions alive such as those of rural Egyptians fellahin the Saiida and to a lesser extent minorities like the Siwa people the Egyptian Romani the Sinawis and the Nubians. Mixtures of folk and pop have also risen from the Cairo hit factory. Since the Nasser era Egyptian pop music has become increasingly important in Egyptian culture particularly among the large youth population of Egypt. Egyptian folk music continues to be played during weddings and other traditional festivities. In the last quarter of the 
20 th century Egyptian music was a way to communicate social and class issues. Among some of the most popular Egyptian pop singers today are Sherine AbdelWahab Mohamed Mounir and Amr Diab. An Egyptian band playing the simsimiyya Ancient Egyptian lyre The Egyptian darbukatabla Sawahli coastal music is a type of popular Egyptian music from the countrys northern coast and is based around ancient Egyptian instrumentals mainly the simsimiyya which is an indigenous Egyptian stringed instrument that has its roots in ancient Egypt itthe simsimiyyawas probably introduced to the countrys northern coast from the Nile valley in the 
19 th century by Egyptian workers in the Suez Canal. Well known Egyptian bands that feature the simsimiyya as a main instrument include elTanboura which uses other ancient Egyptian instruments. Saidi Upper Egyptianedit Egyptian musicians from Upper Egypt play a form of folk music called adi which originates from Upper Egypt. Metqal Qenawis Les Musiciens du Nil Musicians of the Nile who became known to Alain Weber in 1975 are the most popular Sadi group and were chosen by the government to represent Egyptian folk music abroad. They spent over three decades touring Europe performing at various festivals and musical events and in 1983 after their performance in the World of Music and Dance Festival they were signed to Peter Gabriels label Real WorldCarolina and went on to feature on his Album Passion. Other performers include Shoukoukou Ahmad Ismail Omar Gharzawi Sohar Magdy and Ahmed Megahid. Nubianedit In Egypt Nubians are native to southern part of Aswan though some live in Cairo Alexandria and other cities. Nubian folk music can still be heard but migration and intercultural contact with Egyptian and other musical genres have produced new innovations. Ali Hassan Kubans efforts had made him a regular on the world music scene while Mohamed Mounirs social criticism and sophisticated pop have made him a star among Nubians Egyptians and other people worldwide. Ahmed Mounib Mohamed Mounirs mentor was by far the most notable Nubian singer to hit the Egyptian music scene singing in both Egyptian Arabic as well as in his native Nobiin. Hamza El Din was another popular Nubian Egyptian artist well known on the world music scene and has collaborated with the Kronos Quartet. Egyptian musical instrumentsedit A typical early 
20 th century Egyptian ensemble comprising the Oud qanun violin ney and cello. Many of the modern day instruments both in the East and the West trace their roots back to ancient Egypt and many ancient Egyptian instruments are still used in Egypt today such as the darbuka the simsimiyya the Egyptian ney among other instruments. During the Abbasid and Ottoman dynasty Egypt was one of the main musical hubs in the middle east and therefore after the fall of the Ottoman Empire in 1923 Egypt became the capital of music in the Arabicspeaking world where classical instruments such as the oud qanun and ney were widely used. The typical takht ensemble consisted of an Oud player qanun player ney player and violin player. The takht literally meaning a sofa was the most common form of ensembles in the early 
20 th century before the adoption of more orchestral instruments which were introduced by composers such as Mohamed El Qasabgi Riad El Sunbati and Mohammed Abdel Wahab. Electronic musicedit One of the most respected early electronic music composers Halim ElDabh is an Egyptian. Active at the same time or perhaps earlier than the French electronic pioneers from the Studio dEssai he is one of if not the earliest composer of purely electronic music. In 1944 he composed the earliest known work of tape music or musique concrte called The Expression of Zar which he composed in Egypt while still a student in Cairo by capturing sounds from the streets of Egypt on a wire recorder. The Egyptian electronic music scene has gained a mainstream foothold in the forms of techno trance and dance pop DJs such as Aly  Fila. In the 20
10 s Mahraganat music an Egyptian form of electronic music which often contains political lyrics gained popularity both inside and outside Egypt.10 Reconstruction of ancient Egyptian musicedit In the 
20 th and early 
21 st centuries interest in the music of the pharaonicancient Egyptian period began to grow inspired by the research of such foreignborn musicologists as Hans Hickmann who lived and worked in Egypt. By the early 
21 st century Egyptian musicians and musicologists led by the Egyptian musicology professor Khairy elMalt at Helwan University in Cairo had begun to reconstruct musical instruments of ancient Egypt a project that is ongoing.11 Broken Egyptian sistrum Egyptian sistrum Collection of sistrums at the Louvre From the Walters Art Museum 380250 BC Ancient Egyptian long flute Ancient Egyptian stringed instruments Ancient Egyptian with twosided drum Ancient Egyptian music band Latestyle Egyptian lyre Ancient Egyptian woman playing drum Egyptian lyre See alsoedit Egypt portal Arabic music Arabic pop music Egyptian contemporary art Music of Mesopotamia Notes and referencesedit  Asante Molefi Kete 2002. Culture and Customs of Egypt. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 117153. ISBN 9780313317408.  a b PrezArroyo Rafael 2003. Egypt Music in the Age of the Pyramids 
1 st ed.. Madrid Centro de Estudios Egipcios. p. 28. ISBN 8493279617.  a b Lane Edward William 2003. An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians The Definitive 1860 Edition. Cairo American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 9789774247842.  Egypt Hasaballah the Peoples Music Al Jazeera 22 Nov 2017  Hasaballah Music The Past and The Present Archived 20170108 at the Wayback Machine The Community Times 24 May 2016  Fatma Said. The American University in Cairo. Retrieved 10 May 2020.  Fatma Said Biography BBC. BBC. Retrieved 10 May 2020.  Hickmann Hans 1957. Un Zikr Dans le Mastaba de Debhen Guizah IVeme Dynastie. Journal of the International Folk Music Council. 9 5962. doi
10.2 307834982. JSTOR 834982.  Hickmann Hans January 1960. Rythme mtre et mesure de la musique instrumentale et vocale des anciens Egyptiens. Acta Musicologica. 32 1 1122. doi
10.2 307931818. JSTOR 931818.  Six Explosive Tracks that Define Mahraganat Egypts Wildly Popular Street Music. Thump. Retrieved 20170523.  Ancient Egyptian Music Symposium Further readingedit Lodge David and Bill Badley. Partner of Poetry. 2000. In Duane Orla McConnachie James 2000. Broughton Simon Ellingham Mark eds.. World Music Vol. 1 Africa Europe and the Middle East. London Rough Guides. pp. 32331. ISBN 1858286360. Marcus Scott L. 2007. Music in Egypt. New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195146455. Journal of the History of Ideas October 2014 Vol. 75 No. 4 October 2014 pp. 545580 Peterson Jennifer and Karin van Nieuwkerk. Playing with spirituality the adoption of mulid motifs in Egyptian dance music Contemporary Islam 2008 23 271295. Rehding Alexander. MusicHistorical Egyptomania 16501950. Journal of the History of Ideas 
75.4  2014 54580. External linksedit Audio clips Traditional music of Egypt. Muse dethnographie de Genve. Accessed November 25 2010. in French Egyptian music and dance Books Ghostly Echoes an essay on Egypt and its contemporary music An essay on Egypt and its contemporary music drummers of the nile Church Hymnscoptic multimedia library        Egyptian music mp3 v t e Middle Eastern music By style Arabesque Turkish Arabic aljeel Bedouin khaliji samri sawt Coptic Folk Assyrian Iranian Turkish Hip hop Arabic Egyptian Iranian Israeli Jewish Lebanese Palestinian Turkish Iranian classical Jewish Ottoman classical Pop Arabic Iranian Turkish Luri music By region Bahraini Cypriot Egyptian Coptic Emirati Iranian Iraqi Israeli Jordanian Kurdish Kuwaiti Lebanese Omani Palestinian Qatari Saudi Arabian Syrian Turkish Yemeni Related topics Dance Arab Assyrian folk belly Israeli folk Jewish Kurdish Persian Pontic Greek Turkish Dastgah Fantezi Iqa Kanto Khigga Arabic maqam Iraqi maqam Turkish makam Usul v t e Music of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea GuineaBissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda So Tom and Prncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands  Ceuta  Melilla Spain Madeira Portugal Mayotte  Runion France Saint Helena  Ascension Island  Tristan da Cunha United Kingdom Western Sahara v t e Music of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor TimorLeste Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos Keeling Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Egypt topics History Chronology Prehistoric Ancient topics Achaemenid 
27 th Dynasty 
31 st Dynasty Ptolemaic Battle of Actium Lighthouse of Alexandria Roman Diocese of Egypt Library of Alexandria Christian Sassanid Muslim Rashidun Caliphate Fustat Islamization Tulunid dynasty Ikhshidid dynasty Fatimid Caliphate Crusader invasions Ayyubid dynasty Mamluk Sultanate Mamluk Ottoman Ottoman Egypt Khedivate and Kingdom of Egypt Muhammad Ali dynasty Nahda Khedivate EgyptianEthiopian War Urabi revolt Modern French occupation Revolt of Cairo British occupation 1919 revolution World War II Sultanate Kingdom 1948 ArabIsraeli War Republic Nasser era 1952 Egyptian revolution Land reform Suez Crisis United Arab Republic SixDay War Sadat era Yom Kippur War EgyptianLibyan War Assassination of Anwar Sadat Mubarak era 20
10 s Crisis 2011 Egyptian revolution 2013 Rabaa massacre By topic Anarchism Capital Cigarette industry Constitution Copts Genetic Healthcare Jews Muslim Brotherhood 19281938 19391954 19
54 present Parliament Population Postal Saladin Timekeeping devices By city Alexandria Cairo Port Said Geography Biota Borders Cities Climate Deserts Earthquakes Environmental issues Fossils Geology Halfaya Pass Islands Lakes Mountains Mount Sinai Nile Delta Northern coast Oases Qattara Depression Red Sea Riviera Rivers Nile Sinai Peninsula Suez Canal Towns and villages Wadis Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Governorates Civil Code Conflicts Corruption Conscription Constitution Elections Foreign relations Missions Islamic extremism Judiciary Law enforcement Massacres Military Supreme Council Nationality law Parliament Passport Political parties President list Prime Minister list Proposed new capital Refugees of the Syrian civil war Terrorism Terrorism and tourism Twin towns and sister cities Economy Agriculture Banking National Bank Companies Economic regions Egyptian stock exchange Egyptian pound Energy Entrepreneurship policies Fishing Impact on the environment Lighthouses Military industry Mining Mines Nuclear program Power stations Aswan Dam Role of the Egyptian Armed Forces Tallest buildings Telecommunications Internet Tourism Cultural tourism Transport Airlines Airports Railway stations Water supply and sanitation Water resources management Society General Abortion Animal welfare Billionaires Cannabis Capital punishment Censuses Corruption Crime Human trafficking Mass sexual assault Rape Demographics Diaspora Education Academic grading Law schools Medical schools Schools Universities Families Abaza family Feminism Gender inequality Health Healthcare Hospitals Housing Human rights Freedom of religion LGBT rights International rankings Languages Egyptian Arabic Saidi Arabic Sign Language Liberalism Literature Prostitution Religion Bah Blasphemy law Christianity Catholic dioceses Coptic Churches Hinduism Identification card controversy Irreligion Islam Ahmadiyya Mosques Niqb Judaism Synagogues Scientology Smoking Units of measurement Vehicle registration plates Waste management Women Culture Architecture Art ancient Art contemporary Botanical gardens Castles Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Beer Wine Films Flag list regions Football Football clubs Football stadiums Egyptians Mass media Magazines Newspapers Radio TV Museums Music National anthem Olympics Public holidays World Heritage Sites Category Portal WikiProject Commons v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Portal Ancient Egypt Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMusicofEgyptoldid1220207609 Categories Music of Egypt Culture of Egypt Egyptian musical instruments Ancient Egyptian musical instruments Ancient Egypt Arabic music Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Articles with Frenchlanguage sources fr This page was last edited on 22 April 2024 at 1240 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width