Ancient Egyptian technology - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Technology in Dynastic Egypt Toggle Technology in Dynastic Egypt subsection 
1.1 Paper writing and libraries 
1.2 Structures and construction 

1.2.1 Materials and tools 

1.2.2 Buildings 

1.2.3 Monuments 

1.2.4 Obelisks and pillars 
1.3 Navigation and ship building 
1.4 Irrigation and agriculture 
1.5 Glassworking 
1.6 Astronomy 
1.7 Medicine 
1.8 The wheel 
1.9 Other developments 
2 Later technology in Egypt Toggle Later technology in Egypt subsection 
2.1 GrecoRoman Egypt 
2.2 ArabicIslamic Egypt 
3 See also 
4 Notes 
5 References 
6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian technology 10 languages  Catal Espaol      srpski Suomi   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Devices and technologies invented or used in Ancient Egypt Ancient technology Egyptian technology Indian technology Chinese technology Greek technology Roman technology Iranian technology Ancient Egyptian technology describes devices and technologies invented or used in Ancient Egypt. The Egyptians invented and used many simple machines such as the ramp and the lever to aid construction processes. They used rope trusses to stiffen the beam of ships. Egyptian paper made from papyrus and pottery were massproduced and exported throughout the Mediterranean Basin. The wheel was used for a number of purposes but chariots only came into use after the Second Intermediate Period. The Egyptians also played an important role in developing Mediterranean maritime technology including ships and lighthouses. Ancient Egyptian depiction of women engaged in mechanical rope making the first graphic evidence of the craft shown in the two lower rows of the illustration Technology in Dynastic Egyptedit Significant advances in ancient Egypt during the dynastic period include astronomy mathematics and medicine. Their geometry was a necessary outgrowth of surveying to preserve the layout and ownership of fertile farmland which was flooded annually by the Nile River.1 The 345 right triangle and other rules of thumb served to represent rectilinear structures and the post and lintel architecture of Egypt. Egypt also was a center of alchemy research for much of the western world. Paper writing and librariesedit A section of the Egyptian Book of the Dead which is written and drawn on papyrus The word paper comes from the Greek term for the ancient Egyptian writing material called papyrus which was formed from beaten strips of papyrus plants. Papyrus was produced in Egypt as early as 3000 BC and was sold to ancient Greece and Rome. The establishment of the Library of Alexandria limited the supply of papyrus for others. According to the Roman historian Pliny the Elder Natural History records xiii.21 as a result of this parchment was invented under the patronage of Eumenes II of Pergamon to build his rival library at Pergamon. However this is a myth parchment had been in use in Anatolia and elsewhere long before the rise of Pergamon. Egyptian hieroglyphs a phonetic writing system served as the basis for the Phoenician alphabet from which later alphabets such as Hebrew Greek and Latin were derived. With this ability writing and recordkeeping the Egyptians developed one of the  if not the  first decimal system.234 The city of Alexandria retained preeminence for its records and scrolls with its library. This ancient library was damaged by fire when it fell under Roman rule5 and was destroyed completely by 642 CE.67 With it a vast supply of antique literature history and knowledge was lost. Structures and constructionedit Materials and toolsedit Some of the older materials used in the construction of Egyptian housing included reeds and clay. According to Lucas and Harris reeds were plastered with clay in order to keep out of heat and cold more effectually.8 Tools that were used included limestone chiseled stones wooden mallets and stone hammers but also some more sophisticated hand tools.9 For instance the ancient Egyptians were apparently using core drills in stonework at least as long ago as the Fourth Dynasty probably made of copper and used in conjunction with a harder abrasive substance. There has been some dispute among archaeologists over whether the abrasive was quartz sand or a harder mineral such as corundum emery or diamond and whether it was loose or embedded in the metal.101112 Buildingsedit Many Egyptian temples are not standing today. Some are in ruin from wear and tear while others have been lost entirely. The Egyptian structures are among the largest constructions ever conceived and built by humans. They constitute one of the most potent and enduring symbols of ancient Egyptian civilization. Temples and tombs built by a pharaoh famous for her projects Hatshepsut were massive and included many colossal statues of her. Pharaoh Tutankamuns rockcut tomb in the Valley of the Kings was full of jewelry and antiques. In some late myths Ptah was identified as the primordial mound and had called creation into being he was considered the deity of craftsmen and in particular of stonebased crafts. Imhotep who was included in the Egyptian pantheon was the first documented engineer.13 In Hellenistic Egypt lighthouse technology was developed the most famous example being the Lighthouse of Alexandria. Alexandria was a port for the ships that traded the goods manufactured in Egypt or imported into Egypt. A giant cantilevered hoist lifted cargo to and from ships. The lighthouse itself was designed by Sostratus of Cnidus and built in the 
3 rd century BC between 285 and 247 BC on the island of Pharos in Alexandria Egypt which has since become a peninsula. This lighthouse was renowned in its time and knowledge of it was never lost. Monumentsedit Main articles Egyptian pyramids and Egyptian pyramid construction techniques The Nile valley has been the site of one of the most influential civilizations in the world with its architectural monuments which include the Giza pyramid complex and the Great Sphinx. Giza Plateau Cairo. Khafres pyramid in the background The most famous pyramids are the Egyptian pyramidshuge structures built of brick or stone some of which are among the largest constructions by humans. Pyramids functioned as tombs for pharaohs. In Ancient Egypt a pyramid was referred to as mer literally place of ascendance. The Great Pyramid of Giza is the largest in Egypt and one of the largest in the world. The base is over 13 acres 53000 m2 in area. It is one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World and the only one of the seven to survive into modern times. The ancient Egyptians capped the peaks of their pyramids with gold plated pyramidions and covered their faces with polished white limestone although many of the stones used for the finishing purpose have fallen or been removed for use on other structures over the millennia. The Red Pyramid c.
26 th century BC named for the light crimson hue of its exposed granite surfaces is the third largest of Egyptian pyramids. Menkaures Pyramid likely dating to the same era was constructed of limestone and granite blocks. The Great Pyramid of Giza c. 2580 BC contains a huge sarcophagus fashioned of red Aswan granite. The mostly ruined Black Pyramid dating from the reign of Amenemhat III once had a polished granite pyramidion or capstone now on display in the main hall of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. Other uses in Ancient Egypt14 include columns door lintels sills jambs and wall and floor veneer. The ancient Egyptians had some of the first monumental stone buildings such as in Saqqara. How the Egyptians worked the solid granite is still a matter of debate. Archaeologist Patrick Hunt15 has postulated that the Egyptians used emery shown to have higher hardness on the Mohs scale. Regarding construction of the various methods possibly used by builders the lever moved and uplifted obelisks weighing more than 100 tons. Obelisks and pillarsedit See also Obelisk ship The Unfinished obelisk in Aswan Obelisks were a prominent part of the Ancient Egyptian architecture placed in pairs at the entrances of various monuments and important buildings such as temples. In 1902 Encyclopdia Britannica wrote The earliest temple obelisk still in position is that of Senusret I of the XIIth Dynasty at Heliopolis 68 feet high. The word obelisk is of Greek rather than Egyptian origin because Herodotus the great traveler was the first writer to describe the objects. Twentynine ancient Egyptian obelisks are known to have survived plus the Unfinished obelisk being built by Hatshepsut to celebrate her sixteenth year as pharaoh. It broke while being carved out of the quarry and was abandoned when another one was begun to replace it. The broken one was found at Aswan and provides some of the only insight into the methods of how they were hewn. The obelisk symbolized the sky deity Ra and during the brief religious reformation of Akhenaten was said to be a petrified ray of the Aten the sun disk. It is hypothesized by New York University Egyptologist Patricia Blackwell Gary and Astronomy senior editor Richard Talcott that the shapes of the ancient Egyptian pyramid and obelisk were derived from natural phenomena associated with the sun the sungod Ra being the Egyptians greatest deity.16 It was also thought that the deity existed within the structure. The Egyptians also used pillars extensively. It is unknown whether the ancient Egyptians had kites but a team led by Maureen Clemmons and Mory Gharib raised a 59
00 pound 
15 foot 
4.6  m obelisk into vertical position with a kite a system of pulleys and a support frame.17 Maureen Clemmons developed the idea that the ancient Egyptians used kites for work.17 18 Ramps have been reported as being widely used in Ancient Egypt. A ramp is an inclined plane or a plane surface set at an angle other than a right angle against a horizontal surface. The inclined plane permits one to overcome a large resistance by applying a relatively small force through a longer distance than the load is to be raised. In civil engineering the slope ratio of riserun is often referred to as a grade or gradient. An inclined plane is one of the commonlyrecognized simple machines. Maureen Clemmons subsequently led a team of researchers demonstrating a kite made of natural material and reinforced with shellac which according to their research pulled with 97 the efficiency of nylon in a 9 mph wind would easily pull an average 
2 ton pyramid stone up the 
1 st two courses of a pyramid in collaboration with Cal Poly Pomona on a 
53 stone pyramid built in Rosamond CA. Navigation and ship buildingedit It has been suggested that portions of AncientEgyptMaritimetechnology be split from it and merged into this article. Discuss February 2020 Further information Ancient Egyptian solar ships The ancient Egyptians had knowledge to some extent of sail construction. This is governed by the science of aerodynamics.19 The earliest Egyptian sails were simply placed to catch the wind and push a vessel.20 Later Egyptian sails dating to 2400 BC were built with the recognition that ships could sail against the wind using the lift of the sails.2021 Queen Hatshepsut oversaw the preparations and funding of an expedition of five ships each measuring seventy feet long and with several sails.dubious  discusscitation neededVarious others exist also. Egyptian ship 1250 BC Egyptian ship on the Red Sea showing a board truss being used to stiffen the beam of this ship Egyptian ship with a loosefooted sail similar to a longship. From the 
5 th dynasty around 2700 BC Model ship from the Old Kingdom 26862181 BC Sternmounted steering oar of an Egyptian riverboat depicted in the Tomb of Menna c. 14221411 BC Note that the sail is stretched between yards. Loading Egyptian vessels with the produce of Punt. Shows folded sails lowered upper yard yard construction and heavy deck cargo. The ancient Egyptians had experience with building a variety of ships.222324 Some of them survive to this day as Khufu ship.25 The ships were found in many areas of Egypt as the Abydos boats262728 and remnants of other ships were found near the pyramids.272930 Sneferus ancient cedar wood ship Praise of the Two Lands is the first reference recorded to a ship being referred to by name.31 Although quarter rudders were the norm in Nile navigation the Egyptians were the first to use also sternmounted rudders not of the modern type but center mounted steering oars. The first warships of Ancient Egypt were constructed during the early Middle Kingdom and perhaps at the end of the Old Kingdom but the first mention and a detailed description of a large enough and heavily armed ship dates from 
16 th century BC. And I ordered to build twelve warships with rams dedicated to Amun or Sobek or Maat and Sekhmet whose image was crowned best bronze noses. Carport and equipped outside rook over the waters for many paddlers having covered rowers deck not only from the side but and top. and they were on board eighteen oars in two rows on the top and sat on two rowers and the lower  one a hundred and eight rowers were. And twelve rowers aft worked on three steering oars. And blocked Our Majesty ship inside three partitions bulkheads so as not to drown it by ramming the wicked and the sailors had time to repair the hole. And Our Majesty arranged four towers for archers  two behind and two on the nose and one above the other small  on the mast with narrow loopholes. they are covered with bronze in the fifth finger 
3.2 mm as well as a canopy roof and its rowers. and they have carried on the nose three assault heavy crossbow arrows so they lit resin or oil with a salt of Seth probably nitrate tore a special blend and punched  lead ball with a lot of holes  and one of the same at the stern. and long ship seventy five cubits 
41 m and the breadth sixteen and in battle can go threequarters of iteru per hour about 
6.5  knots... The text of the tomb of Amenhotep I KV39. When Thutmose III achieved warships displacement up to 360 tons and carried up to ten new heavy and light to seventeen catapults based bronze springs called siege crossbow  more precisely siege bows. There also appeared giant catamarans heavy warships by the time of Ramesses III used until the Ptolemaic dynasty.32 The world according to Herodotus 440 BC According to the Greek historian Herodotus Necho II sent out an expedition of Phoenicians which reputedly at some point between 610 and before 594 BC sailed in three years from the Red Sea around Africa to the mouth of the Nile. Some Egyptologists dispute that an Egyptian pharaoh would authorize such an expedition33 except for the reason of trade in the ancient maritime routes. The belief in Herodotus account handed down to him by oral tradition34 is primarily because he stated with disbelief that the Phoenicians as they sailed on a westerly course round the southern end of Libya Africa they had the sun on their right  to northward of them The Histories 
4.4 2  in Herodotus time it was not generally known that Africa was surrounded by an ocean with the southern part of Africa being thought connected to Asia35. So fantastic an assertion is this of a typical example of some seafarers story and Herodotus therefore may never have mentioned it at all had it not been based on facts and made with the according insistence.36 This early description of Nechos expedition as a whole is contentious though it is recommended that one keep an open mind on the subject37 but Strabo Polybius and Ptolemy doubted the description. Egyptologist A. B. Lloyd suggests that the Greeks at this time understood that anyone going south far enough and then turning west would have the Sun on their right but found it unbelievable that Africa reached so far south. He suggests that It is extremely unlikely that an Egyptian king would or could have acted as Necho is depicted as doing and that the story might have been triggered by the failure of Sataspes attempt to circumnavigate Africa under Xerxes the Great.38 Regardless it was believed by Herodotus and Pliny.39 Much earlier the Sea Peoples was a confederacy of seafaring raiders who sailed into the eastern shores of the Mediterranean caused political unrest and attempted to enter or control Egyptian territory during the late 
19 th Dynasty and especially during Year 8 of Ramesses III of the 
20 th Dynasty.40 The Egyptian Pharaoh Merneptah explicitly refers to them by the term the foreigncountries or peoples41 of the sea4243 in his Great Karnak Inscription.44 Although some scholars believe that they invaded Cyprus and the Levant this hypothesis is disputed. Irrigation and agricultureedit See also Ancient Egyptian agriculture Irrigation as the artificial application of water to the soil was used to some extent in ancient Egypt a hydraulic civilization which entails hydraulic engineering.45 In crop production it is mainly used to replace missing rainfall in periods of drought as opposed to reliance on direct rainfall referred to as dryland farming or as rainfed farming. Before technology advanced the people of Egypt relied on the natural flow of the Nile River to tend to the crops. Although the Nile provided sufficient watering for the survival of domesticated animals crops and the people of Egypt there were times where the Nile would flood the area wreaking havoc across the land.46 There is evidence of the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Amenemhet III in the Twelfth Dynasty about 1800 BC using the natural lake of the Faym as a reservoir to store surpluses of water for use during the dry seasons as the lake swelled annually with the flooding of the Nile.47 Construction of drainage canals reduced the problems of major flooding from entering homes and areas of crops but because it was a hydraulic civilization much of the water management was controlled in a systematic way.48 Glassworkingedit Ancient Egyptian glassware in the Metropolitan Museum of Art The earliest known glass beads from Egypt were made during the New Kingdom around 1500 BC and were produced in a variety of colors. They were made by winding molten glass around a metal bar and were highly prized as a trading commodity especially blue beads which were believed to have magical powers. The Egyptians made small jars and bottles using the coreformed method. Glass threads were wound around a bag of sand tied to a rod. The glass was continually reheated to fuse the threads together. The glasscovered sand bag was kept in motion until the required shape and thickness was achieved. The rod was allowed to cool then finally the bag was punctured and the sand poured out and reused . The Egyptians also created the first colored glass rods which they used to create colorful beads and decorations. They also worked with cast glass which was produced by pouring molten glass into a mold much like iron and the more modern crucible steel.49 Astronomyedit Main article Egyptian astronomy See also Egyptian calendar and Archaeoastronomy The Egyptians were a practical people and this is reflected in their astronomy50 in contrast to Babylonia where the first astronomical texts were written in astrological terms.51 Even before Upper and Lower Egypt were unified in 3000 BC observations of the night sky had influenced the development of a religion in which many of its principal deities were heavenly bodies. In Lower Egypt priests built circular mudbrick walls with which to make a false horizon where they could mark the position of the sun as it rose at dawn and then with a plumbbob note the northern or southern turning points solstices. This allowed them to discover that the sun disc personified as Ra took 365 days to travel from his birthplace at the winter solstice and back to it. Meanwhile in Upper Egypt a lunar calendar was being developed based on the behavior of the moon and the reappearance of Sirius in its heliacal rising after its annual absence of about 70 days.52 After unification problems with trying to work with two calendars both depending upon constant observation led to a merged simplified civil calendar with twelve 
30 day months three seasons of four months each plus an extra five days giving a 3
65 year day but with no way of accounting for the extra quarter day each year. Day and night were split into 24 units each personified by a deity. A sundial found on Seti Is cenotaph with instructions for its use shows us that the daylight hours were at one time split into 10 units with 12 hours for the night and an hour for the morning and evening twilights.53 However by Seti Is time day and night were normally divided into 12 hours each the length of which would vary according to the time of year. Key to much of this was the motion of the sun god Ra and his annual movement along the horizon at sunrise. Out of Egyptian myths such as those around Ra and the sky goddess Nut came the development of the Egyptian calendar time keeping and even concepts of royalty. An astronomical ceiling in the burial chamber of Ramesses VI shows the sun being born from Nut in the morning traveling along her body during the day and being swallowed at night. During the Fifth Dynasty six kings built sun temples in honour of Ra. The temple complexes built by Niuserre at Abu Gurab and Userkaf at Abusir have been excavated and have astronomical alignments and the roofs of some of the buildings could have been used by observers to view the stars calculate the hours at night and predict the sunrise for religious festivals.citation needed The Dendera Zodiac was on the ceiling of the GrecoRoman temple of Hathor at Dendera Claims have been made that precession of the equinoxes was known in ancient Egypt prior to the time of Hipparchus.54 This has been disputed however on the grounds that preHipparchus texts do not mention precession and that it is only by cunning interpretation of ancient myths and images which are ostensibly about something else that precession can be discerned in them aided by some pretty esoteric numerological speculation involving the 72 years that mark one degree of shift in the zodiacal system and any number of permutations by multiplication division and addition.55 Note however that the Egyptian observation of a slowly changing stellar alignment over a multiyear period does not necessarily mean that they understood or even cared what was going on. For instance from the Middle Kingdom onwards they used a table with entries for each month to tell the time of night from the passing of constellations. These went in error after a few centuries because of their calendar and precession but were copied with scribal errors long after they lost their practical usefulness or the possibility of understanding and use of them in the current years rather than the years in which they were originally used. Medicineedit Main articles Ancient Egyptian medicine and Egyptian medical papyri Plates vi  vii of the Edwin Smith Papyrus around the 
17 th century BC among the earliest medical texts The Edwin Smith Papyrus is one of the first medical documents still extant and perhaps the earliest document which attempts to describe and analyze the brain given this it might be seen as the very beginnings of neuroscience. However medical historians believe that ancient Egyptian pharmacology was largely ineffective.56 According to a paper published by Michael D. Parkins 72 of 260 medical prescriptions in the Hearst papyrus had no curative elements.57 According to Michael D. Parkins sewage pharmacology first began in ancient Egypt and was continued through the Middle Ages56 and while the use of animal dung can have curative properties58 it is not without its risk. Practices such as applying cow dung to wounds ear piercing tattooing and chronic ear infections were important factors in developing tetanus.59 Frank J. Snoek wrote that Egyptian medicine used fly specks lizard blood swine teeth and other such remedies which he believes could have been harmful.60 Mummification of the dead was not always practiced in Egypt. Once the practice began an individual was placed at a final resting place through a set of rituals and protocol. The Egyptian funeral was a complex ceremony including various monuments prayers and rituals undertaken in honor of the deceased. The poor who could not afford expensive tombs were buried in shallow graves in the sand and because of the arid environment they were often naturally mummified. The wheeledit Evidence indicates that Egyptians made use of potters wheels in the manufacturing of pottery from as early as the 
4 th Dynasty c.2613 to 2494 BC.61 Lathes are known from at least 1300 BC62 but Flinders Petrie claimed that they had been used as early as the 
4 th Dynasty based on tool marks found on stone bowls from that period.63 Chariots however are only believed to have been introduced by the invasion of the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period c.1650 BC to c.1550 BC64 during the New Kingdom era c.1550 BC to c.1077 BC chariotry became central to Egypts military. Other developmentsedit The Egyptians developed a variety of furniture. There in the lands of ancient Egypt is the first evidence for stools beds and tables such as from the tombs similar to Tutankhamuns. Recovered Ancient Egyptian furniture includes a third millennium BC bed discovered in the Tarkhan Tomb a c.2550 BC. gilded set from the tomb of Queen Hetepheres I and a c. 1550 BC. stool from Thebes. Some have suggested that the Egyptians had some form of understanding electric phenomena from observing lightning and interacting with electric fish such as Malapterurus electricus or other animals such as electric eels.65 The comment about lightning appears to come from a misunderstanding of a text referring to high poles covered with copper plates to argue this66 but Dr. Bolko Stern has written in detail explaining why the copper covered tops of poles which were lower than the associated pylons do not relate to electricity or lightning pointing out that no evidence of anything used to manipulate electricity had been found in Egypt and that this was a magical and not a technical installation.67 Later technology in Egyptedit GrecoRoman Egyptedit See also Ancient Greek technology and Roman technology Under Hellenistic rule Egypt was one of the most prosperous regions of the Hellenistic civilization. The ancient Egyptian city of Rhakotis was renovated as Alexandria which became the largest city around the Mediterranean Basin. Under Roman rule Egypt was one of the most prosperous regions of the Roman Empire with Alexandria being second only to ancient Rome in size. Recent scholarship suggests that the water wheel originates from Ptolemaic Egypt where it appeared by the 
3 rd century BC.6869 This is seen as an evolution of the paddledriven waterlifting wheels that had been known in Egypt a century earlier.68 According to John Peter Oleson both the compartmented wheel and the hydraulic noria may have been invented in Egypt by the 
4 th century BC with the Sakia being invented there a century later. This is supported by archeological finds at Faiyum Egypt where the oldest archeological evidence of a waterwheel has been found in the form of a Sakia dating back to the 
3 rd century BC. A papyrus dating to the 
2 nd century BC also found in Faiyum mentions a water wheel used for irrigation a 
2 ndcentury BC fresco found at Alexandria depicts a compartmented Sakia and the writings of Callixenus of Rhodes mention the use of a Sakia in Ptolemaic Egypt during the reign of Ptolemy IV in the late 
3 rd century BC.69 Ancient Greek technology was often inspired by the need to improve weapons and tactics in war. Ancient Roman technology is a set of artifacts and customs which supported Roman civilization and made the expansion of Roman commerce and Roman military possible over nearly a thousand years. ArabicIslamic Egyptedit Main articles Inventions in medieval Islam Muslim Agricultural Revolution and Timeline of science and engineering in the Islamic world Under Arab rule Egypt once again became one of the most prosperous regions around the Mediterranean. The Egyptian city of Cairo was founded by the Fatimid Caliphate and served as its capital city. At the time Cairo was second only to Baghdad capital of the rival Abbasid Caliphate. After the fall of Baghdad however Cairo overtook it as the largest city in the Mediterranean region until the early modern period. Inventions in medieval Islam covers the inventions developed in the medieval Islamic world a region that extended from AlAndalus and Africa in the west to the Indian subcontinent and Central Asia in the east. The timeline of Islamic science and engineering covers the general development of science and technology in the Islamic world. See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal List of Egyptian inventions and discoveries Ancient Egyptian units of measurement Egyptian chronology History of science in early cultures Astrology and astronomy History of technology Notesedit  Erlikh agai Erlikh Hggai Gershoni I. 2000. The Nile Histories Cultures Myths. Lynne Rienner Publishers. pp. 8081. ISBN 9781555876722. Retrieved 9 January 2020. The Nile occupied an important position in Egyptian culture it influenced the development of mathematics geography and the calendar Egyptian geometry advanced due to the practice of land measurement because the overflow of the Nile caused the boundary of each persons land to disappear.  Georges Ifrah The Universal History of Numbers. Page 162 cf. As we have seen Sumer used a sexagesimal base whereas the system of Ancient Egypt was strictly decimal.  Robert E Krebs Groundbreaking scientific experiments inventions and discoveries of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Page 127. ISBN 0313324336  Thomas Little Heath Manual of Greek Mathematics. Page 11.  Plutarch Life of Caesar 
49.3 .  Abdellatif 1203 the library which Amr ibn alAs burnt with the permission of Umar.  Europe A History p 139. Oxford Oxford University Press 1996. ISBN 0198201710  A. Lucas and J. Harris Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries New York Courier Corporation 2012 48.  A. Lucas and J. Harris Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries New York Courier Corporation 2012 64.  A. Lucas and J. Harris Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries New York Courier Corporation 2012.  Serotta Anna Car Federico. Hidden Secrets of Ancient Egyptian Technology. metmuseum.org. Retrieved 21 March 2023.  Gorelick Leonard Gwinnett A. John 1983. Ancient Egyptian StoneDrilling  An experimental perspective on a scholarly disagreement. Expedition Magazine. Vol. 25 no. 3. Retrieved 21 March 2023.  What is Civil Engineering Imhotep. Archived from the original on 20080112.  eeescience utoledo.edu  Cairo Rocks  ArceNc Archives Archived October 14 2007 at the Wayback Machine  Patricia Blackwell Gary Richard Talcott June 2006. Stargazing in Ancient Egypt. Astronomy. 34 6 627. Bibcode20
06 Ast....
34 f..
62 G.  a b Caltech researchers successfully raised an obelisk with a kite to test theory about ancient pyramids. Archived from the original on 20070328. Retrieved 20070324.  Kite Obelisk Project. Cal Tech. 20120711. Archived from the original on 20211215. Retrieved 20210816.  A primary feature of a properly designed sail is an amount of draft caused by curvature of the surface of the sail. When the sail is oriented into the wind this curvature induces lift much like the wing of an airplane.  a b Encyclopedia Of International Sports Studies. Page 31  Technological Choices Transformation in Material Cultures. Page 410.  Ships and boats in Egypt  Ancient Egyptian boat building  Shipbuilding in Ancient Egypt  Solar ships  The Abydos Ship  a b Sakkara and Abydous Ship Graves Archived September 29 2011 at the Wayback Machine  Abydos Boat. Archived from the original on 20091021.  Ancient Egypt Ships  Ship Minimatures at Egyptian museum Archived 20080722 at the Wayback Machine  Anzovin item  5393 page 385 Reference to a ship with a name appears in an inscription of 2613 BCE that recounts the shipbuilding achievements of the fourthdynasty Egyptian pharaoh Sneferu. He was recorded as the builder of a cedarwood vessel called Praise of the Two Lands.  Nelson Harold Hayden Allen Thomas George and Dr Raymond O. Faulkner. Tuthmosis III. First Emperor in the History of Mankind. His Regal companions and a Great assistants Oxford UNV Publishing 1921 p.127.  For instance the Egyptologist Alan Lloyd wrote Given the context of Egyptian thought economic life and military interests it is impossible for one to imagine what stimulus could have motivated Necho in such a scheme and if we cannot provide a reason which is sound within Egyptian terms of reference then we have good reason to doubt the historicity of the entire episode. Lloyd Alan B. 1977. Necho and the Red Sea Some Considerations. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 63 149. doi
10.2 3073856314. JSTOR 3856314.  M. J. Cary. The Ancient Explorers. Penguin Books 1963. Page 114  Die umsegelung Asiens und Europas auf der Vega. Volume 2. By Adolf Erik Nordenskild. p148  Heinz Gartmann Sonst stnde die Welt still. Das groe Ringen um das Neue. Econ Dsseldorf 1957  The Cambridge History of the British Empire. CUP Archive 1963. p56  Lloyd Alan B 1977. Necho and the Red Sea Some Considerations. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 63 142155. doi
10.2 3073856314. JSTOR 3856314.  The Geographical system of Herodotus By James Rennel. p348  A convenient table of sea peoples in hieroglyphics transliteration and English is given in the dissertation of Woodhuizen 2006 who developed it from works of Kitchen cited there  As noted by Gardiner V.1 p.196 other texts have foreignpeoples both terms can refer to the concept of foreigners as well. Zangger in the external link below expresses a commonly held view that Sea Peoples does not translate this and other expressions but is an academic innovation. The Woudhuizen dissertation and the Morris paper identify Gaston Maspero as the first to use the term peuples de la mer in 1881.  Gardiner V.1 p.196.  Manassa p.55.  Line 52. The inscription is shown in Manassa p.55 plate 12.  Blake L. White Ancient Egypt Provides an Early Example of How A Societys Worldview Drives Engineering and the Development of Science. Strategic Technology Institute. Page 2.  JG Manning Water Irrigation and Their Connection to State Power in Egypt Econ Yale 2012 8.  Amenemhet III. Britannica Concise. Archived from the original on 20070510. Retrieved 20070110.  JG Manning Water Irrigation and Their Connection to State Power in Egypt Econ Yale 2012 9.  Susan Hampton. Glassmaking in Antiquity. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Archived from the original on 5 April 2007. Retrieved 20070321.  Ronald A Wells Archaeoastronomy in Egypt in Walker Christopher Ed Astronomy before the telescope British Museum Press 1996 p.28  John Britton and Christopher Walker Astrology and Astronomy in Mesopotamia in Walker Christopher Ed Astronomy before the telescope British Museum Press 1996 p. 42  Tyldesley Joyce Pyramids The Real Story Behind Egypts Ancient Monuments Viking 2003 p. 74  Neugebauer Otto 1969 1957. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity. Vol. 9 2 ed.. Dover Publications. pp. 1191. ISBN 9780486223322. PMID 14884919. cite book journal ignored help p.86  De Santillana G. Von Dechend H. 1977. Hamlets Mill. David R. Godine. ISBN 9780879232153.  Paul Jordan 2006. Esoteric Egypt. In Garrett G. Fagan ed.. Archaeological FantasiesHow Pseudoarchaeology Misrepresents the Past and Misleads the Public. Routledge. p. 123. ISBN 9780415305938.  a b Microsoft Word  Proceedings2001.doc Archived April 7 2008 at the Wayback Machine  
10 th Annual Proceedings of the History of Medicine Days Archived April 7 2008 at the Wayback Machine  animal dung can have curative properties. Archived from the original on September 18 2004.  Mamtani R Malhotra P Gupta PS Jain BK June 1978. A comparative study of urban and rural tetanus in adults. Int J Epidemiol. 7 2 1858. doi
10.1 0
93 ije

7.2.1 85. PMID 681065.  Frank J. Snoek August 2001. The Mind Matters. Diabetes Spectrum. 14 3 116117. doi
10.2 3
37 diaspect.

14.3.1 16.  Doherty Sarah 2013. The origins and the use of the potters wheel in Ancient Egypt Thesis. Cardiff University. Retrieved 8 January 2016.  M. Oats Joclyn 2021. An Illustrated Guide to Furniture History. Routledge. ISBN 9781000406108.  Petrie Sir William Matthew Flinders 1883. The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh chapter VIII. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 21 March 2023.  Hyskos introduced chariots to ancient Egypt Archived June 29 2010 at the Wayback Machine  Heinrich Karl BrugschBey and Henry Danby Seymour A History of Egypt Under the Pharaohs. J. Murray 1881. Page 422. cf. ... the symbol of a serpent is rather a fish which still serves in the Coptic language to designate the electric fish ...  Bruno Kolbe Francis ed Legge Joseph Skellon tr. An Introduction to Electricity. Kegan Paul Trench Trbner 1908. 429 pages. Page 391. cf. ... high poles covered with copper plates and with gilded tops were erected to break the stones coming from on high. J. Dmichen Baugeschichte des DenderaTempels Strassburg 1877  Stern Bolko 1998 1896. gyptische Kulturgeschichte. ReprintVerlagLeipzig. pp. 106108. ISBN 9783826219085.  a b rjan Wikander 2008. Chapter 6 Sources of Energy and Exploitation of Power. In John Peter Oleson ed.. The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in the Classical World. Oxford University Press. pp. 1412. ISBN 9780195187311.  a b Adriana de Miranda 2007. Water architecture in the lands of Syria the waterwheels. LErma di Bretschneider. pp. 389. ISBN 9788882654337. Referencesedit Leslie C. Kaplan Technology of Ancient Egypt. 2004 24 pages. ISBN 0823967859 Denys Allen Stocks Experiments in Egyptian Archaeology Stoneworking Technology in Ancient Egypt. Routledge 2003. 336 pages. ISBN 0415306647 Katheryn A. Bard Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt By Katheryn A. Bard. Routledge 1999. 968 pages. ISBN 0415185890 R. J. Forbes Studies in Ancient Technology. 1966. rjan Wikander Handbook of Ancient Water Technology. 2000. Patricia Blackwell Gary Richard Talcott June 2006. Stargazing in Ancient Egypt. Astronomy. 34 6 627. Bibcode20
06 Ast....
34 f..
62 G. Evans James. The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy. New York Oxford University Press 1998. Pannekoek A. A History of Astronomy. New York Dover 1961. Parker Richard A. Egyptian Astronomy Astrology and Calendrical Reckoning. Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 15 706727. Budge E. A. Wallis. Egyptian Religion. Kessinger Publishing 1900. Budge E. A. Wallis. The Gods of the Egyptians Volume 1 of 2. New York Dover Publications 1969 original in 1904. Further readingedit Anzovin Steven et al. Famous First Facts International Edition H. W. Wilson Company 2000 ISBN 0824209583 David Rosalie A. H.G.M. Edwards  D.W. Farwell 2001. Raman Spectroscopic Analysis of Ancient Egyptian Pigments. Archaeometry. 43 4 461473. doi
10.1 111147547
54.0 0029. Earl Bryan Summer 1995. Tin Smelting at the Oriental Institute. The Oriental Institute News and Notes. 146. Gourdin W.H. W.D. Kingery 1975. The Beginnings of Pyrotechnology Neolithic and Egyptian Lime Plaster. Journal of Field Archaeology. 2 12 133150. doi
10.1 179009346975791491277. JSTOR 529624. Lucas Alfred. 1962. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries 
4 th Edition. London Edward Arnold Publishers. Meyer Carol Bir Umm Fawakhir 1997. Insights into Ancient Egyptian Mining. JOM. 49 3 648. Bibcode19
97 JOM....
49 c..
64 M. doi
10.1 0
07 BF02914661. S
2 CID 137697355. Nicholson Paul T. and Ian Shaw eds. 2000. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology. University Press Cambridge. Pulak C. A 1998. The Uluburun Shipwreck An Overview. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology. 27 3 188224. doi
10.1 1
11 j.109592
70.1 998.tb00803.x. Scheel Bernd. 1989. Egyptian Metalworking and Tools. Haverfordwest Great Britain Shire Publications Ltd. Shaw Ian. Editor. 2000. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford Oxford University Press. Shortland A.J. 2004. Evaporites of the Wadi Natrun Seasonal and Annual Variation and its Implication for Ancient Exploitation. Archaeometry. 46 4 497516. doi
10.1 1
11 j.147547
54.2 0
04.0 0170.x. Davis Virginia. Mines and Quarries of Ancient Egypt an Introduction Online article Institutt for Arkeologi Kunsthistorie og Konservering website in English at 1 v t e History of technology History of technology cultures Prehistoric technology Neolithic Ancient Egypt Mayan Inca Ancient Greek Roman Chinese Indian Byzantine Medieval Islam Medieval Europe Renaissance Ottoman Great Divergence Industrial Revolution Modern History of technology domains History of biotechnology History of communication History of computing History of computing hardware History of electrical engineering History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of nuclear technology History of transport v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Ancient seafaring Vessels Types Balangay Bangka Catamaran Coracle Dhow Dragon boat Dugout canoe Galley Penteconter Liburna Longship Multihull Navis lusoria Obelisk ship Outriggers Polyremes Bireme Oared warships Trireme Quadrireme Quinquereme Hexareme Tessarakonteres Raft Reed boat Sailing ship Tomol Propulsion Paddling Sailing Towing Poling Components Anchor Bow Cabin Deck Figurehead Hull Planking Keel Mast Oar Paddle Rope Rudder Steering oar Sail Sail components Stem Sternpost Strake Tiller Construction Boat building Careening Carvel built Clinker built Mortise and tenon Lashedlug Sewnplank Shipbuilding By region Egypt Rigging Crab claw Foreandaft Lateen Settee Tanja Triangular sail Junk Mastaft Spritsail Square Armaments Ballista Catapult Corvus Dolphin Harpax Ram Sambuca Navigation and ports and harbors Navigation Celestial Charts Portolan chart Rutter nautical Coastal Lighthouses History Piloting Pilot boat Maritime pilot By region Inuit Micronesian Polynesia Ports and harbors Canopus Chittagong Guangzhou Lothal Ostia Antica Piraeus Prosphorion Sidon Tulum Typre Wadi alJarf History Prehistory Timeline Britain Oceania Remote Near Ubaid period Civilizations Ancient Egypt Old Kingdom Austronesia Minoan Indus Valley Maya Nuragic China Micronesia Mycenaean Phoenicia Olmecs Greece Archaic Classical Achaemenid Rome Carthage Migration and exploration Austronesian Expansion Chinese exploration Greeks in preRoman Gaul Ocean exploration Phoenician maritime expansion Sardinia Circumnavigation of Africa Pytheas voyage to Britain Roman circumnavigation of Britain Timeline Military Navies Egyptian Achaemenid Greek Roman Battles Mediterranean Alashiya Nile Delta Salamis Artemisium Eurymedon Naupactus Olpae Syracuse Cynossema Arginusae Mytilene Hellespont Echinades Salamis II Mylae Cape Hermaeum Ecnomus Drepana Aegates Lake Trasimene Chios Myonessus Nile Naulochus Mycale Actium China Red Cliffs Tactics Boarding Grappling Incendiaries Oared vessels Sailing ships Greek navy Ramming By region China India Odisha Japan Rome South America Rafts Economy and trade Whaling Fishing IndusMesopotamia relations Meluhha Maritime Jade Route Tin Spice trade Iron Age Britain Sa HuynhKalanay Incense trade Maritime Silk Road Periplus of the Erythraean Sea Maya Egypt Greece shipping Rome IndoRoman Piracy History Mediterranean piracy Ameinias the Phocian Cilician pirates Jewish pirates Kidnapping of Julius Caesar Pompeys campaign against the pirates Research and education Scholars Historians David Blackman Lionel Casson Fik Meijer John Sinclair Morrison William L. Rodgers Chester G. Starr Archaeologists George Bass JeanYves Empereur Boris Rankov J. Richard Steffy Peter Throckmorton Shelley Wachsmann Topics and theories Coastal defense and fortification Grave goods Lighthouses Alexandria Marine art Marine navigation Maritime archaeology Naval warfare Maritime temples Temple of Isthmia Temple of Poseidon Sounion Samothrace temple complex Nusantao network Phoenician discovery of America PreColumbian theories Sea peoples Shipbuilding Shell middens Ship burial Tacking Thalassocracy Underwater archaeology Underwater exploration Wrecks and relics Earliest Pesse canoe Dufuna canoe Abydos Moor Sand Dokos Khufu ship Dover Bronze Age Boat Uluburun Cape Gelidonya Rochelongue Hjortspring Black Sea Sinop D Marsala Greek Ashkelon Kyrenia Leontophoros Syracusia Phoenician Gozo Bajo la Campana Punic Marsala Punic shipwreck Roman Alkedo Arles Rhne 3 Blackfriars I Caligulas Giant Ship De Meern ships Isis Madrague de Giens Nemi ships Marausa Yassi Ada Lists Oldest surviving Museum ships Surviving ancient ships Sites H3 Experimental archaeology KonTiki Ra and Ra II Olympias Regina Phoenician Ship Expedition Viking replicas Viking Institutes and conferences Advisory Council on Underwater Archaeology Archaeological Institute of America European Association of Archaeologists Institute of Nautical Archaeology International Congress of Maritime Museums Nautical Archaeology Society RPM Nautical Foundation Sea Research Society Society for American Archaeology Museums and memorials Bodrum Museum of Underwater Archaeology Giza Solar boat museum Grand Egyptian Museum Ancient Shipwreck Museum at Kyrenia Castle Museum of Ancient Seafaring Museum of Ancient Ships Pisa National Museum of Subaquatic Archaeology Viking ship museums Oslo Roskilde Legend and literature Legend Ark of bulrushes Flood myths Genesis Gilgamesh Greek Literature Odyssey The Histories Herodotus On the Ocean Argonautica The Histories Polybius Metamorphoses Geography Aeneid Portal Ancient Egypt Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAncientEgyptiantechnologyoldid1213849204 Categories Ancient Egyptian technology Ancient Egyptian society Technology by period Egyptian inventions Science and technology in Egypt Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be split from February 2020 All articles to be split All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 This page was last edited on 15 March 2024 at 1359 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width