Help:Category - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Summary 
2 Category page definition Toggle Category page definition subsection 
2.1 Putting pages into categories 
3 Working with category pages Toggle Working with category pages subsection 
3.1 Linking to category pages 
3.2 Retrieving raw category information 
3.3 Sorting category pages 

3.3.1 Default sort key 
3.4 Searching for pages in categories 
3.5 Listing all categories 
3.6 Displaying category trees and page counts 
3.7 Moving and redirecting category pages 
3.8 Hiding categories 
4 Finding articles for a category 
5 Categorizing Toggle Categorizing subsection 
5.1 Categorizing templates 
5.2 Categories and templates 
5.3 Categorizing redirect pages 
5.4 Related Changes with categories 
5.5 Watching category additions and removals 
6 See also 
7 Notes Toggle the table of contents HelpCategory 63 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch     Bnlmg    Boarisch Catal etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Frysk Galego  Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Kiswahili Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Malti  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml    Polski Portugus Ripoarisch Romn  Scots Shqip  Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina  Svenska    tatara  Trke   Yorb  Edit links Help page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki MetaWiki Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wiktionary From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Information page on Wikipedia categories For guidelines on the use of categories on Wikipedia see WikipediaCategorization. For a basic readers guide see HelpCategories. For quick answers see the readers FAQ or the editors FAQ on categories. For a list of categories see SpecialCategories. This page describes editing with the source editor. See HelpVisualEditor  Editing categories for VisualEditor. Wikipedia information page This is an information page. It is not one of Wikipedias policies or guidelines rather its purpose is to explain certain aspects of Wikipedias norms customs technicalities or practices. It may reflect differing levels of consensus and vetting. Shortcut HCAT Wikipedia data structure v t e Namespaces Subject namespaces Talk namespaces 0 MainArticle Talk 1 2 User User talk 3 4 Wikipedia Wikipedia talk 5 6 File File talk 7 8 MediaWiki MediaWiki talk 9 10 Template Template talk 11 12 Help Help talk 13 14 Category Category talk 15 100 Portal Portal talk 101 118 Draft Draft talk 119 710 TimedText TimedText talk 711 828 Module Module talk 829 Former namespaces 108 Book Book talk 109 442 Course Course talk 443 444 Institution Institution talk 445 446 Education Program Education Program talk 447 2300 Gadget Gadget talk 2301 2302 Gadget definition Gadget definition talk 2303 2600 Topic 2601 Virtual namespaces 1 Special 2 Media Current list API call Categories are intended to group together pages on similar subjects. They are implemented by a MediaWiki feature that adds any page with a text like CategoryXYZ in its wiki markup to the automated listing that is the category with name XYZ. Categories help readers to find and navigate around a subject area to see pages sorted by title and to thus find article relationships. Categories are normally found at the bottom of an article page. Clicking a category name brings up a category page listing the articles or other pages that have been added to that particular category. There may also be a section listing the subcategories of that category. The subcategorization feature makes it possible to organize categories into treelike structures to aid navigation. The term category does refer to both the title of a category pagethe category pagenameand the category itself. Keeping this in mind while reading about categorization plus learning a category page layout is a worthwhile investment in research techniques. See also the search box parameter incategory. The layout of a category page is mostly text but see about displaying category trees below. Summary The MediaWiki software maintains tables of categories to which any editable page can be added. To add a page to a category include CategoryCategory name or CategoryCategory nameSortkey in that pages wiki markup. The categories to which a page belongs appear in a box at the bottom of the page. A category is usually associated with a category page in the Category namespace.1 A category page contains text that can be edited like any other page but when the page is displayed the last part of what is displayed is an automatically generated list of all pages in that category in the form of links. Other category pages which appear in this list are treated separately as subcategories. The bottom of a Wikipedia article on Chicken eyeglasses. At the very bottom of the page below the References navigation templates and external links are a series of links. These links are the categories used on the page which include CategoryAnimal welfare CategoryAnimal equipment CategoryEyewear and CategoryPoultry farming. By clicking on the category link at the bottom of the page readers can navigate the Category tree. Category page definition A category page is any page in the Category namespace. They each act as a category and are termed a category. The category page has one section titled Subcategories listing other categories and one section titled Pages listing pages as categorized in other namespaces. New categories are created by creating a page in the Category namespace. A category page can be edited like any other page. However when it is displayed the editable part of the page is followed by automatically generated lists of pages belonging to the category as follows First a count and list of subcategories other category pages belonging to the category is shown if any exist. The name of each subcategory is followed by counts like 6 C 38 P 2 F meaning this subcategory contains 6 subcategories 38 pages and 2 files. Counts of 0 are omitted. The further subcategories are expanded in the display if the  sign alongside the subcategory is clicked but this widget is only visible if your browser has JavaScript enabled. Note  is shown if there are no further subcategories. The subcategory is collapsed again if  is clicked. Next a count and list of pages in the category excluding subcategories and images is shown. If the category has no members a message to that effect is displayed. Next a count and list of image and other media files in the category appears if any exist. These are shown with thumbnails. The first 20 characters of the file name are shown with an ellipsis if that is not the full name also the file size is shown. The items in the lists all link to the pages concerned in the case of the images this applies both to the image itself and to the text below it the name of the image. For the way in which the lists are ordered see Sorting category pages below. The first and second lists are divided into sections according to the first character of the sort key. These initial characters are displayed above the sections. To suppress these make all sort keys start with a space. A category page can only display a limited number of items currently 200. If more pages belong to the category there will be a link to the next ones. The categories box for the category page appears at the bottom in the same place as for other pages. This contains the categories to which the current category page has been added i.e. its parent categories the categories of which it is a subcategory. Add a category page to other categories in the normal way using the CategoryCategory name or CategoryCategory nameSortkey syntax. Putting pages into categories Shortcut WPPAGECAT A page becomes part of a category if the pages wiki markup contains a declaration for that category. A category declaration takes the form CategoryCategory name or CategoryCategory nameSortkey. The declaration must be processed i.e. it will not work if it appears between nowiki...nowiki or includeonly...includeonly tags or in a comment. The declaration may however come from a transcluded page see Categories and templates below. A category name can be any string that would be a legitimate page title. If the category name begins with a lowercase letter it will be capitalized. For initial lowercase letters as in CategorymacOS see the technical restrictions page. On Wikipedia it is customary to place category declarations at the end of the wiki markup but before any stub templates which themselves transclude categories and interlanguage links. When a page has been added to one or more categories a categories box appears at the bottom of the page or possibly elsewhere if a nondefault skin is being used. This box contains a list of the categories the page belongs to in the order in which the category declarations appear in the processed wiki markup. The category names are linked to the corresponding category pages. They appear as red links if the corresponding category page does not exist. If a user has enabled the HotCat gadget the categories box will also provide links to quickly add remove or modify category declarations on the page without having to edit the whole page. Hidden categories are not displayed except as described below under Hiding categories. Working with category pages The following subsections are ordered from simple actions to more elaborate or rarer actions. Linking to category pages To link to a category page without putting the current page in that category precede the link with a colon CategoryCategory name. Such a link can be piped like a normal wikilink. The cl template and others listed on its documentation page may sometimes be helpful. Retrieving raw category information Raw information about the members of a category their sort keys and timestamps time when last added to the category can be obtained from the API using a query of the form httpsen.wikipedia.orgwapi.phpcmtitleCategoryCategorynameactionquerylistcategorymemberscmlimit5
00 cmproptitlesortkeytimestamp Listings of up to 500 members are possible. If there are more members then the results will include text near the end like this categorymembers cmcontinuepageNNNNTITLE . This can be added to the previous one without quotation marks for the next page of members ...cmcontinuepageNNNNTITLE Sorting category pages Shortcut WPSORTCAT By default a page is sorted under the first character of its name without the namespace. English Wikipedia groups accented characters together with their unaccented version so pages starting with    will be listed under heading A. Sorting is caseinsensitive so ABC comes after Abacus. Unlike at SpecialAllpages and SpecialPrefixindex a space is treated as a space coming before all other characters not as an underscore. The English Wikipedia has numerical sorting in categories. This means a page whose title begins with a number will be sorted according to the numeric value of the number even if it is multiple digits. Thus 9 dogs 25 dogs and 112 dogs will all appear under the 09 heading in numeric order. If the number includes a comma space or period the sorting algorithm will only consider the part of the number before the separator. Each of the three lists subcategories pages media files is arranged in the order explained above except that in the subcategories list the namespace indicator Category is not considered. If an item ought to be positioned within a list on the basis of an alternative name sort key for that item then this can be specified in the category tag that places the item in the list CategoryCategory nameSortkey For example to add an article called Albert Einstein to Category1879 births and have the article sorted by Einstein Albert you would type Category1879 birthsEinstein Albert Unlike a piped link which uses the same syntax the sort key itself is not displayed to readers. It affects only the order in which pages are listed on the category page. It is useful to document the system being used for sort keys on the category page. For guidelines about the use of sort keys on Wikipedia see WPSORTKEY. Default sort key Shortcut WPDEFAULTSORT This section documents functionality. For guidelines see WPNAMESORT and WPSORTKEY. It is possible to set a default sort key which is different from PAGENAME by using the magic word DEFAULTSORT DEFAULTSORTnew key This is often used in biography articles to make sure the subject is sorted by their last name DEFAULTSORTLastName FirstName For example on the Albert Einstein page DEFAULTSORTEinstein Albert adds the sort key Einstein Albert to all his categories such as Category1879 births. In the case of multiple default sort key tags the last DEFAULTSORT on the final rendering of a page applies for all categories regardless of the position of the category tags. This also means that a DEFAULTSORT tag included from a template is not effective if another DEFAULTSORT tag occurs later on the page even if the later DEFAULTSORT tag is also hidden included by another template. If a category is added inside ref...ref then DEFAULTSORT may be ignored. Searching for pages in categories Further information HelpSearching  Syntax See also  Searching for articles in categories WikipediaCategory intersection and Wikimedia bug T3497 Hierarchical category system is urgently needed In addition to browsing through hierarchies of categories it is possible to use the search tool to find specific articles in specific categories. To search for articles in a specific category type incategoryCategoryName in the search box. A pipe  can be added to join the contents of one category with the contents of another. For example enter incategorySuspension bridgesBridges in New York City to return all pages that belong to either or both of the categories as here. Note that using search to find categories will not find articles which have been categorized using templates. This feature also doesnt return pages in subcategories. Listing all categories SpecialCategories provides an alphabetic list of all categories with the number of members of each this number does not include the content of the subcategories but it includes the subcategories themselves i.e. each counting as one. The above list contains all categories that have members regardless of whether they have corresponding category pages. To list all existing category pages regardless of whether they have members use SpecialAllPagesCategory. Displaying category trees and page counts As described at mwHelpMagic words PAGESINCATEGORYExample or PAGESINCATExample returns the number of pages in CategoryExample. Each subcategory counts as one page pages in subcategories are not counted. The page SpecialCategoryTree enables you to see the tree structure of a category its subcategories their subcategories and so on the display of files and other member pages is optional. The CategoryTree extension can be used to display such a tree on any page. This is sometimes done on the category page itself if the category is split over multiple screens to make all subcategories available on every screen. The basic syntax is categorytreeCategory namecategorytree to display just the subcategory tree and categorytree modepagesCategory namecategorytree to display member pages as well. They will be indicated by italics. Dapetes categoryvisualizer vCat will render charts of the tree structure. You may also use TemplateCategory tree or TemplateCategory tree all instead. Warning The following code PAGESINCATEGORYPAGENAME will not work as expected when used in the wikitext or in a transcluded template in a category page whose title contains some ASCII punctuations. For legacy reasons PAGENAME may return the page name with these characters being HTMLencoded using numeric character entities  this still works for generating derived wikilinks or displaying page names or when HTMLencoded this page name is used in a conditional switch but PAGESINCATEGORY does not recognize the category name given in parameter if some characters are HTMLencoded this is the case notably when the category name contains ASCII apostrophes  and a few other ASCII punctuations. The same HTMLencoding is also applied to the values returned by FULLPAGENAME SUBPAGENAME or NAMESPACE. In that case as the category is not found by its HTMLencoded pagename PAGESINCATEGORY will unexpectedly return 0 and not its effective number of member pages. A simple workaround is to transform these HTMLencoded characters back into standard UTF
8 encoded characters by using the titleparts parser function like this PAGESINCATEGORYtitlepartsPAGENAME Moving and redirecting category pages Categories can be moved in the same way as an ordinary page but a certain amount of cleanup may be necessary. A redirect is left at the old category name and this is not a normal REDIRECT ... but a category redirect. Once all the pages have been moved out of the old category it may be left as a category redirect or deleted. For categories entirely populated through templates see above modifying the templates enables all affected articles to be moved to another category but with the refresh problem mentioned. Almost all category name changes are made pursuant to a consensus decision at WikipediaCategories for discussion. Do not create intercategory redirects other than with a category redirect template. See WikipediaCategories for discussion  Redirecting categories for more on category redirects. Hiding categories When the magic word HIDDENCAT is placed on a category page that category becomes hidden meaning that it will not be displayed on the pages belonging to that category. On Wikipedia the magic word is not normally used explicitly but is applied through the hidden category template. The feature is mostly used to prevent project maintenance categories from showing up to ordinary readers on article pages. For users who are not logged in hidden categories are displayed on category pages whether as parent categories or subcategories. Hidden categories are displayed at the bottom of each page after Hidden categories for registered users at preview during editing if the user has selected Show hidden categories in their user preferences. Hidden categories are automatically added to CategoryHidden categories. For guidelines on the hiding of categories on Wikipedia see WPHIDDENCAT. Finding articles for a category The most effective way of finding entries of a category is using the What links here tool on the categorys main article. An easy way to find relevant articles for a new category or missing entries in an existing one is by finding the most relevant list and checking its entries. Sometimes categories are about things that are intersections of other categories for which the PetScan tool can be used. More relevant articles may also be found linked in a categorys main article and the articles already featured in the category  especially in their See also sections if existent and the automatically suggested RELATED ARTICLES below them. Furthermore a categorys superordinate categories often feature articles that should be subcategorized to the category. Other ways to find relevant articles include searching Wikipedia for the categorys topic and searching the Web for the topic in quotes  with synonyms also in quotes and appended after an OR and appending the word wiki or Wikipedia or siteWikipedia.org to them. Categorizing Main page WikipediaCategorization Categorizing templates Templates are categorized the same way as articles except that Category Sometopic templates should be placed on the templates documentation page or inside noinclude...noinclude tags if there is no documentation page this is necessary to avoid categorizing pages by template inclusion see below. Categories and templates A template can be used to add pages to a category usually by placing the category link inside includeonlyincludeonly tags on the template e.g. includeonlyCategorycategory nameincludeonly. When the template is transcluded into the page the category link becomes active and the page is added to the category page. This is useful for categories that have high turnover or many pages included like cleanup categories. Changes to the template however may not be reflected immediately on the category page. When you edit an article to add a category tag directly the list of category members is updated immediately when the page is saved. When a category link is contained in a template however this does not happen immediately instead whenever a template is edited all the pages that transclude it are put into the job queue to be recached during periods of low server load. This means that in busy periods it may take hours or even days before individual pages are recached and they start to appear in the category list. Performing a null edit to a page will allow it to jump the queue and be immediately recached. To add the template itself to the category page as well omit the includeonly tags. To add the template to a category without categorizing pages on which the template is transcluded place the category declaration between noinclude...noinclude tags or add it to the template documentation page between includeonlyincludeonly the latter allows recategorizing the template without editing it which is helpful if it is protected or so complicated that mere mortals hesitate to touch it. Parser functions can be used to make the transcluded categories or the sort key used in them dependent on other variables notably PAGENAME. Passing a category name as a parameter includeonlyCategorycatdefaultincludeonly or includeonlycatCategorydefaultincludeonly If the user provides a parameter catXXX the page will be categorized at the page CategoryXXX otherwise it will be categorized at the page Categorydefault. Calling the template with cat equal to nothing disables putting the page in any category. Excluding nonarticle pages includeonlyifNAMESPACE   CategoryXXXincludeonly the variable NAMESPACE is null for mainspace articles. For any space other than mainspace this ParserFunction will produce an empty string but for regular articles this will include the article in CategoryXXX. On Wikipedia it is not recommended that templates be used to populate ordinary content categories of articles. See Categorization using templates in the categorization guideline. Categorizing redirect pages Main page WikipediaCategorizing redirects Redirect pages can be categorized and there are conventions on how to do it. The redirect link must be first on the page. On a category page redirects are listed in italics. Related Changes with categories For a category the Related Changes feature when applied to the corresponding category page lists recent changes to the pages which are currently listed as belonging to a category. Where those pages are subcategories or image pages only changes to their editable parts are listed. Notice that Related Changes does not show edits to pages that have been removed from the category. Also Related Changes does not list recent changes to pages linked from the editable part of the category page as it would normally with a noncategory page. If a workaround would be required the links in question could be placed in a template and transcluded onto the category page. As usual  unlike with watchlists  recent changes to corresponding talk pages are not shown under Related Changes. Pages one is watching are bolded on the list. This can help to find which pages in a given category one has on ones watchlist. The DynamicPageList thirdparty extension provides a list of last edits to the pages in a category or optionally just the list of pages the simpler DynamicPageList Wikimedia is installed on Meta Wikinews Wikibooks and Wikiversity the extension mwExtensionDPLforum is installed on Wikia. Watching category additions and removals Since 2016 additions and removals from categories are available via the Category changes filter on recent changes pages including watchlists and SpecialRecentChangesLinked. For example category changes to articles in CategoryCannabis stubs can be found here. You can monitor additions and removals from specific categories by adding the categories to your watchlist and making sure the Category changes filter is active. You can view changes to categories in your watchlist by clicking here. Additional scripts with similar functionality are UserCategoryWatchlistBot and UserAis5
23 catwatch. See also MediaWiki HelpCategories TemplateCategory TOC WikipediaFAQCategorization WikipediaWikiProject Categories WikipediaQuick cat index How to move a category Notes  The category itself is permanently created as soon as it has been saved on to any page. Unless you create a category page it will display as a red link. Unless you add another category to the category page it will not be placed in the category tree. Category pages are created like any other page. Most commonly editors click on the redlink in an article and create the category page that way. v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q  A forum. FAQs  Reference desks  Noticeboards  Cheatsheet  Directories  About Wikipedia  Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer parental advice Making requests Who writes Wikipedia Help for readers  FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia  Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified ruleset Ignore all rules The rules are principles Styletips Tip of the day Your first article article wizard Getting started  Why create an account Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC live chat tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and donts  Accessibility Biographies Biographies living Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles of articles Howto pages and information pages  Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citationsreferences Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking link color Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages archiving simple archiving User contributions WP search protocol Coding  Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Elevation Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories  Abbreviations Contents Encyclopedia proper Departments Editors index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page  v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse help desk village pump technical talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor Help Special pagerelated Special page help AllPages Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page History merging Nonadmin and adminonly page moves NotificationsEcho FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Linebreak handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sortable tables Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files images videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Costs and benefits Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces MainArticle Category Draft File File description page Help Portal ProjectWikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide List Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AntiVandal AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating history HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle Ultraviolet WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also CategoryWikipedia howto CategoryWikipedia information pages Further navigation at Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia categorization Guidelines Categorization Category names Categories lists and navigation templates Overcategorization Categorizing articles about people People by year CategorizationSorting names Categorizing redirects User categories OvercategorizationUser categories Help pages Basic help for readers Basic help for editors FAQ for readers FAQ for editors Container categories Categorizing portals Category classification templates Template indexCategory namespace PetScan Discussions Categories for discussion Categories for discussionSpeedy Categories for discussionAll current discussions Projectspace essays Categories are different from articles Categories versus lists Categorising fictional characters by attribute Do not write articles using categories OvercategorizationIntersection of location and occupation Wiki workflow WikiProject PlantsDescription in year categories Userspace essays DexDorTerminology categories DexDorCategorization of award recipients Alan LieftingOn categorisation Coder DanCategories gracefoolWhat is a category Kbdank
71 Wikiproject notification CategoryWikipedia categorization CategoryContents WikiProject Categories Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHelpCategoryoldid1214765969 Categories Wikipedia information pages Wikipedia categorization Wikipedia howto Wikipedia page help Hidden categories Wikipedia semiprotected project pages Wikipedia moveprotected project pages This page was last edited on 21 March 2024 at 0100 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width