Portal:Ancient Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk PortalAncient Egypt 26 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto Franais Galego  Italiano    Nederlands Occitan Polski Portugus Romn     srpski Svenska  Ting Vit Edit links Portal Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Portal maintenance status February 2020 This portals subpages have been checked by an editor and are needed. Please take care when editing especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Ancient Egypt Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal THE ANCIENT EGYPT PORTAL edit Showcased content about Ancient Egypt The golden funeral mask of king Tutankhamun a symbol for many of ancient Egypt Ancient Egypt was a civilization of ancient Northeast Africa. It was concentrated along the lower reaches of the Nile River situated in the place that is now the country Egypt. Ancient Egyptian civilization followed prehistoric Egypt and coalesced around 3100 BC according to conventional Egyptian chronology with the political unification of Upper and Lower Egypt under Menes often identified with Narmer. The history of ancient Egypt unfolded as a series of stable kingdoms interspersed by periods of relative instability known as Intermediate Periods. The various kingdoms fall into one of three categories the Old Kingdom of the Early Bronze Age the Middle Kingdom of the Middle Bronze Age or the New Kingdom of the Late Bronze Age. Ancient Egypt reached the pinnacle of its power during the New Kingdom ruling much of Nubia and a sizable portion of the Levant. After this period it entered an era of slow decline. During the course of its history Ancient Egypt was invaded or conquered by a number of foreign powers including the Hyksos the Nubians the Assyrians the Achaemenid Persians and the Macedonians under Alexander the Great. The Greek Ptolemaic Kingdom formed in the aftermath of Alexanders death ruled until 30 BC when under Cleopatra it fell to the Roman Empire and became a Roman province. Egypt remained under Roman control until the 6
40 s AD when it was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate. The success of ancient Egyptian civilization came partly from its ability to adapt to the conditions of the Nile River valley for agriculture. The predictable flooding and controlled irrigation of the fertile valley produced surplus crops which supported a more dense population and social development and culture. With resources to spare the administration sponsored mineral exploitation of the valley and surrounding desert regions the early development of an independent writing system the organization of collective construction and agricultural projects trade with surrounding regions and a military intended to assert Egyptian dominance. Motivating and organizing these activities was a bureaucracy of elite scribes religious leaders and administrators under the control of a pharaoh who ensured the cooperation and unity of the Egyptian people in the context of an elaborate system of religious beliefs.1 The many achievements of the ancient Egyptians include the quarrying surveying and construction techniques that supported the building of monumental pyramids temples and obelisks a system of mathematics a practical and effective system of medicine irrigation systems and agricultural production techniques the first known planked boats Egyptian faience and glass technology new forms of literature and the earliest known peace treaty made with the Hittites. Ancient Egypt has left a lasting legacy. Its art and architecture were widely copied and its antiquities were carried off to far corners of the world. Its monumental ruins have inspired the imaginations of travelers and writers for millennia. A newfound respect for antiquities and excavations in the early modern period by Europeans and Egyptians has led to the scientific investigation of Egyptian civilization and a greater appreciation of its cultural legacy. Full article... Learn more about Ancient Egypt... Refresh with new selections below purge Selected article  show another View of the central East Valley showing the area around KV62. The Valley of the Kings Egyptian Arabic   Wd elMulk Coptic  Dme .m also known as the Valley of the Gates of the Kings    Wd Ebwb elMulk is an area in Egypt where for a period of nearly 500 years from the Eighteenth Dynasty to the Twentieth Dynasty rockcut tombs were excavated for pharaohs and powerful nobles under the New Kingdom of ancient Egypt. It is a wadi sitting on the west bank of the Nile opposite Thebes modernday Luxor and within the heart of the Theban Necropolis. There are two main sections the East Valley where the majority of the royal tombs are situated and the West Valley otherwise known as the Valley of the Monkeys. Full article... List of selected articles Ancient Egyptian literature Thinis Nefertiti Bust Gaza City Makuria Sirius Rosetta Stone Gebelein predynastic mummies Memphis Egypt Ancient Egyptian religion Mask of Tutankhamun Ancient Egyptian deities Pyramid of Neferirkare Abuwtiyuw Pyramid of Unas Decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts Pyramid of Nyuserre Egyptian temple Death of Cleopatra Osiris myth Egyptian mythology Library of Alexandria Middle Kingdom of Egypt Pyramid of Userkaf Ancient Egyptian agriculture Military of ancient Egypt Book of the Dead Layer Pyramid Eye of Ra Pyramid of Sahure edit Selected picture Credit Hans Hillewaert The Rosetta Stone is a fragment of a granite stele containing a decree written in Hieroglyphs Demotic and Greek. Discovered in 1799 the stone contributed greatly to the process of hieroglyph decipherment. Read more... More pictures... edit Did you know... ... that Fort Julien pictured near the mouth of the Nile in Egypt was the place where French soldiers discovered the Rosetta Stone in 1799 ... that Pepi II Neferkare has the title of being the longest reigning monarch of all time ruling for ninetyfour years and taking throne when he was just six ... that the Coptic Cross has its origins tied into the ancient Egyptian Ankh a symbol meaning eternal life More did you know facts edit News 
5 th September 2018. Rockcut Tomb discovered in a 40
00 yearold Elite Cemetery August 2018 in the tomb of the mayor of Memphis Ptahmose who dates around 1300 BC was found well preserved cheese more than 3000 years old. 1 Selected biography  show another Statue of Akhenaten at the Egyptian Museum Akhenaten pronounced kntn also spelled Akhenaton or Echnaton Ancient Egyptian njtn nyty pronounced u n jatj meaning Effective for the Aten was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh reigning c.13531336 or 13511334 BC the tenth ruler of the Eighteenth Dynasty. Before the fifth year of his reign he was known as Amenhotep IV Ancient Egyptian jmntp meaning Amun is satisfied Hellenized as Amenophis IV. As a pharaoh Akhenaten is noted for abandoning traditional ancient Egyptian religion of polytheism and introducing Atenism or worship centered around Aten. The views of Egyptologists differ as to whether the religious policy was absolutely monotheistic or whether it was monolatristic syncretistic or henotheistic. This culture shift away from traditional religion was reversed after his death. Akhenatens monuments were dismantled and hidden his statues were destroyed and his name excluded from lists of rulers compiled by later pharaohs. Traditional religious practice was gradually restored notably under his close successor Tutankhamun who changed his name from Tutankhaten early in his reign. When some dozen years later rulers without clear rights of succession from the Eighteenth Dynasty founded a new dynasty they discredited Akhenaten and his immediate successors and referred to Akhenaten as the enemy or that criminal in archival records. Full article... List of selected biographies Amenhotep I Ahmose I Philitas of Cos Darius the Great Artaxerxes III Thutmose I Tutankhamun Djedkare Isesi Atlanersa Neferefre Unas Menkauhor Kaiu Nyuserre Ini Userkaf Isis Sheshi Hathor Neferirkare Kakai Ramesses VI Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy VI Philometor Sneferu SethPeribsen General images The following are images from various ancient Egyptrelated articles on Wikipedia. Image 
1 Statuette of Merankhre Mentuhotep a minor pharaoh of the Sixteenth Dynasty reigning over the Theban region c. 1585 BC. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
2 Map of Lower Egypt and location of the Faiyum oasis from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
3 Golden mask from the mummy of Tutankhamun from History of ancient Egypt Image 
4 A Gerzeh culture vase decorated with gazelles on display at the Louvre. from History of ancient Egypt Image 5
25 th Dynasty from History of ancient Egypt Image 
6 Portrait of Black Pharaoh Taharqa Louvre Museum reconstruction from History of ancient Egypt Image 
7 Ovoid Naqada I Amratian blacktopped terracotta vase c. 38003500 BC. from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
8 Greywacke statue of the pharaoh Menkaure and his queen consort Khamerernebty II. Originally from his Giza temple now on display at the Museum of Fine Arts Boston. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
9 Possible prisoners and wounded men of the ButoMaadi culture devoured by animals while one is led by a man in long dress probably an Egyptian official fragment top right corner. Battlefield Palette. from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
10 Aterian point from Zaccar Djelfa region Algeria. from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
11 Ring with engraved portrait of Ptolemy VI Philometor as Pharao 
3 rd
2 nd century BCE. Louvre Museum. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
12 The prisoners on the Battlefield Palette may be the people of the ButoMaadi culture subjected by the Egyptian rulers of Naqada III. from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
13 Egypt and its world in 1300 BC. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
14 Evolution of Egyptian prehistoric pottery styles from Naqada I to Naqada II and Naqada III from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
15 Nabta Playa calendar circle reconstructed at Aswan Nubia museum. from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
16 Ancient Egypt Predynastic Stone Vessels. Louvre Museum Paris from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
17 A typical Naqada II pot with ship theme from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
18 Stela of the Second Dynasty Pharaoh Nebra displaying the hieroglyph for his Horus name within a serekh surmounted by Horus. On display at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
19 Naqada figure of a woman interpreted to represent the goddess Bat with her inward curving horns. Another hypothesis is that the raised arms symbolize wings and that the figure is an early version of the white vulture goddess Nekhbet c. 35003400 B.C.E. terracotta painted 1112 in  512 in  214 in 
29.2  cm  
14.0  cm  
5.7  cm Brooklyn Museum from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
20 Bull palette Naqada III from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
21 Colossal depictions of Ramesses II at one of the Abu Simbel temples. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
22 A guardian statue which reflects the facial features of the reigning king probably Amenemhat II or Senwosret II and which functioned as a divine guardian for the imiut. Made of cedar wood and plaster c. 19191885 BC from History of ancient Egypt Image 
23 Merimde culture clay head circa 5000 BC. This is one of the earliest known representations of a human head in Egypt. from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
24 Pottery model of a house used in a burial from the First Intermediate Period on display at the Royal Ontario Museum. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
25 Mesopotamian king as Master of Animals on the Gebel elArak Knife dated to the Naqada II period circa 33003200 BC Abydos Egypt. Louvre Museum reference E 11517. This work of art both shows the influence of Mesopotamia on Egypt at an early date and the state of Mesopotamian royal iconography during the Uruk period. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
26 Map of Egypt from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
27 Egyptian soldier of the Achaemenid army circa 470 BCE. Xerxes I tomb relief. from History of ancient Egypt Image 
28 Tasian beaker found in a Badarian grave at Qau tomb 569 around 4000 BC Upper Egypt British Museum from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
29 Arrowheads from Al Fayum from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
30 An Osiris statue of Mentuhotep II the founder of the Middle Kingdom from History of ancient Egypt Image 
31 Ancient Badarian mortuary figurine of a woman held at the Louvre from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
32 Carved catfish bones and jar discovered in Maadi from Prehistoric Egypt Image 
33 Clapper discovered in Maadi Louvre Museum from Prehistoric Egypt edit Related portals Egypt History Language Traditional African religions Myths Fatimid Caliphate Ancient Rome Judaism Islam Christianity All Africarelated portals edit WikiProjects History Ancient Near East Ancient Egypt Religion work group Archaeology edit Main topics Ancient Egypt History of ancient Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Protodynastic Period Early Dynastic Period Old Kingdom of Egypt First Intermediate Period of Egypt Middle Kingdom of Egypt Second Intermediate Period of Egypt New Kingdom of Egypt Third Intermediate Period of Egypt First Persian Period GraecoRoman Period Arab Conquest Egyptian language Old Egyptian language Middle Egyptian language Late Egyptian language Demotic Egyptian Coptic Writing in Ancient Egypt Hieroglyph Hieratic Demotic Egyptian Ancient Egyptian literature Ancient Egyptian cuisine Ancient egyptian warfare Egyptian calendar Beautiful festival of the valley Ancient Egyptian architecture Pyramid of Djoser Bent Pyramid Giza pyramid complex Great pyramid of Giza Pyramid of Userkaf Pyramid of Unas Black Pyramid Egyptian pyramids Mastaba Karnak temple Luxor temple Abu Simbel Ramesseum Deir elBahri Serdab Benben False door Block statue Egyptian Art of Ancient Egypt Symbols Ankh Djed Wadjet Was sceptre Uraeus Pschent Hedjet Deshret Atef Reserve head Egyptian burial rituals and protocol Military history of Ancient Egypt Battle of Kadesh Ancient Egyptian technology Ancient Egyptian medicine Ancient Egyptian units of measurement Ancient Egyptian royal titulary Egyptian mathematics Racial characteristics of ancient Egyptians Notable Pharaohs Narmer Djoser Sneferu Khufu Khafre Menkaure Userkaf Unas Pepi II Mentuhotep II Amenemhat I Senusret III Amenemhat III Kamose Ahmose I Thutmosis I Hatshepsut Thutmosis III Amenhotep III Akhenaten Tutankhamun Horemheb Seti I Ramesses II Ramesses III Psusennes I Taharka Psamtik I Ptolemy I Cleopatra VII Ancient Egyptian religion Ancient Egyptian offering formula Pantheon Osiris Ptah Amun Isis Horus Set Montu Ra Maat Sekhmet Nepthys Anubis Bastet Shu Tefnut Geb Ammit Bes Religious concepts Ba Ka Akh Duat Atenism Egyptian soul Ennead Ancient Egyptian funerary texts Book of Caverns Book of Gates Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of the Netherworld Books of Breathing Sites Abu Gorab Abu Mena Abu Rawash Abu Simbel Abydos Alexandria Amarna Aswan Asyut Avaris Beni Hasan Bubastis Buhen Busiris Lower Egypt Buto Dahshur Edfu Deir elMadinah ElLahun Deir elBahri Gerzeh Giza Gaza Gebel elSilsila Memphis Egypt Thinis Egyptologists Ludwig Borchardt Alan Gardiner Auguste Mariette E. A. Wallis Budge douard Naville Edward R. Ayrton Bob Brier Edwin Smith Flinders Petrie edit Categories Category puzzle Select  to view subcategories Ancient Egypt Early Dynastic Period of Egypt Old Kingdom of Egypt First Intermediate Period of Egypt Middle Kingdom of Egypt Second Intermediate Period of Egypt New Kingdom of Egypt Third Intermediate Period of Egypt Late Period of ancient Egypt Ancient Egyptrelated lists 
1 st millennium BC in Egypt 
2 nd millennium BC in Egypt 
3 rd millennium BC in Egypt 
4 th millennium BC in Egypt Ancient Egyptian music Ancient Egyptian architecture Dynasties of ancient Egypt Ancient Egyptians Egyptology People executed by ancient Egypt Foreign contacts of ancient Egypt Geography of ancient Egypt Historians of ancient Egypt Ancient Jewish Egyptian history Ancient Egyptian language Ancient Egyptian medicine Military history of ancient Egypt Nomes of ancient Egypt Ancient Egypt in popular culture Ancient Egyptian science Ancient Egyptian society Ancient Egyptian technology Works about ancient Egypt Ancient Egypt stubs edit Recognized content This is a list of recognized content updated weekly by JLBot talk  contribs typically on Saturdays. There is no need to edit the list yourself. If an article is missing from the list make sure it is tagged e.g. WikiProject Ancient Egypt or categorized correctly and wait for the next update. See WPRECOG for configuration options. Featured articles Abuwtiyuw Ahmose I Ancient Egypt Ancient Egyptian literature Atlanersa Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts Discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun Djedkare Isesi Ancient Egyptian deities Egyptian temple Hathor Isis Menkauhor Kaiu The Mummy 1999 film Margaret Murray Mysteries of Isis Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Nyuserre Ini Osiris myth Pepi I Meryre Philitas of Cos Pyramid of Neferirkare Pyramid of Nyuserre Pyramid of Sahure Pyramid of Unas Ramesses VI Rosetta Stone Sahure Shepseskaf Shepseskare Sheshi Sirius Unas Userkaf Featured lists List of cities founded by Alexander the Great Good articles 3
17 a and 3
17 b mummies Abgig obelisk Aetia Callimachus Alexander the Great Amenemhat IV Amenhotep I Ankh Apion family Artaxerxes III Assassins Creed Origins Book of the Dead Callimachus JeanFranois Champollion Criticism of the Book of Abraham Darius the Great Early life of Cleopatra Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Four sons of Horus Gebelein predynastic mummies Gospel of Jesus Wife Hall of Records Tiberius Julius Alexander Khaba Tomb of Tutankhamun Layer Pyramid Library of Alexandria Medjed Nebka Neferhotep I Nefertiti Bust Osorkon IV The Prince of Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy XII Auletes Pyramid of Khentkaus I Pyramid of Userkaf Natacha Rambova Reign of Cleopatra Saluki Seneb SethPeribsen Sobekneferu Tessarakonteres Thinis Thutmose I Tomb of Kha and Merit Tutankhamun Valley of the Kings Did you know articles 3
17 a and 3
17 b mummies Abgig obelisk Abu Mena Abuwtiyuw Aetia Callimachus Amanitore Ancient Egyptian cuisine Ancient Egyptian retainer sacrifices Ancient Egyptian creation myths Ankhhaf Ankhhaf sculpture Apion family Archelaus high priest of Comana Cappadocia Bab elGasus Kthe BosseGriffiths James Henry Breasted Mary Brodrick Callimachus JeanFranois Champollion List of cities founded by Alexander the Great Jean Cldat Walter E. H. Cockle Codex Glazier Coffin of Nedjemankh Coptos Decrees Death of Alexander the Great Decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts Dedi Demetrius the Chronographer Dendera zodiac Diadochi Djed Double Falcon Dwarfs and pygmies in ancient Egypt Egyptian Bridge Egyptian numerals Ancient Egyptian deities Egyptian medical papyri Egyptian mythology Egyptian temple ElTarif Eye of Horus Eye of Ra False door Fayum mummy portraits Four sons of Horus Funeral of a Mummy on the Nile The Greatest Pharaohs George Francis Hardy Head of Nefertem Hearst papyrus Heroninos Archive History of Alexander History of general anesthesia Horus Sa Imyremeshaw The Indestructibles Instructions of Kagemni International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia Ka statue Kadesh inscriptions KV15 Pierre Lacau Oscar Lemm Library of Alexandria Jens Lieblein List of Book of the Dead spells List of Egyptian obelisks Loyalist Teaching Mask of Tutankhamun Medjed Memphite Formula Meni high official Mereruka Mining industry of Egypt Minshat Abu Omar Miriam Mysteries of Isis Nefertiti Bust Neues Museum Hanske Nordstrm Obelisk of Montecitorio Obelisk of Theodosius Osiris myth Osorkon IV Oxyrhynchus Papyri Papyrus Carlsberg Collection Pedestals of Biahmu Periodization of ancient Egypt Petubastis III Pinakes Ptolemy I Soter Pyramid of Khentkaus I Pyramid of Merenre Pyramid of Neferefre Pyramid of Neferirkare Pyramid of Nyuserre Pyramid of Sahure Pyramid of Senusret I Qurna Queen Ramesses III prisoner tiles Ramesseum medical papyri Reserve head Rhacotis S 9 Abydos Sack of Gezer Wafaa El Saddik Saqqara Bird Seneb Senenmut Shanakdakhete Shemay Sheshi Sobekneferu Statue of Ramesses II Temple of Dakka Temple of Amada Temple of Derr Temple of Maharraqa Temples of Wadi esSebua Tesem Tharbis Theban Desert Road Survey Thutmose I Tomb of Akhethetep Tomb of Aline Tomb of Kha and Merit Turin King List Turin Papyrus Map Two Ladies Ugaritic texts Wadi alJarf Caroline Ransom Williams The Younger Lady Yuya Christiane Ziegler Featured pictures All Gizah Pyramids Ancient Egypt mapen Edwin Smith Papyrus v2 File Asun Egipto 20220401 DD 93 Giambattista Tiepolo  The Banquet of Cleopatra  Google Art Project Giza pyramid complex map Le Jardin de Nbamoun Sphinx partially excavated2 Standing Hippopotamus MET DP248993 Templo funerario de Hatshepsut Luxor Egipto 20220403 DD 13 The Mummy 1932 film poster In the News articles Abydos Dynasty Aten city Khentkaus III KV40 Neues Museum Psamtik I Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep Senebkay Sesheshet Main page featured articles Abuwtiyuw Ahmose I Alchemy Ancient Egypt Ancient Egyptian literature Mark Antony Atlanersa Behistun Inscription Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts Discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun Djedkare Isesi Ancient Egyptian deities Egyptian temple Hathor Isis Athanasius Kircher Menkauhor Kaiu The Mummy 1999 film Margaret Murray Mysteries of Isis Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai Nyuserre Ini Osiris myth Oxyrhynchus Pepi I Meryre Philitas of Cos Pyramid of Neferirkare Pyramid of Nyuserre Pyramid of Sahure Pyramid of Unas Ramesses VI Rosetta Stone Sahure Shepseskaf Shepseskare Sheshi Sirius Unas Userkaf Main page featured lists List of cities founded by Alexander the Great Picture of the day pictures All Gizah Pyramids Ancient Egypt mapen Edwin Smith Papyrus v2 Giambattista Tiepolo  The Banquet of Cleopatra  Google Art Project Giza pyramid complex map Le Jardin de Nbamoun Sphinx partially excavated2 Standing Hippopotamus MET DP248993 The Mummy 1932 film poster edit Things to do Here are some tasks awaiting attention Stubs Expand articles listed at CategoryAncient Egypt stubs edit Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject Commons Free media repository Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Freecontent news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Freecontent library Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Sources  James 2005 p. 8 sfnmp error no target CITEREFJames2005 help Manuelian 1998 pp. 67 sfnmp error no target CITEREFManuelian1998 help. Discover Wikipedia using portals List of all portals The arts portal Biography portal Current events portal Geography portal History portal Mathematics portal Science portal Society portal Technology portal Random portal WikiProject Portals Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePortalAncientEgyptoldid1096385834 Categories All portals Ancient Egypt Egypt portal Egyptology History portals African portals Hidden categories Portals with triaged subpages from February 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Pages with undetermined IPA Random portal component with more available subpages than specified max Random portal component with 610 available image subpages Random portal component with 1115 available subpages Pages with Semitic languages IPA Redirect targets of redirected portals with existing subpages This page was last edited on 4 July 2022 at 0500 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width