Home – Wikimedia Foundation
Skip to content Toggle menu Search for Search Current language en English   Franais  Espaol Deutsch Donate now Search for Search Our Work Support Wikipedia Research Advocacy Technology News Participate About Help protect Wikipedia and other public interest projects in the Global Digital Compact. Sign the open letter now  The nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation provides the essential infrastructure for free knowledge. We host Wikipedia the free online encyclopedia created edited and verified by volunteers around the world as well as many other vital community projects. All of which is made possible thanks to donations from individuals like you. We welcome anyone who shares our vision to join us in collecting and sharing knowledge that fully represents human diversity. Protect and sustain Wikipedia Donate Now Donations are secure English   Franais  Espaol Deutsch 1 Wikimedia projects belong to everyone You made it. It is yours to use. For free. That means you can use it adapt it or share what you find on Wikimedia sites. Just do not write your own bio or copypaste it into your homework. 2 We respect your data and privacy We do not sell your email address or any of your personal information to third parties. More information about our privacy practices are available at the Wikimedia Foundation privacy policy donor privacy policy and data retention guidelines. 3 People like you keep Wikipedia accurate Readers verify the facts. Articles are collaboratively created and edited by a community of volunteers using reliable sources so no single person or company owns a Wikipedia article. The Wikimedia Foundation does not write or edit but you and everyone you know can help. 4 Not all wikis are Wikimedia The word wiki refers to a website built using collaborative editing software. Projects with no past or existing affiliation with Wikipedia or the Wikimedia Foundation such as Wikileaks and wikiHow also use the term. Although these sites also use wiki in their name they have nothing to do with Wikimedia. 280000 editors contribute to Wikimedia projects every month Share on X 100 million media files on Wikimedia Commons and counting Share on X 
1.5  billion unique devices access Wikimedia projects every month Share on X Research We conduct our own research and partner with researchers worldwide to address change in society and technology. More about research Technology From site reliability to machine learning our opensource technology makes Wikipedia faster more reliable and more accessible worldwide. More about technology Advocacy We fight to protect everyones right to access free and open knowledge. More about advocacy Collaborative projects are the core of the Wikimedia movement Our volunteers build tools share photos write articles and are working to connect all the knowledge that exists. See all projects Wikipedia Free encyclopedia written in over 300 languages by volunteers around the world. Visit Wikipedia Wikimedia Commons The worlds largest freetouselibrary of illustrations photos drawings videos and music. Visit Wikimedia Commons See what we have been up to Carta aberta para proteger a Wikipdia e outros projetos de interesse pblico no Pacto Digital Global Advocacy Uma nova carta aberta da Fundao Wikimedia a organizao sem fins lucrativos que opera a Wikipdia e outros projetos Wikimedia e afiliadas do Movimento Wikimedia ao redor do mundo apela aos Estados Membros da ONU para protegerem a Wikipdia e outros projetos de interesse pblico no futuro Pacto Digital Global. 24 April 2024 By Wikimedia Read more Wikimedia Foundation and global communities call on UN Member States to protect Wikipedia and other public interest projects in the Global Digital Compact Advocacy New open letter calls for UN Member States to include three key commitments in the Global Digital Compact that can allow public interest projects and the people who create them to thrive. 23 April 2024 By Wikimedia Foundation Read more Wikimedians are heroes of free knowledge Armin Aghayan Editor since 2013 Wikimedia community Sam Oyeyele Editor since 2011 Wikimedia community Emily TempleWood Editor since 2007 Wikimedia community Throughout history knowledge has been controlled by a powerful few. Wikipedia needs knowledge from all languages and cultures. The internet has become the default for accessing informationwomen people of color and the global south remain underrepresented. We invite you to help correct history. Join the movement Help us unlock the worlds knowledge. As a nonprofit Wikipedia and our related free knowledge projects are powered primarily through donations. Donate now Contact us Questions about the Wikimedia Foundation or our projects Get in touch with our team. Contact Follow Facebook X Instagram LinkedIn Photo credits Tiny Big Picture Tiny Big Picture for the Wikimedia Foundation CC BYSA 
4.0  Tiny Big Picture Tiny Big Picture for the Wikimedia Foundation CC BYSA 
4.0  Armine Aghayan File provided by Wikimedia Commons Victor Grigas CC BYSA 
3.0  Sam Oye  Wiki Indaba 2017 File provided by Wikimedia Commons Zachary McCuneWikimedia Foundation CC BYSA 
4.0  Emily TempleWood at Wikimania 2014 File provided by Wikimedia Commons Victor GrigasWikimedia Foundation CC BYSA 
3.0  Tiny Big Picture  Homepage Banner Tiny Big Picture for the Wikimedia Foundation CC BYSA 
4.0  Wikimedia Conference 2017 File provided by Wikimedia Commons Jason KrgerWikimedia Deutschland e.V. CC BYSA 
4.0  PapaulTshibamba3 File provided by Wikimedia Commons Victor Grigas CC BY SA 
3.0  SOPA protest in Midtown NYC File provided by Wikimedia Commons Zachary McCune CC BYSA 
4.0  Wikipedia logo File provided by Wikimedia Commons Nohat Paullusmagnus Wikimedia CCBYSA 
3.0  Wikimedia Commons logo File provided by Wikimedia Commons Reidab UserGrunt 3247 Public domain ArtFeminism Wikipedia editathon File provided by Wikimedia Commons Jens Mohr CC BYSA 
3.0  The Wikimedia Foundation Inc is a nonprofit charitable organization dedicated to encouraging the growth development and distribution of free multilingual content and to providing the full content of these wikibased projects to the public free of charge. Careers Contact Projects Wikipedia Wikibooks Wikiversity Wikinews Wiktionary Wikisource Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikimedia Commons Wikidata Wikispecies Wikifunctions MediaWiki Movement Affiliates Wikimedia Chapters Wikimedia Thematic Organizations Wikimedia User Groups Other Terms of use Privacy policy Disclaimers Accessibility statement Cookie statement Except where otherwise noted the content of this site is licensed under a Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike 
4.0  International license. Powered by WordPress.com VIP. Automattic Privacy Notice.