File:Pharaoh A serekh.svg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FilePharaoh A serekh.svg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this PNG preview of this SVG file 381  538 pixels. Other resolutions 170  240 pixels  340  480 pixels  544  768 pixels  725  1024 pixels  1450  2048 pixels. Original file SVG file nominally 381  538 pixels file size 26 KB This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionPharaoh A serekh.svg English The serekh of the Pharaoh A from Early Dynastic Egypt Date Early Dynastic Period Source Baker Darrell D. 2008. Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume 1 Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC. Egypt The American University in Cairo Press. p. 5. ISBN 9789774162213. Author Unknown authorUnknown author Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is considered part of national folklore in Egypt and is in the public domain as per Article 142 of Intellectual Property Law 82 of 2002. Article 138 of the same law defines national folklore as any expression which consists of distinctive elements reflecting the traditional popular heritage which originated or developed in Egypt including in particular a Oral expressions such as folk tales poetry and charades and other folklore b Musical expressions such as popular songs accompanied by music c Motion expressions such as popular dances plays artistic forms and rituals d Tangible expressions such as Products of popular plastic art particularly drawings with lines and colors engravings sculpture ceramics pottery woodwork and any inlaid designs mosaics metal or jewelry handwoven bags needlework textiles carpets and clothes Musical instruments Architectural forms. This is a faithful photographic reproduction of a twodimensional public domain work of art. The work of art itself is in the public domain for the following reason Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. You must also include a United States public domain tag to indicate why this work is in the public domain in the United States. Note that a few countries have copyright terms longer than 70 years Mexico has 100 years Jamaica has 95 years Colombia has 80 years and Guatemala and Samoa have 75 years. This image may not be in the public domain in these countries which moreover do not implement the rule of the shorter term. Honduras has a general copyright term of 75 years but it does implement the rule of the shorter term. Copyright may extend on works created by French who died for France in World War II more information Russians who served in the Eastern Front of World War II known as the Great Patriotic War in Russia and posthumously rehabilitated victims of Soviet repressions more information. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse The official position taken by the Wikimedia Foundation is that faithful reproductions of twodimensional public domain works of art are public domain. This photographic reproduction is therefore also considered to be in the public domain in the United States. In other jurisdictions reuse of this content may be restricted see Reuse of PDArt photographs for details. PDArt template without license parameter please specify why the underlying work is public domain in both the source country and the United States Usage PDArt
1 deathyearyear of authors deathcountrysource country where parameter 1 can be PDoldauto PDoldautoexpired PDoldauto1996 PDold100 or similar. See CommonsMultilicense copyright tags for more information. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts media type imagesvgxml File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2202 7 December 2022 381  538 26 KB Di theythem Uploaded a work by Unknown author from Baker Darrell D. 2008. Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume 1 Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC. Egypt The American University in Cairo Press. p. 5. ISBN 9789774162213. with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed A pharaoh List of pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on de.wikipedia.org A Pharao Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on uk.wikipedia.org   Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Width 1
07.5 52
83 mm Height 1
51.9 22
45 mm Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFilePharaohAserekh.svg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width