Wikipedia:Please clarify - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 When and how to flag unclear text 
2 How to mark articles for clarification 
3 How to improve articles that need clarification 
4 Specific clarification 
5 See also Toggle See also subsection 
5.1 Related inline templates 
5.2 Messagebox templates 
5.3 Related pages 
6 References Toggle the table of contents WikipediaPlease clarify 13 languages Espaol  Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Trke  Edit links Project page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia For more help with unclear text see WPUNCLEAR. WPCONFUSE redirects here. Not to be confused with WikipediaEditors who may be confused. Wikipedia information page This is an information page. It is not one of Wikipedias policies or guidelines rather its purpose is to explain certain aspects of the WikipediaWriting better articles guideline. It may reflect differing levels of consensus and vetting. Shortcuts WPCLARIFY WPCONFUSE The aim of this page is to describe ways to clarify text or request such clarification. There are inline cleanup tags to flag specific wording that is likely to be confusing to the average reader. When and how to flag unclear text It is always best to take care of something when you notice it but that is not always possible. You can choose one of these templates that tag text with inline messages to request specific clarifications that you cannot provide yourself Clarify to mark individual phrases or sentences Confusing to mark sections or entire articles though this is undesirable because it makes it unclear what exactly needs to be improved Definition needed to mark a term as ambiguous or unclear and in need of a definition Examples to mark individual phrases or sentences which require examples for clarification Explain to mark individual phrases or sections which require further explanation for general i.e. nonexpert readers Non sequitur to mark individual mentions of someone or something in an outofcontext way the relevance of which is unclear When using these templates be specific mark individual phrases sentences and sections in preference to entire articles. Also be sure to leave specific suggestions for improvement on the articles talkpage. The templates pages will almost always have additional documentation on usage and parameters. If not you can leave a message on the templates talk page requesting such information be added. How to mark articles for clarification To ask for clarification for a particular phrase or sentence simply type clarify or what after the phrase or sentence to display a superscripted tag the tag will link here This is a confusing sentence which needs readers to apply much energy and time in order to understand the implicit meanings behind it and needs to be clarifiedrewritten.clarification needed To ask for further explanation of a point made in a particular phrase or sentence simply type explain or elucidate after the phrase or sentence to display a superscripted tag the tag will link here This sentence contains unexplained jargon.further explanation needed To ask for clarification for a particular section simply type Confusingsection at the top of the section to generate the following tagbox This section may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the section. There might be a discussion about this on the talk page. July 2019 Learn how and when to remove this message then update the articles talk page with specific aspects to be improved. To ask for clarification for an entire article consider first whether it would be more productive to tag individual phrases sentences or sections with clarify. If you cannot identify specific parts of the article that need clarification write what aspects of the article you believe need clarification on the articles talk page before tagging the entire article with confusing. How to improve articles that need clarification Explain jargon Define technical terms Add a brief definition when first using new terms like blog a web log of journal entries Add a link to an unfamiliar topic Define extra terms early such as Related terms include Explain regional variations and the slang of certain professions e.g. Massachusetts rotary Could it be shorter Some guidelines which often help Delete extraneous rambling words especially weasel words andor peacock terms Replace clauses with adverbs to limit prepositions to about four per sentence Replace longer words with shorter words Split long sentences into shorter sentences again four prepositions per sentence Use idioms or familiar phrases rather than electron flow field use electric current replace computer program text with source code idioms seem simpler as in viewpoint vs. idiosyncratic approach to the perceived issue Compare two sentences Notwithstanding the controversy she with practiced skill proceeded to navigate MegaX Corporation through difficult financial straits versus Despite the controversy she navigated MegaX through difficult financial straits two prepositions and note the removal of nonneutral assessment. Add a diagram or photo Complex text might be illustrated by a diagram. Wikimedia Commons also has over 12 million images which can be searched such as for galaxy. Even if the image or diagram is not exact mention extra details in the captionarea or use TemplateSuperimpose or TemplateLocation map to overlay a custom labelsymbol onto an image. Add a wikitable or list Multicolumn wikitables could clarify groups of data however simple lists with colonasterisk  bullets might be enough. See spark plug with a list of risksbenefits. Make it clear whats happening and to what A common example is a vague pronoun reference Emily was friends with Francine until she changed her job vague Who changed jobs Pronoun she equally applies to both. Also referring back to a list but not specifying the entry. Use specific wording rather than vague whenever possible For example instead of saying in the old days specify the time period you are referring to say the 
19 th century or the 19
60 s. Similarly do not reference now the word Recently or Soon or their synonyms will become meaningless quickly. Use As of or a specific date. Make sure youre using the right words In one of the great critiques of a fellow author Mark Twain listed eighteen rules of writing romantic fiction violated by James Fenimore Cooper.1 Besides the criticism of Coopers characterisation and plot Twain also said that a writer should Avoid slovenliness of form Employ a simple and straightforward style Eschew surplusage see KISS principle Not omit necessary details Say what he is proposing to say not merely come near it. Avoid euphemisms we dont have to bowdlerize Use good grammar Use the right word not its second cousin Check your intent Wikipedia is a place to inform and to educate. It is not a technical journal. Information from technical journals might need to be reduced to short sentences four prepositions because some journals encourage writing multilevel sentences spanning fifteen lines with subsubclauses. Check your spelling Usually misspelled words are obvious in their intent e.g. Qualty is obviously Quality however Tedting could be Testing or Texting or editing. If it is not actually misspelled or it is intended to be so use the Sic template. Make use of headings A huge block of text can be daunting but dividing it into sections and subsections can organize a logical structure onto the text separating statements into each grouped section. Specific clarification There are some common situations where use of a more specific clarification template might make the desired clarification clearer. A common case is an article citing a scientific measurement without indicating how the measurement was taken. For example the following statement about solar intensity at the earths surface without specifying the suns elevation could be annotated with the following tag The following tag links to a Wikipedia project to clear bias based on the source of the information The suns intensity is 90 watts per square meter.where See also Distinguish Related inline templates Ambiguous Clarify Clarify span Definition Explain Non sequitur Technical statement Vague Messagebox templates Confusing Confusing section Context Technical Related pages WikipediaCiting sources WikipediaExpert help WikipediaExplain jargon WikipediaTemplate messagesCleanup for an overview of cleanup templates of various formats References  Fenimore Coopers Literary Offences by Mark Twain v t e Inline cleanup tags Attribution Among whom According to whom Attribution needed By whom From whom Like whom To whom Who With whom Clarity Ambiguous Clarify Clarify span Clarify timeframe Context inline Expand acronym Incomprehensible inline Incomprehensible span Key needed Non sequitur Sentence fragment Which calendar Miscellaneous Chinese script needed inline Copyright violation Copyvio link Data missing Disambiguation needed External links inline Improve caption Needs IPA Original research inline Original research span Pronunciation needed Script needed inline Spam link Synthesis inline Synthesis span Under discussion inline Verify spelling Whose translation Neutrality Buzzword inline Compared to Editorializing Fact or opinion Opinion Peacock inline POV statement Promotion inline Unbalanced opinion Weasel inline Weasel word some span Precision By how much Definition Definition needed Example needed Example needed span Explain How How often Misquoted Quantify Specify Vague When Where Which Who else Why Year needed Excessive Overly detailed inline Duplication span Importance inline Relevance inline Undue weight inline Globalize inline Timesensitivity Anachronism inline Clarify timeframe Current event inline Is this date calibrated Update after Update inline Update span Verifiability Dubious Contradictory inline Disputed inline Dubious Dubious span Inconsistent Needs independent confirmation Speculation inline Bare URLs Bare URL inline Bare URL nonHTML Bare URL AV media Bare URL PDF Bare URL image Bare URL DOC Bare URL plain text Bare URL spreadsheet Incomplete or broken citation Author incomplete Author missing Date missing Dead link Edition needed Episode needed Full citation needed Incomplete short citation ISBN missing Moved resource Page needed Place missing Publisher missing Season needed Time needed Title incomplete Title missing Volume needed Year missing Missing or problematic reference Additional citation needed Better source needed Better source needed example Check quotation Chronology citation needed Circular reference Citation needed Citation needed span Citation not found Close paraphrasing inline COI source Deprecated inline Excessive citations inline Failed verification Failed verification span Image reference needed Irrelevant citation Medical citation needed Medical citation needed span Nonspecific Not verified in body Obsolete source Page range too broad Primary source inline Promotional source Quote without source Request quotation Request quotation span Retracted Scientific citation needed Selfpublished inline Tertiary source inline Thirdparty inline Unreliable fringe source Unreliable medical source Unreliable source Verify quote Verify source Wording Buzzword inline Colloquialism Copy edit inline Neologism inline Technical inline Tone inline General advice Citing sources Reliable sources Maintenance template removal Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Referencing styles Inline cleanup templates WikiProject Inline Templates Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaPleaseclarifyoldid1220271130 Categories Wikipedia information pages Wikipedia howto Hidden categories Wikipedia semiprotected project pages Wikipedia moveprotected project pages This page was last edited on 22 April 2024 at 1949 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width