Ka (pharaoh) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Reign 
3 Tomb 
4 Gallery 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ka pharaoh 37 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Simple English Slovenina   srpski Suomi Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Predynastic pharaoh of Upper Egypt Ka Sekhen Vessel found at Tarkhan bearing the serekh of King Ka. Petrie Museum London Pharaoh Reign 
32 nd century BC Predecessor IryHor Successor Scorpion II Narmer Royal titulary Horus name Sekhen sn Embraced by Horus  He who embraces Horus Consort Ha1 Burial Chambers B7 B9 Umm elQaab Dynasty Dynasty 0 Ka also alternatively Sekhen23 was a Predynastic pharaoh of Upper Egypt belonging to Dynasty 0. He probably reigned during the first half of the 
32 nd century BC. The length of his reign is unknown. Nameedit The correct reading of Kas name remains uncertain.4 There are vessel inscriptions which show a serekh with a typical Kasymbol both written upright correctly but there are also inscriptions presenting an upright serekh with an upsidedown Kasymbol inside. The second form of that writing indicates a reading as Sekhen meaning to embrace someone rather than Ka.5 It was also thought to be the birth name of Narmer.6 Because the reading of the name is so uncertain Egyptologists and writing experts such as Ludwig David Morenz prefer a neutral reading as King Arms.7 Kas personal name may have been king Ap.8 Reignedit Map of the locations where Kas serekhs have been found. Ka ruled over Thinis in the first half of the 
32 nd century BC and was buried at Umm elQaab. He most likely was the immediate successor to IryHor and was succeeded either by Narmer or by Scorpion II. He is the earliest known Egyptian king with a serekh inscribed on a number of artifacts. This may thus be an innovation of his reign.9 Ka is one of the best attested predynastic kings with Narmer and Scorpion II. Beyond Abydos he is attested in the predynastic necropolis of Adaima in Upper Egypt10 and in the north in Tarkhan Helwan Tell Ibrahim Awad Tell elFarkha Eastern Nile Delta Wadi Tumilat and as far north as Tel Lod in the Southern Levant.11 The number of artifacts bearing Kas serekh found outside Abydos is much greater than that of his predecessor.11 This may be the sign of an increasing influence and perhaps conquest of larger portions of Egypt by the Thinite kings.11 Tombedit Two underground chambers B7 and B9 in the Umm elQaab necropolis of Abydos are believed to be part of the tomb of King Ka. Each chamber is 
1.9 0 m deep B.7 is 
6.0   
3.2  m while B.9 is slightly smaller at 
5.9  x 
3.1  m the two chambers are 
1.8 0 m apart.11 Kas tomb was first excavated by Flinders Petrie in 1902. The excavations yielded fragments of flint knife and pottery. In the southernmost chamber B7 more than forty inscriptions have been found on tall jars and cylinder vessels as well as a seal impression.1112 The tomb of Ka B7 B9 is close to that of IryHor B1 B2 and Narmer B17 B18. Furthermore it is located within a sequential order linking the older U cemetery with the First Dynasty tombs thus suggesting that Ka succeeded IryHor and preceded Narmer on the throne.13 A cylinder jar found within the tomb along with Kas name has inscribed the name Ha wife of the Horus Ka.8 Galleryedit Vessel from Kas tomb in Abydos bearing Kas serekh on display at the British Museum. Seal impression with Kas serekh. Note the absence of the Horus falcon. British Museum. Shard bearing Kas serekh from his tomb in Abydos.
14 page needed Shard bearing Kas serekh from his tomb. Kas tomb in the Umm elQaab Names of Ka and Ha on a jar. Referencesedit  Petrie W.M. Flinders 1923. A History of Egypt Volume I 10 ed.. Methuen  Co. LTD. p. 4.  Rice Michael 1999 Whos Who in Ancient Egypt Routledge p. 86.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Mnchner gyptologische Studien Heft 49 Mainz  P. von Zabern 1999 ISBN 3805325916 available online Archived 20151222 at the Wayback Machine see p. 3637  Wilkinson 1999 pp. 5759.  Kaplony Peter 1982 Kleine Beitrge zu den Inschriften der gyptischen Frhzeit MDAIK in German 38 Berlin Deutsches Archologisches Institut OrientAbteilung Hrsg.. von Zabern 221 229.  Baumgartel Elise Jenny 1975 Some remarks on the origins of the titles of the Archaic Egyptian Kings Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 61 London Egypt Exploration Society 31.  Morenz Ludwig David BildBuchstaben und symbolische Zeichen in German pp. 1068.  a b Petrie W.M. Flinders 1923. A History of Egypt Volume I 10 ed.. Methuen  Co. LTD. p. 4.  Wilkinson 1999 pp. 
57 f.  Grimal N 1999 BIFAO p. 451.  a b c d e Raffaele Francesco. Dynasty 0 PDF.  Gilroy Thomas 2001 Forgotten Serekhs in the Royal Ontario Museum Gttinger Miszellen 180 Gttingen gyptologisches Seminar der Universitt Gttingen 6776 Fig. 2 Tafel I b ISSN 03443
85 X.  Barta Winfried 1982 Zur Namensform und zeitlichen Einordnung des Knigs Ro GM in German 53 1113.  Wilkinson 1999. Bibliographyedit Wilkinson Toby AH 1999 Early Dynastic Egypt LondonNew York Routledge ISBN 0415186331 External linksedit Media related to King Ka at Wikimedia Commons Preceded by IryHor King of Thinis Succeeded by Scorpion II Narmer v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKapharaoholdid1218898133 Categories 
32 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Wadi Tumilat Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2013 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 14 April 2024 at 1440 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width