Osiris - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology of the name 
2 Appearance 
3 Early mythology Toggle Early mythology subsection 
3.1 Father of Horus 
3.2 Ram god 
4 Mythology 
5 Worship Toggle Worship subsection 
5.1 Death or transition and institution as god of the afterlife 
5.2 Ikhernofret Stela 
5.3 Wheat and clay rituals 
6 Judgement 
7 GrecoRoman era Toggle GrecoRoman era subsection 
7.1 Hellenization 
7.2 Destruction of cult 
8 See also 
9 Notes 
10 References 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Osiris 87 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch   Asturianu Azrbaycanca       Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano    Kiswahili  Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy    Bahasa Melayu     Mngdngng  Nhuatl Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Ozbekcha    Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray   Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian god of the afterlife For other uses see Osiris disambiguation. Usire redirects here. For the 2001 film see Usire film. Aser redirects here. Not to be confused with Acer. Osiris Osiris lord of the dead and of rebirth. His green skin symbolizes rebirth. Name in hieroglyphs Major cult center Busiris Abydos Symbol Crook and flail Atef crown ostrich feathers fish mummy gauze djed Personal information Parents Geb and Nut Ipy1 Siblings Isis Set Nephthys Heruur Consort Isis Offspring Horus Anubis in some accounts Osiris osars from Egyptian wsjra is the god of fertility agriculture the afterlife the dead resurrection life and vegetation in ancient Egyptian religion. He was classically depicted as a greenskinned deity with a pharaohs beard partially mummywrapped at the legs wearing a distinctive atef crown and holding a symbolic crook and flail.5 He was one of the first to be associated with the mummy wrap. When his brother Set cut him up into pieces after killing him Osiris wife Isis found all the pieces and wrapped his body up enabling him to return to life. Osiris was widely worshipped until the decline of ancient Egyptian religion during the rise of Christianity in the Roman Empire.67 Osiris was at times considered the eldest son of the earth god Geb8 and the sky goddess Nut as well as being brother and husband of Isis and brother of Set Nephthys and Horus the Elder with Horus the Younger being considered his posthumously begotten son.89 Through syncretism with Iah he was also a god of the Moon.10 Osiris was the judge and lord of the dead and the underworld the Lord of Silence11 and KhentiAmentiu meaning Foremost of the Westerners.12 In the Old Kingdom 26862181 BC the pharaoh was considered a son of the sun god Ra who after his death ascended to join Ra in the sky. After the spread of the Osiris cult however the kings of Egypt were associated with Osiris in death  as Osiris rose from the dead they would unite with him and inherit eternal life through imitative magic.1314 Through the hope of new life after death Osiris began to be associated with the cycles in nature in particular the sprouting of vegetation and the annual flooding of the Nile River as well as the heliacal rising of Orion and Sirius at the start of the new year.15 He became the sovereign that granted all life He Who is Permanently Benign and Youthful.15 The first evidence of the worship of Osiris is from the middle of the Fifth Dynasty of Egypt 
25 th century BC although it is likely that he was worshiped much earlier16 the KhentiAmentiu epithet dates to at least the First Dynasty and was also used as a pharaonic title. Most information available on the Osiris myth is derived from allusions in the Pyramid Texts at the end of the Fifth Dynasty later New Kingdom source documents such as the Shabaka Stone and The Contendings of Horus and Seth and much later in the narratives of Greek authors including Plutarch17 and Diodorus Siculus.18 Some Egyptologists believe the Osiris mythos may have originated in a former living ruler  possibly a shepherd who lived in Predynastic times 55003100 BC in the Nile Delta whose beneficial rule led to him being revered as a god. The accoutrements of the shepherd the crook and the flail  once insignia of the Delta god Andjety with whom Osiris was associated  support this theory.13 Etymology of the nameedit Head of the God Osiris c.595525 BC. Brooklyn Museum Osiris is a Latin transliteration of the Ancient Greek  IPA .si.ris which in turn is the Greek adaptation of the original name in the Egyptian language. In Egyptian hieroglyphs the name appears as wsjr which some Egyptologists instead choose to transliterate as sjr or jsjrj. Since hieroglyphic writing lacks vowels Egyptologists have vocalized the name in various ways such as Asar Ausar Ausir Wesir Usir or Usire. Several proposals have been made for the etymology and meaning of the original name as Egyptologist Mark J. Smith notes none are fully convincing.19 Most take wsjr as the accepted transliteration following Adolf Erman John Gwyn Griffiths 1980 bearing in mind Ermans emphasis on the fact that the name must begin with an sic w proposes a derivation from wsr with an original meaning of The Mighty One.20 Kurt Sethe 1930 proposes a compound stjrt meaning seat of the eye in a hypothetical earlier form wstjrt this is rejected by Griffiths on phonetic grounds.20 David Lorton 1985 takes up this same compound but explains stjrt as signifying product something made Osiris representing the product of the ritual mummification process.19 Wolfhart Westendorf 1987 proposes an etymology from wstjrt she who bears the eye.2122 Mark J. Smith 2017 makes no definitive proposals but asserts that the second element must be a form of jrj to do make rather than jrt eye.19 However recently alternative transliterations have been proposed Yoshi Muchiki 1990 reexamines Ermans evidence that the throne hieroglyph in the word is to be read ws and finds it unconvincing suggesting instead that the name should be read sjr on the basis of Aramaic Phoenician and Old South Arabian transcriptions readings of the throne sign in other words and comparison with st Isis.23 James P. Allen 2000 reads the word as jsjrt24 but revises the reading 2013 to jsjrj and derives it from jsjrj meaning engendering male principle.25 Appearanceedit Scenes from the north wall of the burial chamber of Tutankhamun. On the left side Tutankhamun followed by his ka an aspect of his soul embraces Osiris.26 Osiris is represented in his most developed form of iconography wearing the Atef crown which is similar to the White crown of Upper Egypt but with the addition of two curling ostrich feathers at each side. He also carries the crook and flail. The crook is thought to represent Osiris as a shepherd god. The symbolism of the flail is more uncertain with shepherds whip flywhisk or association with the god Andjety of the ninth nome of Lower Egypt proposed.15 He was commonly depicted as a pharaoh with a complexion of either green the color of rebirth or black alluding to the fertility of the Nile floodplain in mummiform wearing the trappings of mummification from chest downward.27 Early mythologyedit This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. January 2024 Learn how and when to remove this message The Pyramid Texts describe early conceptions of an afterlife in terms of eternal travelling with the sun god amongst the stars. Amongst these mortuary texts at the beginning of the Fourth Dynasty is found An offering the king gives and Anubis. By the end of the Fifth Dynasty the formula in all tombs becomes An offering the king gives and Osiris.28 Father of Horusedit The gods Osiris Anubis and Horus. Wall painting in the tomb of Horemheb KV57. The syncretized god SekerOsiris. His iconography combines that of Osiris atefcrown crook and flail and Seker hawk head wassceptre. Osiris is the mythological father of the god Horus whose conception is described in the Osiris myth a central myth in ancient Egyptian belief. The myth describes Osiris as having been killed by his brother Set who wanted Osiris throne. His wife Isis finds the body of Osiris and hides it in the reeds where it is found and dismembered by Set. Isis retrieves and joins the fragmented pieces of Osiris then briefly revives him by use of magic. This spell gives her time to become pregnant by Osiris. Isis later gives birth to Horus. Since Horus was born after Osiris resurrection Horus became thought of as a representation of new beginnings and the vanquisher of the usurper Set. PtahSeker who resulted from the identification of the creator god Ptah with Seker thus gradually became identified with Osiris the two becoming PtahSekerOsiris. As the sun was thought to spend the night in the underworld and was subsequently reborn every morning PtahSekerOsiris was identified as king of the underworld god of the afterlife life death and regeneration. Osiris also has the aspect and form of SekerOsiris. Ram godedit Banebdjed b
3 nbd in hieroglyphs Osiris soul or rather his ba was occasionally worshipped in its own right almost as if it were a distinct god especially in the Delta city of Mendes. This aspect of Osiris was referred to as Banebdjedet which is grammatically feminine also spelt Banebded or Banebdjed literally the ba of the lord of the djed which roughly means The soul of the lord of the pillar of continuity. The djed a type of pillar was usually understood as the backbone of Osiris. The Nile supplying water and Osiris strongly connected to the vegetable regeneration who died only to be resurrected represented continuity and stability. As Banebdjed Osiris was given epithets such as Lord of the Sky and Life of the sun god Ra. Ba does not mean soul in the western sense and has to do with power reputation force of character especially in the case of a god. Since the ba was associated with power and also happened to be a word for ram in Egyptian Banebdjed was depicted as a ram or as Ramheaded. A living sacred ram was kept at Mendes and worshipped as the incarnation of the god and upon death the rams were mummified and buried in a ramspecific necropolis. Banebdjed was consequently said to be Horus father as Banebdjed was an aspect of Osiris. Regarding the association of Osiris with the ram the gods traditional crook and flail are the instruments of the shepherd which has suggested to some scholars also an origin for Osiris in herding tribes of the upper Nile. Mythologyedit Further information Osiris myth The family of Osiris. Osiris on a lapis lazuli pillar in the middle flanked by Horus on the left and Isis on the right Twentysecond Dynasty Louvre Paris Plutarch recounts one version of the Osiris myth in which Set Osiris brother along with the Queen of Ethiopia conspired with 72 accomplices to plot the assassination of Osiris.29 Set fooled Osiris into getting into a box which Set then shut sealed with lead and threw into the Nile. Osiris wife Isis searched for his remains until she finally found him embedded in a tamarisk tree trunk which was holding up the roof of a palace in Byblos on the Phoenician coast. She managed to remove the coffin and retrieve her husbands body. In one version of the myth Isis used a spell to briefly revive Osiris so he could impregnate her. After embalming and burying Osiris Isis conceived and gave birth to their son Horus. Thereafter Osiris lived on as the god of the underworld. Because of his death and resurrection Osiris was associated with the flooding and retreating of the Nile and thus with the yearly growth and death of crops along the Nile valley. Diodorus Siculus gives another version of the myth in which Osiris was described as an ancient king who taught the Egyptians the arts of civilization including agriculture then travelled the world with his sister Isis the satyrs and the nine muses before finally returning to Egypt. Osiris was then murdered by his evil brother Typhon who was identified with Set. Typhon divided the body into twentysix pieces which he distributed amongst his fellow conspirators in order to implicate them in the murder. Isis and Hercules Horus avenged the death of Osiris and slew Typhon. Isis recovered all the parts of Osiris body except the phallus and secretly buried them. She made replicas of them and distributed them to several locations which then became centres of Osiris worship.3031 Worshipedit A personified Eye of Horus offers incense to the enthroned god Osiris in a painting from the tomb of Pashedu thirteenth century BC32 Annual ceremonies were performed in honor of Osiris33 in various places across Egypt.34 Evidences of which were discovered during underwater archaeological excavations of Franck Goddio and his team in the sunken city of ThonisHeracleion.35 These ceremonies were fertility rites which symbolised the resurrection of Osiris.36 Recent scholars emphasize the androgynous character of Osiris fertility clear from surviving material. For instance Osiris fertility has to come both from being castratedcutintopieces and the reassembly by female Isis whose embrace of her reassembled Osiris produces the perfect king Horus.37 Further as attested by tombinscriptions both women and men could syncretize identify with Osiris at their death another set of evidence that underlines Osiris androgynous nature.38 Death or transition and institution as god of the afterlifeedit OsirisNepra with wheat growing from his body. From a basrelief at Philae.39 The sprouting wheat implied resurrection.40 Plutarch and others have noted that the sacrifices to Osiris were gloomy solemn and mournful... Isis and Osiris 69 and that the great mystery festival celebrated in two phases began at Abydos commemorating the death of the god on the same day that grain was planted in the ground Isis and Osiris 13. The annual festival involved the construction of Osiris Beds formed in shape of Osiris filled with soil and sown with seed.41 The germinating seed symbolized Osiris rising from the dead. An almost pristine example was found in the tomb of Tutankhamun.42 The imiut emblem an image of a stuffed headless skin of an animal tied to a pole mounting a pot was a symbol associated both with Osiris as god of the underworld and with Anubis god of mummification was sometimes included among a deceased persons funerary equipment.13 The first phase of the festival was a public drama depicting the murder and dismemberment of Osiris the search for his body by Isis his triumphal return as the resurrected god and the battle in which Horus defeated Set. According to Julius Firmicus Maternus of the fourth century this play was reenacted each year by worshippers who beat their breasts and gashed their shoulders.... When they pretend that the mutilated remains of the god have been found and rejoined...they turn from mourning to rejoicing. De Errore Profanarum Religionum. The passion of Osiris was reflected in his name Wenennefer the one who continues to be perfect which also alludes to his post mortem power.27 Ikhernofret Stelaedit Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Cosmology Duat Maat Mythology Index Numerology Philosophy Soul Practices Funerals Offerings Offering formula Temples Priestess of Hathor Pyramids Deities list Ogdoad Amun Amunet Hauhet Heh Kauket Kek Naunet Nu Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun Duau god F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mandulis Medjed Mafdet Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nemty Nekhbet Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Locations Aaru Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Aani Abtu Ankh Atef Atet Book of Thoth Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Griffin Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Hieracosphinx Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Matet boat Medjed Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Serpopard Set animal Shen ring Sphinx Tyet Uraeus Ushabti Wassceptre Winged sun Texts Funerary texts Amduat  Books of Breathing  Book of Caverns  Book of the Dead  Book of the Earth  Book of Gates Related religions Atenism Hermeticism Thelema Kemeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy  Church of the Most High Goddess Ancient Egypt portal v t e Much of the extant information about the rites of Osiris can be found on the Ikhernofret Stela at Abydos erected in the Twelfth Dynasty by Ikhernofret possibly a priest of Osiris or other official the titles of Ikhernofret are described in his stela from Abydos during the reign of Senwosret III Pharaoh Sesostris about 1875 BC. The ritual reenactment of Osiriss funeral rites were held in the last month of the inundation the annual Nile flood coinciding with Spring and held at Abydos which was the traditional place where the body of Osiris drifted ashore after having been drowned in the Nile.43 The part of the myth recounting the chopping up of the body into 14 pieces by Set is not recounted in this particular stela. Although it is attested to be a part of the rituals by a version of the Papyrus Jumilhac in which it took Isis 12 days to reassemble the pieces coinciding with the festival of ploughing.44 Some elements of the ceremony were held in the temple while others involved public participation in a form of theatre. The Stela of Ikhernofret recounts the programme of events of the public elements over the five days of the Festival The First Day The Procession of Wepwawet A mock battle was enacted during which the enemies of Osiris are defeated. A procession was led by the god Wepwawet opener of the way. The Second Day The Great Procession of Osiris The body of Osiris was taken from his temple to his tomb. The boat he was transported in the Neshmet bark had to be defended against his enemies. The Third Day Osiris is mourned and the enemies of the land are destroyed. The Fourth Day Night Vigil Prayers and recitations are made and funeral rites performed. The Fifth Day Osiris is Reborn Osiris is reborn at dawn and crowned with the crown of Maat. The statue of Osiris is brought back to the temple.43 A rare sample of Egyptian terra cotta sculpture which may depict Isis mourning Osiris. The sculpture portrays a woman raising her right arm over her head a typical gesture of mourning. Muse du Louvre Paris. Wheat and clay ritualsedit Contrasting with the public theatrical ceremonies sourced from the Middle Kingdom Ikhernofret Stele more esoteric ceremonies were performed inside the temples by priests. Plutarch mentions that for much later period two days after the beginning of the festival the priests bring forth a sacred chest containing a small golden coffer into which they pour some potable water...and a great shout arises from the company for joy that Osiris is found or resurrected. Then they knead some fertile soil with the water...and fashion therefrom a crescentshaped figure which they cloth and adorn this indicating that they regard these gods as the substance of Earth and Water. Isis and Osiris 39. Yet his accounts were still obscure for he also wrote I pass over the cutting of the wood  opting not to describe it since he considered it as a most sacred ritual Ibid. 21. In the Osirian temple at Denderah an inscription translated by Budge Chapter XV Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection describes in detail the making of wheat paste models of each dismembered piece of Osiris to be sent out to the town where each piece is discovered by Isis. At the temple of Mendes figures of Osiris were made from wheat and paste placed in a trough on the day of the murder then water was added for several days until finally the mixture was kneaded into a mold of Osiris and taken to the temple to be buried the sacred grain for these cakes were grown only in the temple fields. Molds were made from the wood of a red tree in the forms of the sixteen dismembered parts of Osiris the cakes of divine bread were made from each mold placed in a silver chest and set near the head of the god with the inward parts of Osiris as described in the Book of the Dead XVII. Judgementedit Judgment scene from the Book of the Dead. In the three scenes from the Book of the Dead version from 1375 BC the dead man Hunefer is taken into the judgement hall by the jackalheaded Anubis. The next scene is the weighing of his heart against the feather of Maat with Ammut waiting the result and Thoth recording. Next the triumphant Hunefer having passed the test is presented by the falconheaded Horus to Osiris seated in his shrine with Isis and Nephthys. British Museum The idea of divine justice being exercised after death for wrongdoing during life is first encountered during the Old Kingdom in a Sixth Dynasty tomb containing fragments of what would be described later as the Negative Confessions performed in front of the 42 Assessors of Maat.45 At death a person faced judgment by a tribunal of fortytwo divine judges. If they led a life in conformance with the precepts of the goddess Maat who represented truth and right living the person was welcomed into the kingdom of Osiris. If found guilty the person was thrown to the souleating demon Ammit and did not share in eternal life.46 The person who is taken by the devourer is subject first to terrifying punishment and then annihilated. These depictions of punishment may have influenced medieval perceptions of the inferno in hell via early Christian and Coptic texts.47 Purification for those who are considered justified may be found in the descriptions of Flame Island where they experience the triumph over evil and rebirth. For the damned complete destruction into a state of nonbeing awaits but there is no suggestion of eternal torture.4849 During the reign of Seti I Osiris was also invoked in royal decrees to pursue the living when wrongdoing was observed but kept secret and not reported.50 GrecoRoman eraedit Hellenizationedit Bust of Serapis. The early Ptolemaic kings promoted a new god Serapis who combined traits of Osiris with those of various Greek gods and was portrayed in a Hellenistic form. Serapis was often treated as the consort of Isis and became the patron deity of the Ptolemies capital Alexandria.51 Serapiss origins are not known. Some ancient authors claim the cult of Serapis was established at Alexandria by Alexander the Great himself but most who discuss the subject of Serapiss origins give a story similar to that by Plutarch. Writing about 400 years after the fact Plutarch claimed that Ptolemy I established the cult after dreaming of a colossal statue at Sinope in Anatolia. His councillors identified the statue as the Greek god Pluto and said that the Egyptian name for Pluto was Serapis. This name may have been a Hellenization of OsirisApis.52 OsirisApis was a patron deity of the Memphite Necropolis and the father of the Apis bull who was worshipped there and texts from Ptolemaic times treat Serapis as the Greek translation of OsirisApis. But little of the early evidence for Serapiss cult comes from Memphis and much of it comes from the Mediterranean world with no reference to an Egyptian origin for Serapis so Mark Smith expresses doubt that Serapis originated as a Greek form of OsirisApiss name and leaves open the possibility that Serapis originated outside Egypt.53 Destruction of cultedit The Philae temple on Agilkia Island as seen from the Nile The cult of Isis and Osiris continued at Philae until at least the 4
50 s CE long after the imperial decrees of the late 
4 th century that ordered the closing of temples to pagan gods. Philae was the last major ancient Egyptian temple to be closed.54 See alsoedit Aaru Ancient Egyptian concept of the soul Tekaher KhentiAmentiu Mysteries of Osiris Traditional African religion portal Notesedit  Coptic  ousire Coptic pronunciation usir Phoenician 2 romanized sr34 Referencesedit  Hart George 20060421. A Dictionary of Egyptian Gods and Goddesses. Routledge. p. 100. ISBN 9781134930128.  KAI 31 47 Cippi of Melqart 48 Banobal stele 91 RS 367 504  Coptic Dictionary Online. corpling.uis.georgetown.edu. Retrieved 20170317.  Allen James P. 2010. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139486354.  Egyptian Mythology  Osiris Cult. www.touregypt.net in Russian. Retrieved 20181026.  Catholic Encyclopedia Theodosius I. Newadvent.org. 19120701. Retrieved 20120501.  History of the Later Roman Empire from the Death of Theodosius I. to the Death of Justinian The Suppression of Paganism  ch22 p. 371 John Bagnell Bury Courier Dover Publications 1958 ISBN 0486203999  a b Wilkinson Richard H. 2003. The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 105. ISBN 9780500051207.  Kane Chronicles  Quirke S. Spencer A. J. 1992. The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt. London The British Museum Press.  The Burden of Egypt J. A. Wilson p. 302 University of Chicago Press 
4 th imp 1963  Collier Mark Manley Bill 1998. How to Read Egyptian Hieroglyphs British Museum Press p. 41 ISBN 0714119105  a b c Strudwick Helen 2006. The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. New York Sterling Publishing Co. Inc. pp. 118119. ISBN 9781435146549.  Man Myth and Magic Osiris vol. 5 pp. 20872088 S.G.F. Brandon BPC Publishing 1971.  a b c The Oxford Guide Essential Guide to Egyptian Mythology Edited by Donald B. Redford pp. 302307 Berkley 2003 ISBN 0425190
96 X  Griffiths John Gwyn 1980. The Origins of Osiris and His Cult. Brill. p. 44  Isis and Osiris Plutarch translated by Frank Cole Babbitt 1936 vol. 5 Loeb Classical Library. Penelope.uchicago.edu  The Historical Library of Diodorus Siculus vol. 1 translated by G. Booth 1814.  a b c Smith Mark 2017. Following Osiris Perspectives on the Osirian Afterlife from Four Millennia. pp. 124125.  a b Griffiths John Gwyn 2018 1980. The Origins of Osiris and His Cult. pp. 8995.  Mathieu 2010 p. 79 harvnb error no target CITEREFMathieu2010 help  Mais qui est donc Osiris  Ou la politique sous le linceul de la religion  Westendorf Wolfhart 1987. Zur Etymologie des Namens Osiris ws.tjr.t die das Auge trgt. Form und Mass Beitrge zur Literatur Sprache und Kunst des Alten gypten Festschrift fr Gerhard Fecht zum 65. Geburtstag Am 6. Februar 1987 in German 456461.  Muchiki Yoshi 1990. On the transliteration of the name Osiris. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 76 191194. doi
10.1 177030751339007600127. S
2 CID 194037367.  Allen James P. 20100415. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139486354.  Allen James P. 2013. The Name of Osiris and Isis. Lingua Aegyptia. 21 914.  Reeves 1990 pp. 7273. sfn error no target CITEREFReeves1990 help  a b How to Read Egyptian Hieroglyphs Mark Collier  Bill Manley British Museum Press p. 42 1998 ISBN 0714119105  Architecture of the Afterlife Understanding Egypts pyramid tombs Ann Macy Roth Archaeology Odyssey Spring 1998  Plutarch 1874. Plutarchs Moralia On Isis and Osiris ch. 12. Retrieved 20120501. or Babbit translation.  Osiris Man Myth  Magic S.G.F Brandon Vol5 P2088 BPC Publishing.  The Historical Library of Diodorus Siculus translated by George Booth 1814. retrieved 3 June 2007. Google Books  Wilkinson 1992 pp. 4243. sfn error no target CITEREFWilkinson1992 help  Franck Goddio and David Fabre Osiris  Egypts Sunken Mysteries Flammarion 2017 ISBN 9782081378735  Racheli ShalomiHen The Writing of Gods the Evolution of Divine Classifiers in the Old Kingdom Wiesbaden Harrassowitz 2006 6995.  The Mysteries of Osiris at the British Museum  httpsbritishmuseum.tumblr.compost1516177634
22 themysteriesofosiris  Early 
20 thcentury scholar E.A. Wallis Budge over emphasizes Osiris action Osiris is closely connected with the germination of wheat the grain which is put into the ground is the dead Osiris and the grain which has germinated is the Osiris who has once again renewed his life. E.A. Wallis Budge Osiris and the Egyptian resurrection Volume 2 London P. L. Warner New York G. P. Putnams Sons 1911 32.  Ann M. Roth Father Earth Mother Sky Ancient Egyptian Beliefs about Conception and Fertility in Reading the Body Representations and Remains in the Archaeological Record ed. Alison E. Rautman Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Press 2000 187201.  Roth 199.  Egyptian ideas of the future life. E. A Wallis Budge chapter 1 E. A Wallis Budge org pub 1900  Routledge Dictionary of Egyptian Gods and Goddesses George Hart p119 Routledge 2005 ISBN 0415344956  Teeter Emily 2011. Religion and Ritual in Ancient Egypt. Cambridge University Press. pp. 5866  Osiris Bed Burton photograph p2024 The Griffith Institute.  a b The passion plays of osiris. ancientworlds.net. Archived from the original on 20070626.  J. Vandier Le Papyrus Jumilhac pp. 136137 Paris 1961  Studies in Comparative Religion General editor E. C Messenger Essay by A. Mallon S. J vol 25 p. 23 Catholic Truth Society 1934  Religion and Magic in Ancient Egypt Rosalie David pp. 158159 Penguin 2002 ISBN 0140262520  The Essential Guide to Egyptian Mythology The Oxford Guide Hell pp. 161162 Jacobus Van Dijk Berkley Reference 2003 ISBN 0425190
96 X  The Divine Verdict John Gwyn Griffiths p. 233 Brill Publications 1991 ISBN 9004092315  Letter Hell in the ancient world. Letter by Professor J. Gwyn Griffiths. The Independent. December 31 1993. Archived from the original on September 1 2012. Retrieved December 4 2017.  The Burden of Egypt J.A Wilson p. 243 University of Chicago Press 
4 th imp 1963 The INSCRIPTIONS OF REDESIYEH from the reign of Seti I include As for anyone who shall avert the face from the command of Osiris Osiris shall pursue him Isis shall pursue his wife Horus shall pursue his children among all the princes of the necropolis and they shall execute their judgment with him. Breasted Ancient Egyptian Records Vol 3 p. 86  Wilkinson 2003 pp. 127128.  Franoise Dunand and Christiane ZivieCoche 2004 Gods and Men in Egypt 3000 BCE to 395 CE pp. 214215  Smith 2017 pp. 390394.  Dijkstra Jitse H. F. 2008. Philae and the End of Egyptian Religion pp. 337348 External linksedit Wikisource has the text of The New Students Reference Work article Osiris. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Osiris. OsirisAncient Egypt on a Comparative Method v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Authority control databases International FAST VIAF National Catalonia Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Poland Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleOsirisoldid1219986395 Categories Osiris Agricultural gods Egyptian death gods Middle Eastern gods Egyptian underworld Fertility gods Health gods Hellenistic Egyptian deities Lifedeathrebirth gods Lunar gods Nature gods Primordial teachers Underworld gods Mythological kings Killed deities Chthonic beings Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles containing Copticlanguage text Pages with Coptic IPA CS1 Russianlanguage sources ru Harv and Sfn notarget errors CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 21 April 2024 at 0336 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width