Djet - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign 
3 Tomb 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Djet 48 languages   Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Ripoarisch Romn   Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh of first dynasty Djet Wadj Zet Uadji Ouenephes Vavenephis The famous stela of King Djet which once stood next to his tomb in the Umm elQaab Louvre Museum. Pharaoh Reign 10 years ca. 2980 BC Predecessor Djer Successor Merneith Den Royal titulary Horus name HorDjet rt Serpent of Horus Abydos King List Ita jt Turin King List ...tjuj ...tjwj 1 Consort Merneith Ahaneith Children Den Father Djer Mother Herneith Nakhtneith Burial Tomb Z Umm elQaab Dynasty First Dynasty Djet also known as Wadj Zet and Uadji in Greek possibly the pharaoh known as Uenephes or possibly Atothis was the fourth pharaoh of the First Dynasty successor of Djer. Djets Horus name means Horus Cobra2 or Serpent of Horus. Familyedit See also First Dynasty of Egypt family tree Djets queen was his sister Merneith who may have ruled as a pharaoh in her own right after his death.citation needed There is a possibility that a woman known as Ahaneith was also one of his wives. Djet and Merneiths son was Den and their grandson was Anedjib. Reignedit Ita cartouche name of Djet in the Abydos king list. How long Djet ruled is unknown. Only one Seker festival is attested by ivory labels dating to his reign whose duration is estimated to be anywhere between six and ten years. According to Wolfgang Helck he reigned 10 years.3 From a calendar entry Djer is known to have died on 7 Peret III while Djet began his reign on 22 Peret IV. The reason for the 45 days of interregnum is unknown. Details of Djets reign are lost in the lacunas of the Palermo Stone. However finds of vessel fragments and seal impressions prove that there were intense trading activities with Syria and Canaan at the time. Graves at Tarkhan and Saqqara dating to his reign yielded pottery from Canaan.4 Other activities can be inferred from the only two known years tablets of the ruler one of which is preserved in two copies. The reading of the events described on the tablets is highly problematic. Helck translated Year of the planning of the undergroundbasement  of the dual plant birth of lotus buds standing in the crown shrine of the two Ladies.5 The other year tablet mentions a victory the production birth of a statue and perhaps the creation of a fortress.6 Finally in Marsa Alam in Nubia the short inscription Hemka below Djet was discovered. 7 Clay seals prove that the official Amka begun his career under King Djer as manager of the Horsekhentidju estate. Under Djet Amka became royal steward. In the early years of the kings successor Amka died after he was appointed to regional responsibilities in the western Nile Delta.8 Other senior officials under Djet were Sekhemkasedj and Setka. Manetho mentions that in his reign a great famine seized Egypt. He also says that he erected pyramids near Kchm.9 Tombedit Fragment of an object bearing the serekh of Djet and the name of a court official Sekhemkasedj Egyptian Museum. Label of King Djet Ashmolean. Abydos Umm elQaab Tomb Z. Djets tomb is located at Abydos in Petries Tomb Z. It is located west of his father King Djers tomb. Surrounding Djets tomb are 174 subsidiary burials most of them being retainers that were sacrificed upon Djets death to serve him in the afterlife. Found within Djets tomb was a stele. This stele was a snake surmounted by a falcon Horus and could be interpreted to mean Horus the snake. Also found within the tomb was an ivory comb with the name of Djet on it along with a picture of the stele. Copper tools and pottery were also found in the tomb a common find in Egyptian tombs. There is evidence that Djets tomb was intentionally burned along with other tombs at Abydos from this time period.10 The tombs were later renovated because of the association with the cult of Osiris. Djet owes his fame to the survival in wellpreserved form of one of his artistically refined tomb steles. It is carved in relief with Djets Horus name and shows that the distinct Egyptian style had already become fully developed at that time. This stela was discovered in 1904 by mile Amlineau and is today on display at the Louvre museum. Another artistic landmark dated to Djets reign is his ivory comb 11 now housed in the Egyptian Museum. It is the earliest surviving depiction of the heavens symbolised by the outspread wings of a falcon. The wings carry the bark of Seker below the celestial bark Djets serekh is surrounded by two Was scepters and one Ankhsign. See alsoedit List of Pharaohs Ancient Egyptian retainer sacrifices Referencesedit  Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 2006 paperback p.16  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit Agyptologische Abhandlungen ISBN 3447026774 O. Harrassowitz 1987 p. 124  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge New edition 2001 ISBN 0415260116  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit Agyptologische Abhandlungen ISBN 3447026774 O. Harrassowitz 1987 p. 124  G. Dreyer Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo. MDAIK Nr. 59. 2003 p. 93  Z. Zaba The Rock Inscriptions of Lower Nubia p. 23941 Nr. A30  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt  Strategy Society and Security p. 146  Manetho 1940.  Baker Darrell D. 2008. Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume 1 Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC. Egypt The American University in Cairo Press. p. 95. ISBN 9789774162213.  Picture Bibliographyedit Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 7374 Toby A. H. Wilkinson Royal Annals of Ancient Egypt The Palermo Stone and Its Associated Fragments Kegan Paul International 2000. Manetho 1940 Manetho translated by Wadell W.G. Cambridgecitation CS1 maint location missing publisher link Preceded by Djer Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Merneith v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e First Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Pharaohs MenesNarmer HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Regents Neithhotep Merneith Queen consorts Benerib Herneith Penebui Nakhtneith Khenthap Semat Serethor Seshemetka Betrest Officials Amka Hemaka Sabef Meriiti Other people Ahaneith Artefacts and monuments Narmer macehead Narmer palette Den seal impressions Abydos boats MacGregor plaque Mastabas S3503 and S3504 Capital Thinis Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleDjetoldid1214775307 Categories 
30 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the First Dynasty of Egypt Djer Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 CS1 maint location missing publisher This page was last edited on 21 March 2024 at 0213 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width