Anedjib - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Identity 
3 Reign 
4 Tomb 
5 Finds associated to Anedjib 
6 Bibliography 
7 References 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Anedjib 45 languages  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Ripoarisch   Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Anedjib Adjib Enezib Miebds Pharaoh Anedjib on a stone bowl fragment Pharaoh Reign 810 years ca. 2930 BC Predecessor Den Successor Semerkhet Royal titulary Horus name HorAdjib rjb He with the bold heartforce of will Abydos King List Merbiape mrbj
3 p Beloved one of the brazen throne Saqqara Tablet Merybiapen mr.ijbj
3 pn Beloved one of the brazen throne Turin King List Merigeregipen mrjgrgipn Beloved founder of the brazen throne Prenomen Praenomen NisutBityNebuyMerbiape nsw.tbtynebwymrjbj
3 p King of Upper and Lower Egypt he of the two lords the beloved one of the brazen throne Consort Betrest  Children Semerkhet Father Den  Burial Tomb X Umm elQaab Dynasty 
1 st Dynasty Anedjib more correctly Adjib and also known as HorAnedjib HorAdjib and Enezib is the Horus name of an early Egyptian king who ruled during the 
1 st Dynasty. The Egyptian historian Manetho named him Miebds and credited him with a reign of 26 years1 whilst the Royal Canon of Turin credited him with an implausible reign of 74 years.2 Egyptologists and historians now consider both records to be exaggerations and generally credit Adjib with a reign of 810 years.3 Name sourcesedit Cartouche name Merbiape from the Abydos King List Adjib is well attested in archaeological records. His name appears in inscriptions on vessels made of schist alabaster breccia and marble. His name is also preserved on ivory tags and earthen jar seals. Objects bearing Adjibs name and titles come from Abydos and Sakkara.34 Identityedit See also First Dynasty of Egypt family tree Adjibs family has only partially been investigated. His parents are unknown but it is thought that his predecessor king Den may have been his father. Adjib was possibly married to a woman named Betrest. On the Palermo Stone she is described as the mother of Adjibs successor king Semerkhet. Definite evidence for that view has not yet been found. It would be expected that Adjib had sons and daughters but their names have not been preserved in the historical record. A candidate for being a possible member of his family line is Semerkhet.5 Reignedit According to archaeological records Adjib introduced a new royal title which he thought to use as some kind of complement to the NisutBitytitle the Nebuytitle written with the doubled sign of a falcon on a short standard. It means The two lords and refers to the divine state patrons Horus and Seth. It also symbolically points to Lower and Upper Egypt. Adjib is thought to have legitimised his role as Egyptian king with the use of this title.56 Clay seal impressions record the foundation of the new royal fortress Hor nebwkhet Horus the gold of the divine community and the royal residence Hor sebakhet Horus the star of the divine community.7 Stone vessel inscriptions show that during Adjibs reign an unusually large number of cult statues were made for the king. At least six objects show the depicting of standing statues representing the king with his royal insignia.4 Seal impression of king Anedjib Stone vessel inscriptions record that Adjib commemorated a first and even a second Heb Sed a throne jubilee a feast that was celebrated the first time after 30 years of a kings reign after which it was repeated every third or fourth year.8 But recent investigations suggest that every object showing the Hebsed and Adjibs name together were removed from king Dens tomb. It would seem that Adjib had simply erased and replaced Dens name with his own. This is seen by egyptologists and historians as evidence that Adjib never celebrated a Hebsed and thus his reign was relatively short. Egyptologists such as Nicolas Grimal and Wolfgang Helck assume that Adjib as Dens son and rightful heir to the throne may have been quite old when he ascended the Egyptian throne. Helck additionally points to an unusual feature All Hebsed pictures of Adjib show the notation Qesen calamity written on the stairways of the Hebsed pavilion. Possibly the end of Adjibs reign was a violent one.36 Tombedit Adjibs burial site was excavated at the Umm elQaab necropolis in Abydos and is known as Tomb X. It measures 
16.4  x 
9.0  metres and is the smallest of all royal tombs in this area. Adjibs burial chamber 7 x 
4.5  metres consists of two rooms and is accessed by a stairway from the east. The walls of the chamber are more than a meter thick and the rooms are divided by a cutoff wall. The smaller of the two chambers contained several cylinder seals and was probably a storage chamber. The burial chamber was made of wooden planks set in the desert sand without any other foundations. Some of these planks were wellpreserved. The roof of the chamber was held up by wooden posts one of which was found still intact by the excavators.9 The main chamber is surrounded by 64 subsidiary tombs which are interpreted as ancillary burials.1011 Some of these chambers contained large numbers of ivory carvings.12 Until the end of the 
1 st dynasty it would seem to have been a tradition that the family and court of the king committed suicide or were killed and were then buried alongside the ruler in his necropolis.13 To date the tomb has only been excavated once by Flinders Petrie between 1899 and 1900. This is unlike the other tombs in the necropolis which were excavated before Petrie by the Frenchman mile Amlineau and subsequently by the German Archaeological Institute. Ivory inlay carvings from the tomb Finds associated to Anedjibedit Stone vessel fragment bearing Anedjib serekh. Serekh of Anedjib from an inscription. Map of Anedjibs tomb in the Umm elQaab. Bibliographyedit EvaMaria Engel. The Royal Tombs at Umm elQaab In ArcheoNil 18 2008 p. 39. William Matthew Flinders Petrie. The royal tombs of the first dynasty 1900. Part I  Memoir of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Volume 18 ISSN 03075109. Egypt Exploration Fund London 1900 Digitised pp. 1213. Referencesedit  William Gillan Waddell Manetho The Loeb Classical Library Volume 350. Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 Reprint ISBN 0674993853 page 3337.  Alan H. Gardiner The Royal Canon of Turin. Griffith Institute of Oxford Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 page 15  Table I.  a b c Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. gyptologische Abhandlungen Volume 45 Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 124 160  162  212  214.  a b Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 78 79  275.  a b Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards Early History of the Middle East The Cambridge Ancient History Vol. 1 Pt. 2. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2006 ISBN 0521077915 page 2731.  a b NicolasChristophe Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell LondonNew York 1994 ISBN 0631193960 page 53  54.  Stan Hendrickx Barbara Adams  K. M. Cialowicz Egypt at its origins studies in memory of Barbara Adams  proceedings of the international conference Origin of the State Predynastic and Early Dynastic Egypt. Peeters Publishers Leuven 2004 ISBN 9042914696 page 1137.  Jean Daniel Degreef The Heb Set Festival Sequence and pBrooklyn 
47.2 
18.5 0 in Gttinger Miscellen vol. 223 2009 ISSN 03443
85 X page 2734.  W. M. Flinders Petrie Francis L. Griffith The royal tombs of the first dynasty 1900. Part I. London 1900 Tafel LVX.  Gnter Dreyer Zur Rekonstruktion der Oberbauten der Knigsgrber der 1. Dynastie in Abydos Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Kairo 47. von Zabern Mainz 1991 page 56.  Walter Bryan Emery gypten Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit 32002800 v. Chr. Fourier Wiesbaden 1964 ISBN 0415186331 page 16  W. M. Flinders Petrie Francis L. Griffith The royal tombs of the earliest dynasties 1901. Part 2  Memoir of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Band 21 ZDBID 9881414. Egypt Exploration Fund u.a. London 1901 S. 39 Tafel XLII Digitalisierung.  Walter Bryan Emery gypten Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit 32002800 v. Chr. Fourier Wiesbaden 1964 ISBN 0415186331 page 17. External linksedit Francesco Raffaele Adjib  Merbiape Preceded by Den Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Semerkhet v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e First Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Pharaohs MenesNarmer HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Regents Neithhotep Merneith Queen consorts Benerib Herneith Penebui Nakhtneith Khenthap Semat Serethor Seshemetka Betrest Officials Amka Hemaka Sabef Meriiti Other people Ahaneith Artefacts and monuments Narmer macehead Narmer palette Den seal impressions Abydos boats MacGregor plaque Mastabas S3503 and S3504 Capital Thinis Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAnedjiboldid1180007636 Categories 
30 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the First Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 October 2023 at 2156 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width