Nebty name - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Heraldic appearance 
3 Symbolism 
4 Introduction and history 
5 See also 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Nebty name 15 languages  Asturianu Brezhoneg Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Nederlands Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina  Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia One of the Great five names used by Egyptian pharaohs Nebty name in hieroglyphs Full title nebty He of Nekhbet and Wadjet He of the Two Ladies Nebty name of king Semerkhet The Nebty name also called the TwoLadiesname was one of the great five names used by Egyptian pharaohs. It was also one of the oldest royal titles. The modern term TwoLadiesname is a simple derivation from the translation of the Egyptian word nebty. Etymologyedit The terms Nebty name and TwoLadiesname derive from the Egyptian word nbtj Nebty which is a dual noun meaning the two ladies. As a mere noun it is a religious euphemism designating the goddesses Nekhbet and Wadjet as a deified pair. As a royal crest it was thought to represent a unified Egypt.12 Heraldic appearanceedit The Nebty name similarly to the later NiswtBity name was constructed with two sign groups. The first one shows a griffon vulture sitting on a basket. The second group shows an erect cobra also sitting on a basket. The oldest versions of the Nebty name showed instead of the cobra the red crown above the second basket. The sign groups forming the Nebty name were never used separately.12 Symbolismedit The Nebty name was symbolically linked to the two most important goddesses of Ancient Egyptian kingship Nekhbet and Wadjet. Whilst Nekhbet Egypt. Nekhebety she from Nekheb was the mistress of Upper Egypt her pendant Wadjet Egypt. Wadyt she who thrives or simply lady of the green was the mistress of Lower Egypt. Nekhbet was worshipped as the celestial mother of a king which is expressed in the Ancient Egyptian queen title Mwtniswt mother of the king. The cobra of Wadjet was worshipped as the celestial diadem snake on the kings forehead believed to spit fire at anyone who dared to take on the pharaoh. This protective behaviour made Wadjet very popular and already in early dynastic times several deities were depicted as wearing a uraeus on their foreheads. With his Nebty name each pharaoh wished to present himself as the one under the guidance and protection of the two goddesses thus legitimizing himself as being ruler of the whole of Egypt.12 Introduction and historyedit Naqada Label showing the Horus name of the pharaoh Aha with what appears to be an enclosure featuring the name Menes beneath the Nebty symbol. Reconstruction prt Garstang 1905 p. 62 fig3 harvnb error no target CITEREFGarstang1905 help After the Horus name the Nebty name is the second oldest royal name of Ancient Egyptian history and also known as the TwoLadies name. Egyptologists such as Toby Wilkinson and Ludwig David Morenz point to an obvious prototype of the Nebty name used before the introduction of the final form ivory tags from the Abydos tombs of the kings HorAha and Djer and the queen Neithhotep show the TwoLadies crest with the red crown instead of the cobra over a basket. In the case of HorAha the Nebty crest is of special interest because it is depicted inside a threeframed building shrine tomb together with the hieroglyph Men Gardiner sign Y5 meaning to stay or to endure. It is intensely disputed whether this sign group merely gives the name of a Nebty shrine MenNebty where the Two Ladies endure whether it shows Ahas Nebty name inside his tomb or whether it shows instead Narmers Nebty name indicating that Aha buried Narmer. The ivory tags of kings Djer and Djet show the prototype inside a palace and a shrine guided by the notation that the kings visited the palace of the Two Ladies or oversaw the building of wine cellars for the Nebty shrine. The first use of the final form of the Nebty crest vulture and cobra over two baskets appeared during the reign of king Semerkhet who called himself IryNebty guardian of the Two Ladies. After him every future king used a Nebty name though not every king of the early dynasties and the Old Kingdom is known by his Nebty name.12 A further problem in determining Nebty names is a fashion which arose during the reign of king Peribsen. He was the first ruler who used the Nebty crest as a separate name or title. After him it seems that other rulers used separate Nebty names too. Evidence for that is the case of king Qaa. Ivory tag inscriptions reveal that Qaa obviously used two different Nebty names QaaNebty raised arm of the Two Ladies and SenNebty kissed by the Two Ladies or brother of the Two Ladies. And king Hotepsekhemwy called himself SehotepNebty the Two Ladies are pleased with him thus using virtually the same name as he used for his serekh name.34 Another problem in assigning Nebty names is that during the Old Kingdom Egyptian queens also used the Nebty crest as a part of their birth names. Prominent examples are the queens Hetephernebti and Djefatnebti. This has caused a problem concerning the interpretation of a Nebty name appearing on an ivory stencil from Saqqara. It is disputed whether it was the name of a queen DjeseretankhNebty or just the Nebty name of king Sekhemkhet.35 See alsoedit Horus name Two Ladies Referencesedit  a b c d Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 203205.  a b c d Wolfgang Helck Eberhard Otto Nechbet. In Kleines Lexikon der gyptologie. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1999 ISBN 3447040270 p. 199.  a b Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 201 206207.  Hermann Ranke Die altgyptischen Personennamen. vol. III. Augustin Glckstadt 1977 p. 319.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit  gyptologische Abhandlungen vol. 45. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 p. 108  117. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNebtynameoldid1209158044 Categories Ancient Egyptian titles Ancient Egyptian language Egyptian mythology Egyptian hieroglyphs birds Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Harv and Sfn notarget errors This page was last edited on 20 February 2024 at 1603 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width