Sneferka - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Identity 
3 Possible battle with Horus Bird 
4 References 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents Sneferka 24 languages  Catal Deutsch Franais Galego Bahasa Indonesia  Magyar   Nederlands Norsk bokml Portugus   Slovenina   srpski Svenska Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Sneferka Neferseka Sekanefer Neferkaes Slate fragment bearing Sneferkas serekh from Saqqara1 Pharaoh Reign short ca. 2900 BC Predecessor unclear possibly Qaa or Horus Bird Successor unclear possibly Hotepsekhemwy or Horus Bird Royal titulary Horus name HorSneferka r.snfrk3 His Ka is completeperfect Dynasty end of 
1 st Dynasty Sneferka was an early Egyptian king who may have ruled at the end of the 
1 st Dynasty. The exact length of his reign is unknown but thought to have been very short and his chronological position is unclear. Name sourcesedit Sneferkas serekhname is the object of current investigations because of the unusual typographical order of the hieroglyphic signs within the serekh. This led to several different readings his name is read as Seneferka Sneferka Neferseka and Sekanefer.2 The serekhname Sneferka appears on several schist and alabaster vessels. One was found in the mastaba of the high official Merka who served under king Qaa a second one in the underground galleries of the step pyramid of king Djoser 
3 rd Dynasty and the third was found in an anonymous mastaba also at Sakkara. A fourth artifact with Sneferkas name is found in the private GeorgesMichailidisCollection but its authenticity is questioned by archaeologists and Egyptologists since its origin is unknown. Additionally the inscription on the Michailidisobject is a serekh with no Horusfalcon which is highly unusual for any Egyptian artifact of that time period.345 Identityedit Beside Sneferkas serekh the inscriptions mention several institutions and places already known thanks to finds dating to Qaas reign. They are called QauNetjeru Elevations of the gods and AhNetjer Divine palace and appear in several stone vessel inscriptions from Qaas tomb at Abydos. Egyptologists such as Peter Kaplony conclude that the inscriptions prove a chronological adjacency to king Qaa or that the name Sneferka was an alternative name that Qaa bore for a short time. Egyptologist Kim Ryholt believes that Sneferka ruled during the midst of 
2 nd Dynasty and was to be identified with Neferkara I attested in Ramesside sources. He points to the circumstance that Ramesside scribes often added the symbol of the sun to the names of early dynastic kings ignoring the fact that the sun was not yet an object of divine adoration at that early time. To support his view Ryholt points to cartouche names such as Neferkara II and Nebkara I which represent early kings and contradictorily have a sunsymbol in their names.6 Egyptologist Aidan Dodson thinks alike and points to the fact that nearly all serekhs of Sneferka are made on erasures thus leading to the conclusion that Sneferka usurped Qaas vessels. This behavior was typical for kings who ruled somewhat later than the original owner of the reused artefacts and who ruled for a very short time only.7 Possible battle with Horus Birdedit Two artifacts of different origins show the serekh of a king whose name is highly disputed for the hieroglyphic sign used to write the kings name is almost illegible. Since at least the depiction of a bird was recognised the king in question is called Horus Bird. Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck and Peter Kaplony believe that Sneferka and Horus Bird fought each other to gain the throne of Egypt. The struggles peaked in the plundering of the royal cemetery of Abydos which was therefore abandoned. The struggle for the throne was possibly brought to an end by the founder of the 
2 nd Dynasty king Hotepsekhemwy. A piece of evidence supporting this theory is the Horus name of Hotepsekhemwy which means The two powers are reconciled and could relate to a reunification of the Egyptian realm after a period of discord.8910 Referencesedit  Pierre Lacau  JeanPhilippe Lauer La Pyramide  Degrs IV.  Inscriptions graves sur les Vases Fouilles  Saqqarah. Service des antiquits de lgypte Cairo 1936  I.E.S. Edwards The Cambridge ancient history Volume 13. Cambridge University Press 1970 ISBN 0521077915 page 29.  Walter Brian Emery Great tombs of the First Dynasty Excavations at Saqqara vol. 3. Egypt exploration society LondonCairo 1958. page 38.  Pierre Lacau  JanPhillip Lauer La Pyramide a Degrees IV.  Inscriptions Gravees sur les Vases Fouilles  Saqqarah. Service des antiquits de lgypte Kairo 1936 page 1517.  Toby Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 69.  Kim Ryholt in Journal of Egyptian History vol.1. BRILL Leiden 2008 ISSN 18741657 page 159173.  Aidan Dodson The Mysterious Second Dynasty In KMT  A Modern Journal of Ancient Egypt Nr.7. Kmt Communications San Francisco 1996 ISSN 10530827 S. 1931.  Peter Kaplony Er ist ein Liebling der Frauen  Ein neuer Knig und eine neue Theorie zu den Kronprinzen sowie zu den Staatsgttinnen Kronengttinnen der 
1.2 . Dynastie. In Manfred Bietak gypten und Levante. Verlag der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 2006 ISBN 9783700166689 page 126127.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewutsein ihrer Nachwelt. page 3641.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. gyptologische Abhandlungen Vol. 45. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 117 External linksedit Francesco Raffaele Horus SNEFERKA  Horus Bird  Horus SEKHET   Horus BA Preceded by Qaa Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Horus Bird v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSneferkaoldid1187478543 Categories 
30 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
29 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 November 2023 at 1401 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width