Hotepsekhemwy - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Family 
3 Identity 
4 Reign 
5 Tomb 
6 References 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Hotepsekhemwy 46 languages  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Ripoarisch   Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian king Hotepsekhemwy Bedjatau Bedjau Boethos Bochus Stone vase bearing Hotepsekhemwys serekh National Archaeological Museum France. Pharaoh Reign 2529 years Predecessor uncertain Qaa or Sneferka or Horus Bird Successor Raneb Royal titulary Horus name HorHotepsekhemwy Hr.htpsxm.wj Horus reconciliation of the two powers Nebty name SehotepNebty S.htpnbt.j He who pacifies the Two Ladies Abydos King List Bedjau B3.w The smelter1 Saqqara King List Netjerbau Nrb3.w Divine of Bas Turin Canon ...Bauhetepju ...b3.whtp.w ...Bas are satisfied2 Giza Writing Board 
6 th dynasty Bedjatau B
3 t3.w The smelter13 Nomen NisutbitjNebtyHotep Nsw.tbtjnbt.jhtp King of Upper and Lower Egypt he of the Two Ladies the satisfied Children Perneb and Raneb  Burial Gallery Tomb A Saqqara  Dynasty 
2 nd Dynasty starting c. 2890 BC. Hotepsekhemwy is the Horus name of an early Egyptian king who was the founder of the Second Dynasty of Egypt. The exact length of his reign is not known the Turin canon suggests an improbable 95 years4 while the ancient Egyptian historian Manetho reports that the reign of Boths lasted for 38 years.5 Egyptologists consider both statements to be misinterpretations or exaggerations. They credit Hotepsekhemwy with either a 25 or a 
29 year rule.6 Name sourcesedit Cartouche name of Hotepsekhemwy in the Abydos King List cartouche no. 9. Hotepsekhemwys name has been identified by archaeologists at Sakkara Giza Badari and Abydos from clay seal impressions stone vessels and bone cylinders. Several stone vessel inscriptions mention Hotepsekhemwy along with the name of his successor Raneb.1789 The Horus name of Hotepsekhemwy is the subject of particular interest to Egyptologists and historians as it may hint at the turbulent politics of the time. The Egyptian word Hotep means peaceful and to be pleased though it can also mean conciliation or to be reconciled too. So Hotepsekhemwys full name may be read as the two powers are reconciled or pleasing in powers which suggests a significant political meaning. In this sense the two powers could be a reference to Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt as well as to the major deities Horus and Seth.11011 From the reign of Hotepsekhemwy onward it became a tradition to write the Horus name and the Nebty name in the same way. It is thought that some kind of philosophic background affected that choice since the Horus name reveals a clearly defined symbolic meaning in its translation. Horus and nebty names being the same might also indicate that the Horus name was adopted after ascending the throne.1 Familyedit The name of Hotepsekhemwys wife is unknown. A son of the king and priest of Sopdu named Perneb might have been his son but since the clay seals providing his name and titles were found in a gallery tomb which is attributed to two kings equally Hotepsekhemwy and his successor Raneb it is uncertain whose son Perneb really was.1213 Identityedit Bone cylinder inscribed with the serekh of Hotepsekhemwy. Hotepsekhemwy is commonly identified with the Ramesside cartouche names Bedjau from the Abydos king list Bedjatau from Giza NetjerBau from the Sakkara king list and the name Bauhetepju from the royal canon of Turin. Egyptologist Wolfgang Helck points to the similar name Bedjatau which appears in a short king list found on a writing board from the mastaba tomb G1001 of the high official Mesdjeru. Bedjatau means the foundryman and is thought to be a misreading of the name Hotepsekhemwy since the hieroglyphic signs used to write Hotep in its full form are very similar to the signs of a pottery kiln and a chick in hieratic writings. The signs of two Sekhem sceptres were misread as a leg and a drill. A similar phenomenon might have occurred in the case of King Khasekhemwy where the two sceptres in the Horus name were misread as two legsymbols or two drillsigns. The Abydos king list imitates this Old Kingdom name form of Bedjatau. The names Netjerbau and Bauhetepju are problematic since Egyptologists cant find any name source from Hotepsekhemwys time that could have been used to form them.11415 Reignedit Little is known about Hotepsekhemwys reign. Contemporary sources show that he may have gained the throne after a period of political strife including ephemeral rulers such as Horus Bird and Sneferka the latter is also thought to be an alternate name used by king Qaa for a short time. As evidence of this Egyptologists Wolfgang Helck Dietrich Wildung and George Reisner point to the tomb of king Qaa which was plundered at the end of 
1 st Dynasty and was restored during the reign of Hotepsekhemwy. The plundering of the cemetery and the unusually conciliatory meaning of the name Hotepsekhemwy may be clues of a dynastic struggle. Additionally Helck assumes that the kings Sneferka and Horus Bird were omitted from later king lists because their struggles for the Egyptian throne were factors in the collapse of the first dynasty.11016 Seal impressions provide evidence of a new royal residence called Horus the shining star that was constructed by Hotepsekhemwy. He also built a temple near Buto for the littleknown deity NetjerAchty and founded the Chapel of the White Crown. The white crown is a symbol of Upper Egypt. This is thought to be another clue to the origin of Hotepsekhemwys dynasty indicating a likely source of political power.117 Egyptologists such as Nabil Swelim point out that there is no inscription from Hotepsekhemwys reign mentioning a Sed festival indicating the ruler cannot have ruled longer than 30 years the Sed festival was celebrated as the anniversary marking a reign of 30 years.18 Entrance to the gallery tomb beneath the Unas passway. The ancient Egyptian historian Manetho called Hotepsekhemwy Boths apparently altered from the name Bedjau and reported that during this rulers reign a chasm opened near Bubastis and many perished. Although Manetho wrote in the 
3 rd century BC  over two millennia after the kings actual reign  some Egyptologists think it possible that this anecdote may have been based on fact since the region near Bubastis is known to be seismically active.5 Tombedit The location of Hotepsekhemwys tomb is uncertain. Egyptologists such as Flinders Petrie Alessandro Barsanti and Toby Wilkinson believe it could be the giant underground Gallery Tomb A beneath the funeral passage of the Unasnecropolis at Saqqara. Many seal impressions of king Hotepsekhemwy have been found in these galleries. Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck and Peter Munro are not convinced and think that Gallery Tomb B is instead the burial site of king Raneb as several seal impressions of this ruler were also found there.919202122 The more accepted theory is that Hotepsekhemwy and his son Raneb shared Tomb A. Referencesedit  a b c d e f g h Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit gyptologische Abhandlungen Vol. 45 Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774  Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin. Reissued. Griffith Institute Oxford 1997 ISBN 0900416483 vol. 1  Edward Brovarski Two old writing boards from Giza. In Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte. vol. 71 1987 ISSN 16871510 p. 2752 issue 1 Online PDF 11 MB.  Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin. Griffith Institute of Oxford Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 page 15  Table I.  a b William Gillian Waddell Manetho The Loeb Classical Library Volume 350. Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 Reprint ISBN 0674993853 page 3741.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewusstsein ihrer Nachwelt. Teil 1 Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien Mnchener gyptologische Studien Volume 17. Deutscher Kunstverlag MnchenBerlin 1969. page 3133.  Guy Brunton Qau and Badari I with chapters by Alan Gardiner and Flinders Petrie British School of Archaeology in Egypt 44 London 1927 Bernard Quaritch Tafel XIX 25  Gaston Maspero Notes sur les objets recueillis sous la pyramide dOunas in Annales du Service des Antiquits de lEgypt ASAE Vol. III. Kairo 1902 pages 185190.  a b EvaMaria Engel Die Siegelabrollungen von Hetepsechmui und Raneb aus Saqqara. In Ernst Czerny Irmgard Hein Hermann Hunger Dagmar Melman Angela Schwab Timelines Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak. Peeters Leuven 2006 ISBN 9042917
30 X page 2829.  a b Peter Kaplony Er ist ein Liebling der Frauen  Ein neuer Knig und eine neue Theorie zu den Kronprinzen sowie zu den Staatsgttinnen Kronengttinnen der 
1.2 . Dynastie. In Manfred Bietak gypten und Levante. Verlag der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 2006 ISBN 9783700166689 page 126127.  Peter A. Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs The Reignbyreign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt Thames and Hudson London 2006 ISBN 0500286280 page 26.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early dynastic Egypt Strategy Society and Security. Routledge London u. a. 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 296.  Peter Kaplony Inschriften der gyptischen Frhzeit. Band 3  gyptologische Abhandlungen Bd. 8. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1963 ISBN 3447000
52 X page 96 as Obj. 367.  Edward Brovarski Two Old Kingdom writing boards from Giza. In Annales du Service des Antiquits de lEgypte Vol.71 1987 Table 1  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 page 134.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewutsein ihrer Nachwelt. page 3641.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 285  286.  Nabil M. A. Swelim Some Problems on the History of the Third Dynasty. Archaeological Society Alexandria 1983 Archaeological and Historical Studies 7. page 6777.  Alessandre Barsanti in Annales du service des antiquits de lgypte  Spplemnts Volume II. Institut Franais dArchologie Orientale Kairo 1902. page 249257.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 83  84.  Wolfgang Helck Wirtschaftsgeschichte des alten gypten im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend vor Chr. Brill Leiden 1975 ISBN 9004042695 page 2132.  Peter Munro Der UnasFriedhof Nordwest I. Von Zabern Mainz 1993 page 95. External linksedit Francesco Raffaele Hotepsekhemwy  Hotep v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHotepsekhemwyoldid1211458238 Categories 
29 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt 
3 rdmillennium BC births 
3 rdmillennium BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 March 2024 at 1743 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width