Nebra (pharaoh) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 Name sources 
3 Family 
4 Identity 
5 Reign 
6 Tomb 
7 Gallery 
8 References 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Nebra pharaoh 42 languages  Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Ripoarisch  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Nebra Pharaoh Horus name of the second early Egyptian king of the 
2 nd dynasty For the town in Germany see Nebra Unstrut. Nebra Raneb Nebre Kakau Kaichoos Cechous Tomb stela of Nebra Metropolitan Museum of Art New York Pharaoh Reign 1014 years Predecessor Hotepsekhemwy Successor Nynetjer Royal titulary Horus name HorNebra Hrnbr Lord of the sun of Horus Nomen NisutbitjNebtyNebra Nsw.tbtjrnb King of Upper and Lower Egypt he of the Two Ladies Nebra Abydos King List Kakau K
3 k3.w Saqqara King List Kakau K
3 k3.w Turin Canon ...Kakau ...k
3 k3.w Children Perneb Nynetjer  Father Hotepsekhemwy  Burial Gallery Tomb A Saqqara  Dynasty 
2 nd Dynasty around 2850 BC Nebra or Raneb is the Horus name of the second early Egyptian king of the 
2 nd Dynasty. The exact length of his reign is unknown since the Turin canon is damaged and the year accounts are lost.1 Manetho suggests that Nebras reign lasted 39 years2 but Egyptologists question Manethos view as a misinterpretation or exaggeration of information that was available to him. They credit Nebra with either a 10 or 
14 year rule.3 Attestationsedit Nebras name appears on several stone vessels mostly made of schist alabaster and marble. Most of the bowls were found at Abydos Giza and Saqqara. The inscriptions contain depictions of cultic buildings such as the Kahouse depictions of deities such as Bastet Neith and Seth and also the mentionings of cultic feasts. All found objects present Nebras name either together with that of his predecessor Hotepsekhemwy or with his successor Nynetjer. Nebras name never appears alone.4 Clay seal impressions with Nebras name were found beneath the causeway of the Pyramid of Unas at Saqqara and inside a large gallery tomb also at Saqqara. This tomb also yielded several seal impressions with Hotepsekhemwys name and for this reason it is debated whether the tomb belongs to Nebra or his predecessor Hotepsekhemwy.5 In 2012 Pierre Tallet and Damien Leisnay reported three rock inscriptions with Nebras horus name found in the south of the Sinai Peninsula. Each rock inscription can be found in a different wadi Wadi Abu Madawi Wadi Abu Koua and Wadi Ameyra. The places where Nebras name is displayed lie along a very old route used for expeditions from the western shore of the Sinai to its inland where copper and turquoise mines existed. Along the wadis the names of predynastic kings up to pharaohs of the 
4 th Dynasty are located at the same places.6 Name sourcesedit Nebras serekh name is of great interest to Egyptologists since it is written with the hieroglyphic sign of the Sun which had not yet become the object of divine adoration during his lifetime.citation needed At the time of king Nebra the most important religious cults were concentrated on the preservation of the dualistic equal status of the state patrons Horus and Seth.citation needed Nothing was more important than keeping that divine balance. The kings themselves were seen as the living representation of that godlike pair.citation needed The Sun was seen as a celestial object controlled either by Horus or as in the case of king SethPeribsen by Seth.citation needed Therefore the Sun was not an independent deity yet. The first definite proof of the existence of the Sundeity Ra occurs at the beginning of the 
3 rd dynasty during the reign of king Djoser in the names of high officials such as Hesyre. And the first definitive detectable proof for a fully established royal Sun cult occurs under king Radjedef the third ruler of the 
4 th Dynasty. He was the first king who connected his birth name with the name of Ra starting the great religious belief that Egyptian kings were the living representation of the Sun alongside Horus and Seth.78 Therefore Nebras Horus name is problematic regarding its translation and meaning. The typical translation of Nebras name as Ra is my lord which would be read Raneb is questionable as this would assume that the Sun was already being worshiped as an independent deity. Consequently Egyptologists have proposed the translation Lord of the sun of Horus which is read Nebra and implies the pharaohs rule over the Sun as a celestial body which was indeed also under Horus or Seths control. Any solar religion or solar symbolism were not yet established in any useful form and it is now thought that king Nebra might actually have been the first king who adopted extended religious thought about the Sun and the sky.78 Familyedit The wife of Nebra is unknown. A son of the king and priest of Sopdu named Perneb might have been his son but since the clay seals providing his name and titles were found in a gallery tomb which is attributed to two kings equally Nebra and his predecessor Hotepsekhemwy it is unclear whose son Perneb really was.910 Identityedit Statue of Hotepdief priest of the mortuary cults of the first 3 rulers of the dynasty Hotepsekhemwy Nebra and Nynetjer. The serekh of Nebra is the middle one on the shoulder of the priest. King Nebra is commonly identified with the Ramessideera cartouchename Kakau which can be translated as The bull of Apis. This links to the anecdote written by Manetho who said that under king Kchos the Greek version of the name Kakau the deities Apies the goat of Mendes and Menevus were introduced and worshipped as gods. This view is questioned by modern Egyptologists as there was already a cult of Apis established during the 
1 st Dynasty if not earlier. The name Kakau itself is problematic for this early pharaoh as there was no name source from Nebras time that could have been used to form the word.11 The birth name of Nebra also remains unclear. A theory by Egyptologist Jochem Kahl says that Nebra was the same person as the mysterious king WenegNebti. He points to a vessel fragment made of volcanic ash which was found in the tomb of king Peribsen a later ruler during the 
2 nd dynasty at Abydos. On the pot sherd he believes there are traces of the wenegflower beneath the incised name of king Ninetjer. To the right of Ninetjers name the depiction of the Kahouse of king Nebra is partially preserved. This arrangement led Kahl to conclude that the wenegflower and Nebras name were connected to each other and king Ninetjer replaced the inscription. Kahl also points out that king Ninetjer wrote his name mirrored so that his name deliberately runs in the opposite direction to Nebras name.12 Kahls theory is the subject of continuing discussion since the vessel inscription is damaged thus leaving plenty of room for varying interpretations. Egyptologists such as Jrgen von Beckerath and Battiscombe Gunn identify Nebra with another mysterious early pharaoh Nubnefer. This link is questioned by other scholars since the rulers of 
2 nd Dynasty often wrote their birth and Horus names in the same way for example HorNebra  NisutBityNebtyNebra. Thus the name Nubnefer may be the birth name of a different king.1314 Reignedit Little is known about Nebras reign. The discovery of sealings bearing Nebras name together with sealings of Hotepsekhemwy at Saqqara suggests that Nebra conducted the burial of Hotepsekhemwy and was his direct successor.15 Additional confirmation of this succession is provided by a statue and a stone bowl both bearing Hotepsekhemwy and Nebras serekhs in juxtaposition.citation needed Other pot inscriptions and seal impressions surviving from his time only name cultrelated and administrative events such as the Erecting of the pillars of Horus. Under Nebra the first depiction of the goddess Bastet occurs. The exact duration of Nebras reign is the subject of investigations. Reconstructions of the well known Palermo Stone a black basalt table presenting the yearly events of the kings from the beginning of the 
1 st dynasty up to king Neferirkare in the shape of clearly divided charts leads to the conclusion that Nebra and his predecessor king Hotepsekhemwy ruled altogether for 39 years. Since Nebra has fewer records of his rule than Hotepsekhemwy Nebra is thought to have ruled for a shorter time. The calculations differ from 29 and 10 years to 25 and 14 years.161718 According to different authors Nebra ruled Egypt c. 2850 BC19 from 2820 BC to 2790 BC Donald B. Redford 2800 BC to 2785 BC Jrgen von Beckerath or 2765 BC to 2750 BC J. Mlek.20 Tombedit The location of Nebras tomb is unknown. Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck and Peter Munro believe that Nebra was buried in the gallery tomb B beneath the causeway of the Pyramid of Unas at Saqqara. Indeed most of the artifacts bearing Ranebs name were found there.2122 Galleryedit Stone bowl inscription bearing Nebra and Hotepsekhemwy serekhs before the goddess Bastet23 Cartouche name of Nebra in the Abydos King List read as k3 k
3 wkakau cartouche no. 10 Referencesedit  Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin. Griffith Institute of Oxford Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 page 15  Table I.  William Gillian Waddell Manetho The Loeb classical Library Volume 350. Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 Reprint ISBN 0674993853 page 3741.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewusstsein ihrer Nachwelt. Teil 1 Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien Mnchener gyptologische Studien Volume 17. Deutscher Kunstverlag MnchenBerlin 1969. page 3133.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 87.  EvaMaria Engel Die Siegelabrollungen von Hetepsechemui und Raneb aus Saqqara. In Ernst Czerny Irmgard Hein Timelines  Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak  Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta. OLA vol. 149. Leuven ParisDudley 2006 p. 2829 Fig. 69.  Pierre Tallet Damien Laisnay IryHor et Narmer au SudSina Ouadi Ameyra un complment  la chronologie des expditios minire gyptiene. In Bulletin de lInstitut Franais DArchologie Orientale BIFAO vol. 112 2012 p. 389398.  a b Jochem Kahl Ra is my Lord. Searching for the Rise of the Sun God at the Dawn of Egyptian History. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2007 ISBN 3447055405. page 414.  a b Steven Quirke Ancient Egyptian Religions. Dover Publishing London 1992 ISBN 0714109665 page 22.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early dynastic Egypt Strategy Society and Security. Routledge London u. a. 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 296.  Peter Kaplony Inschriften der gyptischen Frhzeit. Volume 3  gyptologische Abhandlungen vol. 8. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1963 ISBN 3447000
52 X page 96 as Obj. 367.  Walter Bryan Emery gypten. Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit. Fourier Mnchen 1964 page 103  274.  Jochem Kahl Ra is my Lord  Searching for the rise of the Sun God at the dawn of Egyptian history. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2007 ISBN 3447055405 page 1214  74.  Battiscombe Gunn in Annales du service des antiquits de lgypte  Supplments Volume 28. Institut Franais dArchologie Orientale Kairo 1938 page 152.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen. Deutscher Kunstverlag Mnchen Berlin 1884 ISBN 3422008322 page 48  49.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Strategies Society and Security. Routledge LondonNew York 2001 ISBN 0415260116 p. 71  Wolfgang Helck in Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Institut Kairo 30. Deutsches Archologisches Institut OrientAbteilungHg.. de Gruyter Berlin 1974 ISSN 03421279 page 31.  Werner Kaiser in Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertum 86. AkademieVerlag Berlin 1961 ISSN 00442
16 X page 39.  Winfried Barta in Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertum 108. AkademieVerlag Berlin 1981 ISSN 00442
16 X page 11.  M. L. Bierbrier Historical dictionary of ancient Egypt M. L. Bierbrier Scarecrow Press 2008 p. xvii  Egyptian Pharaohs  Early Dynastic Period  Dynasty 2  Raneb.  Wolfgang Helck Wirtschaftsgeschichte des alten gypten im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend vor Chr. Brill Leiden 1975 ISBN 9004042695 page 2132.  Peter Munro Der UnasFriedhof Nordwest I. Von Zabern Mainz 1993 page 95.  Pierre Lacau  JanPhillip Lauer La Pyramide a Degrees IV. Abb.58. External linksedit Francesco Raffaele Nebra Kakaw Preceded by Hotepsekhemwy Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Nynetjer v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNebrapharaoholdid1211458299 Categories 
29 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
28 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 This page was last edited on 2 March 2024 at 1743 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width