Weneg (pharaoh) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources and contradictions 
2 Identification Toggle Identification subsection 
2.1 Weneg corresponds to HorNebre or Raneb 
2.2 Weneg corresponds to HorSekhemibPerenmaat 
2.3 Weneg as an independent ruler 
3 Reign 
4 References 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents Weneg pharaoh 37 languages Azrbaycanca Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus Romn   Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit emaitka Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian ruler Wneg redirects here. For other uses see WNEG disambiguation. Weneg WenegNebty Uneg Alabaster fragment with the throne name NisutbitjNebtyWeneg.1 Pharaoh Reign length of reign unknown Predecessor Nynetjer Successor unknown Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen NisutBitjNebtyWeneg Nsw.tbtjnb.tjwng King of Lower and Upper Egypt He of the two Ladies Weneg Dynasty 
2 nd Dynasty around 2740 B.C. Weneg or Uneg also known as WenegNebty is the throne name of an early Egyptian king who ruled during the Second Dynasty. Although his chronological position is clear to Egyptologists it is unclear for how long King Weneg ruled. It is also unclear as to which of the archaeologically identified Horuskings corresponds to Weneg. Name sources and contradictionsedit The name Weneg is generally accepted to be a nebti or throne name introduced by the crest of the Two Ladies the goddesses Nekhbet and Wadjet and the sedgeandbeecrest. Wenegs name appears in black ink inscriptions on alabaster fragments and in inscriptions on schistvessels. Seventeen vessels bearing his name have been preserved eleven of them were found in the underground galleries beneath the step pyramid of king Djoser at Sakkara. Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck and Francesco Tiradritti point out that all the inscriptions are made in the place of existing inscriptions which means that the names that were originally placed on the vessels were completely different. The symbol that was used to write Wenegs name is the object of significant dispute between Egyptologists to this day. The socalled weneg flower is rarely used in Egyptian writing. Mysteriously the weneg flower is often guided by six vertical strokes three of them on each side of the flower bud. The meaning of these strokes is unknown. After Wenegs death his heraldic flower was not used again until king Teti 
6 th dynasty when it was used in his pyramid texts to name a Weneg as a sky and death deity which was addressed with Son of Ra and follower of the deceased king. So it seems that the weneg flower was somehow connected with the Egyptian sun and death cult. But the true meaning of the flower as a kings name remains unknown.2345 Identificationedit Since Wenegs name first became known to Egyptologists scholars have been trying to match the nebti name of Weneg to contemporary Horuskings. The following sections discuss some of the theories. Weneg corresponds to HorNebre or Ranebedit BM EA 35556 the stone vessel used by Jochem Kahl to equate Weneg with Raneb.6 Egyptologist Jochem Kahl argues that Weneg was the same person as king Raneb the second ruler of the 
2 nd dynasty. He points to a vessel fragment made from an igneous material which was found in the tomb of king Peribsen a later ruler of the 
2 nd dynasty at Abydos. He believed he had found on the pot shard weak but clear traces of the weneg flower beneath the inscribed name of king Ninetjer. On the right side of Ninetjers name the depiction of the Ka house of king Raneb is partially preserved. The complete arrangement led Kahl to the conclusion that the weneg flower and Ranebs name were connected to each other and king Ninetjer later replaced the inscription. Kahl also points out that king Ninetjer wrote his name mirrored so that his name points in the opposite direction to Ranebs name.6 Kahls theory is the subject of continuing debate since the vessel inscription is badly damaged and thus leaves plenty of room for varying interpretations. Weneg corresponds to HorSekhemibPerenmaatedit Egyptologists such as Nicolas Grimal Wolfgang Helck and Walter Bryan Emery identify Weneg with king SekhemibPerenmaat and with the Ramesside royal cartouchename Wadjenes. Their theory is based on the assumption that Sekhemib and SethPeribsen were different rulers and that both were the immediate successors of king Ninetjer. But this theory is not commonly accepted because clay seals of Sekhemib were found in the tomb of king Khasekhemwy the last ruler of the 
2 nd dynasty. The clay seals set Sekhemibs reign close to Khasekhemwys whilst the Ramesside name Wadjenes is placed near the beginning of the 
2 nd dynasty.789 Weneg as an independent ruleredit Egyptologists such as Peter Kaplony and Richard Weill argue that Weneg was a separate king from other kings of the period. They suggest that Weneg succeeded Ninetjer and his name is preserved in Ramesside kinglists under the name Wadjenes. Their assumption is firstly based on the widely accepted theory that Ramesside scribes interchanged the weneg flower with the papyrus haulm changing it into the name Wadjenes. Secondly Kaplony and Weills theory is based on the inscription on the Cairo stone. They believe that the name Wenegsekhemwy is preserved over the third line of year events.10 This theory is also not widely accepted as the Cairo stone is badly damaged and the very weak traces of the hieroglyphs leave too much room for different interpretations. Reignedit Little is known about Wenegs reign. The vessel inscriptions mentioning his name only show reports about ceremonial events such as the raising up of the pillars of Horus. This feast is frequently reported on vessels from Nynetjers reign which brings Wenegs chronological position very close to that of Nynetjer. The length of Wenegs rulership is unknown. If he was the same person as king Wadjenes he ruled according to the Royal Canon of Turin for 54 years. If Weneg was the same person as king Tlas mentioned by the historian Manetho he ruled for 17 years. But modern Egyptologists have doubts about both statements and evaluate them as misinterpretations or exaggerations. If Weneg was actually a separate ruler as Richard Weill and Peter Kaplony believe he may have ruled for 12 years depending on their reconstructions of the Cairo stone inscriptions. One theory suggests that the once unified kingdom of Egypt was divided after Nynetjers death into two parts. Consequently for a period after king Wenegs death two kings ruled at the same time over Egypt suggesting that Weneg was an independent ruler. This assumption is based on the observation that both the Thinite and Memphite king lists of the Ramesside era mention the names Wadjenes and Senedj as the immediate successors of king Nynetjer. The Abydos king lists for example mention only six kings for the 
2 nd dynasty whilst all the other kinglists mention nine kings. So Weneg may have been the last king who had ruled over the whole of Egypt before sharing his throne and control over Egypt with another king. It remains unclear who the other king may have been.41011121314 Wenegs successor may have been Senedj but even that is uncertain in this shadowy period of the 
2 nd dynasty of Egypt. Referencesedit  see P. Lacau J.P. Lauer La Pyramide a Degeres IV. Inscriptions Gravees sur les Vases. Cairo 1959 obj.104  B. Grdseloff King Uneg. In Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte No. 44 1944 page 279306.  Winfried Barta in Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde No.108. AkademieVerlag Berlin 1981 ISSN 00442
16 X page 2021.  a b Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards The Cambridge ancient history Vol. 1 Pt. 2 Early history of the Middle East 
3 rd reprint. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2006 ISBN 9780521077910 p. 31.  Jochem Kahl Das System der gyptischen Hieroglyphenschrift in der 
0.3 . Dynastie. In Gttinger Orientforschungen volume IV. 1994 page 354355.  a b Jochem Kahl Ra is my Lord  Searching for the rise of the Sun God at the dawn of Egyptian history. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2007 ISBN 9783447055406 pp. 1214 74.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 9783447026772 page 103107.  Walter Bryan Emery gypten. Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit. FourierVerlag Wiesbaden 1964 ISBN 9783921695395 page 105.  Gunter Dreyer in Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Kairo No.59. Deutsches Archologisches Institut OrientAbteilung Hrsg.. de Gruyter Berlin 2003 S. 115.  a b Peter Kaplony Steingefe der Frhzeit und des Alten Reiches. In Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskund Volumes 133135. AkademieVerlag Berlin 1981 ISSN 00442
16 X.  Aidan Dodson The Mysterious Second Dynasty. In Kemet volume 7 chapter 2 1996 page 1931  Werner Kaiser Zur Nennung von Sened und Peribsen in Saqqara B3. In Gttinger Miszellen  Beitrge zur gyptologischen Diskussion. No. 122. gyptologisches Seminar der Universitt Gttingen Gttingen 1991 ISSN 03443
85 X page 2223.  Barbara Bell Oldest Records of the Nile Floods. In Geographical Journal volume 136 1970 page 569573.  Hans Goedike in Journal of Egypt Archaeology. volume 42 1998 page 50. External linksedit Francesco Raffaele WNG Weneg or Uneg Preceded by Horus Sa Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Wadjenes v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWenegpharaoholdid1183059433 Categories 
28 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 November 2023 at 2321 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width