Senedj - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Identity 
3 Reign 
4 Tomb 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Senedj 37 languages Azrbaycanca Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Hrvatski Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Senedj Sened Sendj Sethenes Cartouche name of Senedj in the Abydos King List cartouche no. 13 Pharaoh Reign 27732753 BC or later Predecessor Wadjenes or Weneg Successor uncertain Sekhemib Peribsen Neferkara I Royal titulary Nomen Stone bowl from Giza King of Upper and Lower Egypt Sened nsw.tbtj snd Tomb of Shery 
4 th dynasty Saqqara Sened Snd Abydos King List Senedj Snd.j Saqqara King List Senedj Snd.j Turin Canon Senedj Snd.j Father Wadjenes  Dynasty 
2 nd Dynasty Senedj also known as Sened and Sethenes was an early Egyptian king pharaoh who may have ruled during the 
2 nd Dynasty. His historical standing remains uncertain. His name is included in the kinglists of the Ramesside era although it is written in different ways While the Abydos King List imitates the archaic form the Royal Canon of Turin and the Saqqara King List form the name with the hieroglyphic sign of a plucked goose. It is unknown how long Senedj ruled over Egypt. The Royal Canon of Turin credits him with 70 years of rulership1 the ancient Egyptian historian Manetho states that Sthenes as he calls Senedj ruled for 41 years.2 Name sourcesedit The possibly only known contemporary inscription from Senedjs reign was found in 1909 by Egyptologist Uvo Hlscher who assisted the excavations at the Khephren and Menkaura temple at Giza. Hlscher found a small thinwalled and polished diorite shard which once belonged to a flat bowl. At the left breakline an incised inscription gives the reading The king of Upper and Lower Egypt Senedj. The inscription goes from the right to the left and exceeds the breakline but the kings name remains reconstructable. The precious artifact was published in 19
12.3  It was also examined by George Andrew Reisner who mentioned it shortly in his book Mycerinus the Temples of the Third Pyramid at Giza.45 The next source referring to king Senedj dates back to the beginning or middle of the 
4 th Dynasty. The name written in a cartouche appears in the inscription on a false door belonging to the mastaba tomb of the high priest Shery at Saqqara. Shery held the title overseer of all wabpriests of king Peribsen in the necropolis of king Senedj overseer of the kapriests of king Senedj and gods servant of Senedj. Senedjs name is written in archaic form and set in a cartouche which is an anachronism since the cartouche itself was not used until the end of 
3 rd Dynasty under king Huni.67 Egyptologist Dietrich Wildung points to two further priests and possible relatives of Shery who both also participated the funerary cult of Senedj Inkef and Siy.8 Senedj is also mentioned in papyrus P. Berlin 3038 which contains medical prescriptions and therapies for numerous diseases. One of these gives instructions for treating foot cramps and closes with the claim that the recipe for the ointment originates from a book of vessels. This book is claimed to originate from the time of king Usphais identical with king Horus Den of Dynasty I. King Senedj allegedly received the book as an inheritance gift.9 The latest mention of Senedjs name appears on a small bronze statuette in the shape of a kneeling king wearing the White Crown of Upper Egypt and holding incense burners in its hands. Additionally the figurine wears a belt which has Senedjs name carved at the back.1011 Egyptologist Peter Munro has written a report about the existence of a mud seal inscription showing the cartouche name NefersenedjRa which he thinks to be a version of Senedj.12 But since the finding was never photographed nor drawn and the alleged object meanwhile got lost Munros claim is highly questioned by many scholars.11 Identityedit The horus name of Senedj remains unknown. The false door inscription of Shery might indicate that Senedj is identical with king SethPeribsen and that the name Senedj was brought into the kinglists because a sethname was not allowed to be mentioned.1314 Other Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck and Dietrich Wildung are not so sure and believe that Senedj and Peribsen were different rulers. They point out that the false door inscription has the names of both strictly separated from each other. Additionally Wildung thinks that Senedj donated an offering chapel to Peribsen in his necropolis.1516 This theory in turn is questioned by Helck and Hermann A. Schlgl who point to the clay seals of king Sekhemib found in the entrance area of Peribsens tomb which might prove that Sekhemib buried Peribsen not Senedj.17 Reignedit Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck Nicolas Grimal Hermann Alexander Schlgl and Francesco Tiradritti believe that king Nynetjer the third ruler of 
2 nd dynasty left a realm that was suffering from an overly complex state administration and that Nynetjer decided to split Egypt to leave it to his two sons or at least two chosen successors who would rule two separate kingdoms in the hope that the two rulers could better administer the states.1819 In contrast Egyptologists such as Barbara Bell believe that an economic catastrophe such as a famine or a long lasting drought affected Egypt. Therefore to better address the problem of feeding the Egyptian population Nynetjer split the realm into two and his successors founded two independent realms until the famine came to an end. Bell points to the inscriptions of the Palermo stone where in her opinion the records of the annual Nile floods show constantly low levels during this period.20 Bells theory is refuted today by Egyptologists such as Stephan Seidlmayer who corrected Bells calculations. Seidlmayer has shown that the annual Nile floods were at usual levels at Nynetjers time up to the period of the Old Kingdom. Bell had overlooked that the heights of the Nile floods in the Palermo stone inscription only takes into account the measurements of the nilometers around Memphis but not elsewhere along the river. Any longlasting drought can therefore be excluded.21 It is also unclear if Senedj already shared his throne with another ruler or if the Egyptian state was split at the time of his death. All known kinglists such as the Sakkara list the Turin King List and the Abydos table list a king Wadjenes as predecessor of Senedj. After Senedj the kinglists differ from each other in respect of the successors. While the Sakkara list and the Turin canon mention the kings Neferkara Neferkasokar and Hudjefa I as immediate successors the Abydos list skips them and lists a king Djadjay identical with king Khasekhemwy. If Egypt was already divided when Senedj gained the throne kings like Sekhemib and Peribsen would have ruled Upper Egypt whilst Senedj and his successors Neferkara and Hudjefa I would have ruled Lower Egypt. The division of Egypt was brought to an end by king Khasekhemwy.22 Tombedit It is unknown where Senedj was buried. Toby Wilkinson assumes that the king might have been buried at Saqqara. To support this view Wilkinson makes the observation that mortuary priests in earlier times were never buried too far away from the king for whom they had practised the mortuary cult. Wilkinson thinks that one of the Great Southern Galleries within the Necropolis of King Djoser 
3 rd Dynasty was originally Senedjs tomb.23 Referencesedit  Alan H. Gardiner The Royal Canon of Turin. Griffith Institute of Oxford Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 p. 15  table I.  William Gillian Waddell Manetho  The Loeb Classical Library Vol. 350. Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 ISBN 0674993853 p. 3741.  Uvo Hlscher Georg Steindorff Das Grabdenkmal des Knigs Chephren  Verffentlichungen der Ernst von Sieglin Expedition in gypten 
1 st Volume. Hinrischssche Buchhandlung Leipzig 1912. page 1
06 ff.  George Andrew Reisner Mycerinus the Temples of the Third Pyramid at Giza. Harvard University Press Boston 1931 page 105.  Wilkinson T.A.H. 2002. Early Dynastic Egypt. Taylor  Francis. p. 7475. ISBN 9781134664207. Retrieved 20240119.  Auguste Mariette Les mastabas de lAncien Empire. Paris 1885 page 9294  Werner Kaiser Zur Nennung von Sened und Peribsen in Sakkara In Gttinger Miszellen no. 122 1991 page 4955.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewutsein ihrer Nachwelt  Mnchener gyptologische Studien. Bd. 17. Deutscher Kunstverlag Mnchen Berlin 1969 p. 4447.  Wolfhart Westendorf Erwachen der Heilkunst die Medizin im alten gypten. Artemis  Winkler 1992 ISBN 3760810721 p. 48.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. gyptologische Abhandlungen Volume 45 Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 103106  a b Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewusstsein ihrer Nachwelt. Part I Mnchener gytologische Studien 17. Deutscher Kunstverlag MnchenBerlin 1969 page 45  Peter Munro NeferSenedjRa In Orientalia Band 57 1988 page 330.  Kenneth Anderson Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions. page 234235  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen.. Deutscher Kunstverlag MnchenBerlin 1984 ISBN 3422008322 page 171.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. page 105106.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewusstsein ihrer Nachwelt. page 45.  Hermann Alexander Schlgl Das Alte gypten. page 7778  415.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell Weinheim 1994 ISBN 9780631193968 page 55.  Francesco Tiradritti  Anna Maria Donadoni Roveri Kemet Alle Sorgenti Del Tempo. Electa Milano 1998 ISBN 8843560425 page 8085.  Barbara Bell Oldest Records of the Nile Floods In Geographical Journal No. 136. 1970 page 569573 M. Goedike Journal of Egypt Archaeology No. 42. 1998 page 50.  Stephan Seidlmayer Historische und moderne Nilstnde Historische und moderne Nilstnde Untersuchungen zu den Pegelablesungen des Nils von der Frhzeit bis in die Gegenwart. Achet Berlin 2001 ISBN 3980373088 page 8789.  Hermann Alexander Schlgl Das Alte gypten Geschichte und Kultur von der Frhzeit bis zu Kleopatra. Beck Hamburg 2006 ISBN 3406549888 page 7778  415.  Toby Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 88  89. External linksedit SenedSenedj Preceded by Wadjenes Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by SethPeribsen v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSenedjoldid1198295327 Categories 
28 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 January 2024 at 1859 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width