Sekhemib-Perenmaat - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Identity 
3 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
3.1 Proponents of the dividedrealmtheory 
3.2 Opponents of the dividedrealmtheory 
4 Tomb 
5 External links 
6 References Toggle the table of contents SekhemibPerenmaat 28 languages  Catal Deutsch   Franais Hrvatski Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar     Mngdngng Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Sekhemib SekhemibPerenmaat Alabaster vessel showing the damaged double name of Sekhemib Pharaoh Reign ca. 2720 BC Predecessor uncertain Peribsen Nynetjer Successor uncertain Peribsen Khasekhemwy Royal titulary Horus name HorSekhemib rSmjb He with the powerful force of will of Horus HorSekhemibPerenmaat rSmjbprnm
3 t He with a powerful force of will he comes forth for the Maat of Horus Nebty name SekhemibPerenmaatNebty Smjbprnm
3 tNb.tj He with the powerful force of will of the two ladies he comes forth for their Maat Full royal title NisutBityNebtySekhemibPerenmaat Nsw.tbtjnb.tySmjbprnm
3 t King of Lower and Upper Egypt He of the two ladies with the powerful force of will who comes forth for the Maat Prenomen Praenomen NisutBitySekhemib Nsw.tbtjSmjb King of Lower and Upper Egypt he with the powerful force of will Burial unknown Dynasty 
2 nd dynasty SekhemibPerenmaat or simply Sekhemib is the Horus name of an early Egyptian king who ruled during the 
2 nd Dynasty. Similar to his predecessor successor or coruler SethPeribsen Sekhemib is contemporarily well attested in archaeological records but he does not appear in any posthumous document. The exact length of his reign is unknown and his burial site has yet to be found.1 Name sourcesedit Sekhemibs name is known from seal impressions and from inscriptions on vessels made of alabaster and breccia. They were found in the entrance of Peribsens tomb at Abydos in the underground galleries beneath the step pyramid of 
3 rd Dynasty king Djoser at Sakkara and on one excavation site at Elephantine.1234 Sekhemibs serekh name is notable as it is the first in Egyptian history that was extended by an epithet. Beside the first name Sekhemib several seal impressions and stone vessel inscriptions show the epithet Perenmaat inside the serekh. Sekhemib used both name forms the single horus name and the double name at the same time. Egyptologists such as Herman te Velde and Wolfgang Helck think that the double name of Sekhemib came in use when the Egyptian state was split into two independent realms. It seems that Sekhemib tried to stress the peaceful political situation prevailing in Egypt at the time. An increased form of such a double name was created and used by a successor of Sekhemib king Khasekhemwy. This king also used a double name and even placed Horus and Seth together as protective deities atop his serekh. Khasekhemwy had tried to express peace and reconciliation between Upper and Lower Egypt with his unusual serekh too.56 Identityedit Vase of Sekhemib bearing the inscription reproduced on the right. At its right it reads The king of Upper and Lower Egypt SekhemibPerenmaat at its left it reads administrator of the house of copper god servant of Kherty National Archaeological Museum France. The historical figure of Sekhemib is the subject of investigation and discussions by Egyptologists and historians to this day. The contradictory findings allow room for plenty of interpretations and theories. Egyptologists such as Walter Bryan Emery Kathryn A. Bard and Flinders Petrie believe that Sekhemib was the same person as king Peribsen a ruler who had connected his name with the deity Seth and who possibly ruled only Upper Egypt. Emery Bard and Petrie point to several clay seals that were found in the tomb entrance of Peribsens necropolis. Sekhemibs tomb has not yet been found.2789 In contrast Egyptologists such as Hermann Alexander Schlgl Wolfgang Helck Peter Kaplony and Jochem Kahl believe that Sekhemib was a different ruler to Peribsen. They point out that the clay seals were only found at the entrance area of Peribsens tomb and that none of them ever shows Peribsen and Sekhemibs names together in one inscription. They compare the findings with the ivory tablets of king Hotepsekhemwy found at the entrance of king Qaas tomb. Therefore Schlgl Helck Kaplony and Kahl are convinced that Sekhemibs seals are merely proof that Sekhemib buried Peribsen.610 Egyptologists such as Toby Wilkinson and Helck believe that Sekhemib and Peribsen could have been related. Their theory is based on the stone vessel inscriptions and seal impressions that show strong similarities in their typographical and grammatical writing styles. The vessels of Peribsen for example show the notation inisetjet tribute of the people of Sethro whilst Sekhemibs inscriptions note inichasut tribute of the desert nomads. A further indication for a relationship between Peribsen and Sekhemib is the serekhname of both as they both use the syllables per and ib in their names.1112 Egyptologists such as Helck identify Sekhemib with the ramesside cartouche name Wadjenes and equate Peribsen with a king named Senedj. Egyptologist Dietrich Wildung thinks alike and identifies Sekhemib with the nebty name WenegNebty and Peribsen with Senedj.613 Reignedit Clay seal of Sekhemib There seems to be archaeological evidence that Sekhemib ruled only in Upper Egypt. His realm would have extended down from Ombos up to the Isle of Elephantine where a new administrative centre called The white house of treasury was founded under Peribsen.14 It remains the subject of discussion by Egyptologists and historians as to if why and when it was decided to split the state. Proponents of the dividedrealmtheoryedit Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck Nicolas Grimal Hermann Alexander Schlgl and Francesco Tiradritti believe that king Ninetjer the third ruler of 
2 nd dynasty and a predecessor of Peribsen left a realm that was suffering from an overly complex state administration and that Ninetjer decided to split Egypt between his two sons or at least his two successors in the hope that the two rulers could better administer the two states.1516 Since the artefacts surviving from his lifetime seem to prove that he and his contemporary Peribsen ruled only in Upper Egypt it is the subject of investigation as to who ruled in Lower Egypt at that time. The Ramesside king lists differ in their succession of royal names from king Senedj onward. A reason may be that the royal table of Saqqara and the royal canon of Turin reflect Memphite traditions which allow Memphite rulers to be mentioned. The Abydos king list instead reflects Thinite traditions and therefore only Thinite rulers appear on that list. Until king Senedj all posthumous king lists accord with each other. After him the Saqqara list and the Turin list mention three kings as successors Neferkara I Neferkasokar and Hudjefa I. The Abydos king list skips these kings and jumps forward to Khasekhemwy calling him Djadjay. The discrepancies are considered by Egyptologists to be the result of the partition of the Egyptian state during the 
2 nd Dynasty.1101516 A further problem is the Horus names and Nebty names of different kings in inscriptions found in the Great Southern Gallery in the necropolis of 
3 rd Dynasty king Djoser at Saqqara. Stone vessel inscriptions mention kings such as Nubnefer WenegNebty Horus Ba Horus Bird and Za but each of these kings is mentioned only a few times which suggests to Egyptologists that each of these kings did not rule very long. King Sneferka might be identical with king Qaa or an ephemeral successor of his. King WenegNebty might be identical with the Ramesside cartouche name Wadjenes. But kings such as Nubnefer Bird and Za remain a mystery. They never appear anywhere else in the historical record other than at Saqqara where the number of objects surviving from their lifetimes is very limited. Schlgl Helck and Peter Kaplony postulate that Nubnefer Za and Bird were the corresponding rulers to Peribsen and Sekhemib and ruled in Lower Egypt whilst the latter two ruled Upper Egypt.110151617 In contrast Egyptologists such as Barbara Bell believe that an economic catastrophe such as a famine or a longlasting drought affected Egypt at that time. To help solve the problems of feeding the Egyptian population Ninetjer split the realm and his successors ruled two independent realms until the famine was successfully brought to an end. Bell points to the inscriptions of the Palermo stone where in her opinion the records of the Nile floods show consistently low levels.18 The administrative titles of the scribes sealbearers and overseers were adjusted to the new political situation. For example titles like sealer of the king were changed into sealer of the king of Upper Egypt. The administration system since the time of Peribsen and Sekhemib shows a clear and well identified hierarchy an example Treasury house  pension office  property  vine yards  private vine yard. King Khasekhemwy the last ruler of 
2 nd Dynasty was able to reunify the state administration of Egypt and therefore unite the whole of Ancient Egypt. He brought the two treasury houses of Egypt under the control of the House of the King bringing them into a new single administration center.1920 Fragment of a diorite vase inscribed with part of the name of pharaoh Sekhemib Perenmaat from the Pyramid of Djoser and now in the Egyptian Museum. The inscription reads from right to left King of Lower and Upper Egypt SekhemibPerenmaat tribute of the foreigners provisions to.... Opponents of the dividedrealmtheoryedit Other Egyptologists such as Michael Rice21 Francesco Tiradritti16 and Wolfgang Helck believe that there was no division of the Egyptian thrones and that Sekhemib and Peribsen were each sole and independent rulers. The suspected division may have been of a mere bureaucratic nature including changes in the titles of highranking officials. It is possible that king Nynetjer or Peribsen decided to split the whole bureaucracy of Egypt into two separate departments in an attempt to reduce the power of the officials. Such an act was not surprising and occurred several times in Egyptian history especially in later dynasties. The scholars also point to the once palatial and well preserved mastaba tombs at Saqqara and Abydos belonging to high officials such as Ruaben and NeferSetekh. These are all dated from the reign of Nynetjer to that of Khasekhemwy the last ruler of the Second Dynasty. Egyptologists consider the archaeological record of the mastabas condition and the original architecture as proof that the statewide mortuary cults for kings and noblemen successfully operated during the entire dynasty. If true their preservation is inconsistent with the theory of civil wars and economic problems during Peribsens reign. Rice Tiradritti and Helck think that Nynetjer decided to leave a divided realm because of private or political reasons and that the split was a formality sustained by Second Dynasty kings.162122 Scholars such as Herman TeVelde23 I. E. S. Edwards24 and Toby Wilkinson25 believe the inscription of the famous Annal stone of Fifth Dynasty a black olivinebasalt slabstone displaying a very detailed king list also argues against the division of the realm. On the stone the kings are listed by their Horus name their gold name their cartouche name and finally with the name of their royal mother. The lists also contain rectangular windows presenting year events from the day of the kings coronation to his death. The most famous fragments of the Annal stone are called the Palermo Stone and the Cairo Stone. On the Cairo stone in line IV the last nine years of king Nynetjer are preserved but most of the year windows are illegible now.25 The Annal stone however gives absolutely no indication of a division of the Egyptian realm. Barta TeVelde Wilkinson and Edwards argue that the theory of state division is untenable. A mere administrative reorganization of the bureaucracy or a split in the priesthood sects seems more likely.25 Bells theory of a famine or drought is refuted today by Egyptologists such as Stephan Seidlmayer who corrected Bells calculations. Seidlmayer has shown that the annual Nile flood was normal during Ninetjers time up to the period of the Old Kingdom. Bell may have overlooked that the height of the Nile floods in the Palermo stone inscriptions only takes into account the measurements of the nilometers around Memphis and not elsewhere along the river. Any longlasting drought at that time can therefore be excluded.26 Three officials from Sekhemibs reign are known to Egyptologists by seal impressions Nebhotep Inykhnum and Maapermin. However Inykhnum might also have held office in later times under kings such as Djoser and Sanakht.27 Tombedit The location of Sekhemibs tomb is unknown. If he was actually the same person as Peribsen he was buried in tomb P at Abydos. If not his burial site may be located at Saqqara.279 External linksedit Francesco Raffaele Horus Sekhemib Perenmaat Referencesedit  a b c d Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London und New York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 9091.  a b c William Matthew Flinders Petrie  Francis Llewellyn Griffith The royal tombs of the first dynasty. Volume II. Trbner  Co. London 1900 page 7 14 19 20  48.  Pierre Lacau und JanPhillip Lauer La Pyramide a Degrees IV.  Inscriptions Gravees sur les Vases Fouilles  Saqqarah. Service des antiquits de lgypte Cairo 1936. page 18 und 91 Bildtafel 39.  Jeoffrey A. Spencer Early Dynastic Objects. British Museum Publications London 1980 page 7678 Obj. No. 278.  Herman te Velde Seth God of Confusion a study of his role in Egyptian mythology and religion. Brill Leiden 1977 ISBN 9004054022 page 72 73  110.  a b c Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thintenzeit. gyptologische Abhandlungen Volume 45 Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 104111  183.  a b Walter Bryan Emery gypten  Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit. Fourier Munich 1964 page 106.  J. P. Ptznik in Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo MDAIK 1999. page 54.  a b Kathryn A. Bard The Emergence of the Egyptian State. in Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. page 86.  a b c Hermann A. Schlgl Das Alte gypten. Geschichte und Kultur von der Frhzeit bis zu Kleopatra. Verlag C. H. Beck Mnchen 2006 ISBN 3406549888 page 78.  Siegfried Schott Altgyptische Festdaten. Verlag der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur MainzWiesbaden 1950 page 55.  Toby Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. page 9091 see also Walter Bryan Emery gypten  Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit. page 106.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewutsein ihrer Nachwelt. Volume I Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien. Mnchener gyptologische Studien Volume. 17 Deutscher Kunstverlag MunichBerlin 1969. page 14  250.  JeanPierrePtznik Die Siegelabrollungen und Rollsiegel der Stadt Elephantine im 3. Jahrtausend vor Christus. Archaeopress Oxford UK 2005 ISBN 1841716855 page 6466.  a b c Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell Weinheim 1994 ISBN 9780631193968 page 55.  a b c d e Francesco Tiradritti  Anna Maria Donadoni Roveri Kemet Alle Sorgenti Del Tempo. Electa Milano 1998 ISBN 8843560425 page 8085.  Peter Kaplony A building named MentiAnkh. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Kairo MDAIK volume 20. de Gruyter Berlin 1965 page 146.  Barbara Bell Oldest Records of the Nile Floods In Geographical Journal No. 136. 1970 page 569573 M. Goedike Journal of Egypt Archaeology No. 42. 1998 page 50.  JeanPierre Ptznick Die Siegelabrollungen und Rollsiegel der Stadt Elephantine im 3. Jahrtausend v. Chr. page 211213 see also JeanPierre Ptznick in Mitteilungen des Deutschen gyptologischen Instituts Kairo. No. 55 Deutsches Archologisches Institut OrientAbteilungHrsg.. de Gruyter Berlin 1999 page 9092.  Christian E. Schulz Schreibgerte und Schreiber in der 0. Bis 3. Dynastie. GRIN Munich 2007 ISBN 3638639096 page 915  a b Michael Rice Whos Who in Ancient Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 2001 ISBN 0415154499 page 72 134  172.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit  gyptologische Abhandlungen Vol. 45. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 p. 103111.  Herman te Velde Seth God of Confusion. A study of his role in Egyptian mythology and religion  Probleme der gyptologie Vol. 6. Brill Leiden 1977 ISBN 9004054022 p. 109111.  I. E. S. Edwards Hrsg. Early history of the middle east  The Cambridge ancient history. Vol. 12 
3 rd edition. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 1970 ISBN 0521077915 p.3132.  a b c Toby A. H. Wilkinson Royal annals of ancient Egypt The Palermo stone and its associated fragments. Taylor and Francis London 2000 ISBN 9780710306678 p. 200206.  Stephan Seidlmayer Historische und moderne Nilstnde Historische und moderne Nilstnde Untersuchungen zu den Pegelablesungen des Nils von der Frhzeit bis in die Gegenwart. Achet Berlin 2001 ISBN 3980373088 page 8789.  Peter Kaplony Inschriften der gyptischen Frhzeit. Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1963 Band III ISBN 3447000
52 X page 406479. v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSekhemibPerenmaatoldid1183185741 Categories 
28 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 November 2023 at 1823 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width