Neferkara I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Identity 
3 Reign 
4 References 
5 External links Toggle the table of contents Neferkara I 29 languages Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar    Mngdngng Nederlands Occitan Polski Portugus  Slovenina Svenska Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian ruler Neferkara I Neferka Aaka Nephercheres Pharaoh Reign length of reign unknown Predecessor Senedj Successor Neferkasokar Royal titulary Nomen Abydos King List Neferkara Nfrk
3 r3 Turin Canon Neferka Nfrk3 Turin Canon alternative reading Aaka 
3 k3 Dynasty 
2 nd Dynasty around 2740 B.C. Neferkara I also Neferka and alternatively Aaka is the cartouche name of a king pharaoh who is said to have ruled during the 
2 nd Dynasty of Ancient Egypt. The exact length of his reign is unknown since the Turin canon lacks the years of rulership1 and the ancient Egyptian priest Manetho suggests that Neferkaras reign lasted 25 years.2 Egyptologists evaluate his statement as misinterpretation or exaggeration. Name sourcesedit Although the name Neferkara meaning the Ka of Re is beautiful appears in the Abydos King list several times this very Pharaoh according to Jrgen von Beckerath and several others is not depicted here. It is assumed that the 
19 th entry in this list is to be assigned to a much later Pharaoh Nebkara whose nomen presumably was Neferka.3 The name Neferkara however appears in the Saqqara King list. The Turin Royal Canon lists a kings name which is disputed for its uncertain reading. Egyptologists such as Alan H. Gardiner read Aaka1 whilst other Egyptologists such as Beckenrath read Neferka. Both kinglists describe Neferkara I as the immediate successor of king Senedj and as the predecessor of king Neferkasokar.456 Identityedit There is no contemporary name source for this king and no Horus name could be connected to Neferkara I up to this day.45 In contrast Egyptologists such as Kim Ryholt believe that NeferkaraNeferka was identical with a sparsely attested king named Sneferka which is also thought to be a name used by king Qaa the last ruler of the 
1 st dynasty for a short time only. Ryholt thinks that Ramesside scribes misleadingly added the symbol of the sun to the name Sneferka ignoring the fact that the sun itself was no object of divine adoration yet during the 
2 nd dynasty. For a comparison he points to cartouche names such as Neferkara II from the kinglist of Abydos and Nebkara I from the Sakkara table.7 Aidan Dodson equated Neferkara with SethPeribsen.8 The ancient historian Manetho called Neferkara I Npherchres and reported that during this kings rulership the Nile was flowing with honey for eleven days. Egyptologists think that this collocation was meant to show that the realm was flourishing under king Nephercheres.69 Reignedit Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck Nicolas Grimal Hermann Alexander Schlgl and Francesco Tiradritti believe that king Nynetjer the third ruler of second dynasty left a realm that was suffering from an overly complex state administration and that Ninetjer decided to split Egypt to leave it to his two sons or at least rightful throne successors who would rule two separate kingdoms in the hope that the two rulers could better administer the states.1011 In contrast Egyptologists such as Barbara Bell believe that an economic catastrophe like a famine or a long lasting drought affected Egypt. Therefore to address the problem of feeding the Egyptian population Ninetjer split the realm and his successors founded two independent realms until the famine came to an end. Bell points to the inscriptions of the Palermo stone where in her opinion the records of the annual Nile floods show constantly low levels during this period.12 Bells theory is refuted today by Egyptologists such as Stephan Seidlmayer who corrected Bells calculations. Seidlmayer has shown that the annual Nile floods were at usual levels at Ninetjers time up to the period of the Old Kingdom. Bell had overlooked that the heights of the Nile floods in the Palermo stone inscription only takes the measurements of the nilometers around Memphis into account but not elsewhere in Egypt. Any longlasting drought can therefore be excluded.13 It is a commonly accepted theory that Neferkara I had to share his throne with another ruler. It is just unclear yet with whom. Later kinglists such as the Sakkara list and the Turin canon list the kings Neferkasokar and Hudjefa I as immediate successors. The Abydos list skips all these three rulers and name a king Djadjay identical with king Khasekhemwy. If Egypt was already divided when Neferkara I gained the throne kings like Sekhemib and Peribsen would have ruled Upper Egypt whilst Neferkara I and his successors would have ruled Lower Egypt. The division of Egypt was brought to an end by king Khasekhemwy.14 Referencesedit  a b Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin. Griffith Institute of Oxford Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 p. 15  Table I.  William Gillian Waddell Manetho The Loeb classical Library Volume 350. Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 Reprint ISBN 0674993853 pp. 3741.  Theis Christoffer 2014 Zu den an der Pyramide Lepsius XIII gefundenen Namen Die Frage nach Nfrk3 und B
3 k3 Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur in German vol. 43 Hamburg Buske p. 438 JSTOR 44160285  a b Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards The Cambridge ancient history Vol. 1 Pt. 2 Early history of the Middle East 
3 rd volume Reprint. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2006 ISBN 0521077915 p. 35.  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen. Deutscher Kunstverlag MnchenBerlin 1984 p. 49.  a b Winfried Barta Die Chronologie der 1. bis 5. Dynastie nach den Angaben des rekonstruierten Annalensteins. In Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde. ZAS volume 108 AkademieVerlag Berlin 1981 ISSN 00442
16 X pp. 1214.  Kim Ryholt in Journal of Egyptian History vol.1. BRILL Leiden 2008 ISSN 18741657 pp. 159173.  Dodson Aidan 1996. The Mysterious 
2 nd Dynasty. KMT. 7 2 20.  Walter Bryan Emery gypten Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit 32002800 v. Chr. p. 19.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell Weinheim 1994 ISBN 9780631193968 p. 55.  Francesco Tiradritti  Anna Maria Donadoni Roveri Kemet Alle Sorgenti Del Tempo. Electa Milano 1998 ISBN 8843560425 p. 8085.  Barbara Bell Oldest Records of the Nile Floods In Geographical Journal No. 136. 1970 p. 569573 M. Goedike Journal of Egypt Archaeology No. 42. 1998 page 50.  Stephan Seidlmayer Historische und moderne Nilstnde Historische und moderne Nilstnde Untersuchungen zu den Pegelablesungen des Nils von der Frhzeit bis in die Gegenwart. Achet Berlin 2001 ISBN 3980373088 pp. 8789.  Hermann Alexander Schlgl Das Alte gypten Geschichte und Kultur von der Frhzeit bis zu Kleopatra. Beck Hamburg 2006 ISBN 3406549888 pp. 7778  415. External linksedit Francesco Raffaele Nwbnefer Neferkara and Neferkaseker Preceded by Sekhemib Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Neferkasokar v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNeferkaraIoldid1120718046 Categories 
28 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 November 2022 at 1256 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width