Neferkasokar - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Reign 
3 External links 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Neferkasokar 24 languages Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Galego Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands Polski Portugus  Slovenina Svenska Tagalog  Trke   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Seventh pharaoh of the second Egyptian dynasty Neferkasokar Neferkaseker Sesochris Seal impression showing the cartouche name of king Neferkasokar Pharaoh Reign 8 years Predecessor Neferkara I Successor Hudjefa I Royal titulary Nomen Saqqara King List Neferkasokar Nfrk
3 skr Turin Canon Neferkasokar Nfrk
3 skr Cylinder seal NisutbitjNeferkasokar nsw.tbtjNfrk
3 skr Dynasty 
2 nd Dynasty around 2740 B.C. Neferkasokar Ancient Egyptian NeferKaSeker which means beautiful soul of Sokar or the soul of Sokar is complete was an Ancient Egyptian king pharaoh who may have ruled in Egypt during the 
2 nd Dynasty. Very little is known about him since no contemporary records about him have been found. Rather his name has been found in later sources.1 Name sourcesedit Neferkasokar appears in the Saqqara king list from the tomb of the high priest Tjuneroy where he is recorded as succeeding king Neferkare I and precedes king Hudjefa I in the ninth cartouche.2 He also appears in the Royal Canon of Turin as the successor of a king Neferkara I and as the predecessor of king Hudjefa I. His cartouche can be found in column III line 1. The Turin papyrus records him having a reign of 8 years and 3 months.3 Furthermore Neferkasokars name appears on a steatite cylinder seal of unknown provenance. The inscription bears the kings name twice within royal cartouches. The first cartouche shows the name of the god Sokar on top whilst the second cartouche places the syllable Neferka above the gods name. A guiding inscription says Merinetjeru which means beloved one of the gods. This titulary was common from the Middle Kingdom onwards thus the cylinder seal is not likely to originate from the 
2 nd Dynasty. Most Egyptologists date the object to the 
13 th Dynasty. Some Egyptologists also question the authenticity of the seal.4 Neferkasokar also plays an important role in a papyrus originating from the Middle Kingdom. The text was translated around 237 BC into the demotic language and is preserved in papyrus p. Wien D6319. The papyrus gives instructions on how to build temples and how the temple priests should perform their tasks. The papyrus also includes a story that royal scribes under the supervision of prince Djedefhor had discovered an old document in a forgotten chamber which was sealed by king Neferkasokar. The discovered papyrus contained a report of a famine that affected Egypt for seven years and king Neferkasokar was instructed by a celestial oracle through a dream to restore all Egyptian temples. When the king finished his mission successfully the Nile started flowing normally again. As a result Neferkasokar issues a decree which is rediscovered by prince Djedefhor.5 Egyptologist and linguist Joachim Friedrich Quack later gave this treatise the name Book of the Temple.6 Reignedit Very little is known about Neferkasokars reign. Egyptologists such as Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards and Walter Bryan Emery think that Neferkasokar ruled only in Lower Egypt since his name appeared in the Sakkara king list but is missing from the Abydos king list while the Sakkara king lists reflect Memphite traditions. Neferkasokar is also thought to have ruled in Lower Egypt around the same time that kings such as Peribsen and SekhemibPerenmaat ruled in Upper Egypt. This assumption would be consistent with the view of a number of Egyptologists that at that time Egypt was divided into two parts. The theory of a divided realm since the end of king Nynetjers reign is based on a study of the name of king Peribsen whose name is connected to the Ombite deity Seth to show that he came from Ombos and ruled an area that included Ombos. Peribsen himself is contemporaneously documented in materials found in the Thinite region but was excluded from documentation associated with the Memphites. His case therefore corresponds to Neferkasokars case but for Lower Egypt. Neferkasokars predecessors may have been king Senedj and king Neferkara I his successor may have been king Hudjefa I.78910 External linksedit Francesco Raffaele Nwbnefer Neferkara and Neferkaseker Referencesedit  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 page 175.  Jan Assmann Elke Blumenthal Georges Posener Literatur und Politik im pharaonischen und ptolemischen gypten. Institut franais darchologie orientale ParisKairo 1999 ISBN 2724702514 page 277.  Alan H. Gardiner The Royal Canon of Turin. Griffith Institute of Oxford Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 page 15  Table I.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen. Deutscher Kunstverlag MnchenBerlin 1984 ISBN 3422008322 page 29.  Martin A. Stadler Weiser und Wesir Studien zu Vorkommen Rolle und Wesen des Gottes Thot im gyptischen Totenbuch. Mohr Siebeck 2009 ISBN 3161498542 page 84  85.  Joachim Friedrich Quack Ein gyptisches Handbuch des Tempels und seine griechische bersetzung. Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik 119 1997 S. 297300.  Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards The Cambridge ancient history Vol. 1 Pt. 2 Early history of the Middle East 3. Ausgabe Reprint. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2006 ISBN 0521077915 page 35.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. Otto Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 35.  Walter Bryan Emery gypten Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit 32002800 v. Chr. Fourier Munic 1964 page 19.  Herman Alexander Schlgl Das Alte gypten. Beck Hamburg 2006 ISBN 3406549888 page 77  78. Preceded by Neferkara I Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Hudjefa I v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNeferkasokaroldid1088505541 Categories 
28 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 May 2022 at 1209 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width