Horus Sa - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 Identity 
3 Tomb 
4 Further reading 
5 References Toggle the table of contents Horus Sa 15 languages Catal Deutsch Franais Bahasa Indonesia  Magyar   Nederlands Portugus  Slovenina Svenska   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Possible early Egyptian pharaoh Horus Sa Weneg  Senedj  Sanakht  Vessel fragment bearing the inscription wtk3 rwz3. Pharaoh Reign 
2 nd or 
3 rd Dynasty Royal titulary Burial uncertain gallery tomb at Saqqara  Gisr elmudir  Horus Sa also Horus Za Sa and Za was a possible early Egyptian pharaoh who may have reigned during the Second or Third Dynasty of Egypt. His existence is disputed as is the meaning of the artifacts that have been interpreted as confirming his existence. Attestationsedit Horus Sa is known from vessel fragments with black ink inscriptions showing his name. These vessels were found in the east galleries beneath Djosers pyramid at Saqqara. The inscriptions are short and written in cursive handwritings. In all cases the name Horus Sa does not appear within a serekh and its identification as the Horusname of a king is disputed.12 The name Horus Sa always appears within the inscription wtk3 rwz3 House of the Ka of Horus Sa regularly found together with the names of Inykhnum and MaaaperMin two highranking officials who served in the Kahouse. During the Early Dynastic Period of Egypt the House of the Ka was a forerunner of the mortuary temple a place where a cult to the Ka of a deceased ruler was performed. A further inscription wtk3 rwz3 was found in the 19
80 s at Saqqara in the area of the tomb of Maya and very close to that of MeryraMeryneith.3 Maya and MeryraMeryneith were both late 
18 th dynasty court officials who reused 
2 nd dynasty tombs for themselves some 1500 years after the death of their original owners.34 Identityedit Jrgen von Beckerath Dietrich Wildung and Peter Kaplony proposed that Sa is a short form of the Horusname Sanakht.5 Wolfgang Helck rejects this argument on the grounds that the ink inscriptions from the eastgalleries of Djosers pyramid complex date predominantly from the reign of Nynetjer or shortly thereafter while Sanakht reigned during the mid
3 rd dynasty. Furthermore inscriptions mentioning the House of the Ka of Hotepsekhemwy are stylistically similar to that of Horus Sa which would place Sa in the 
2 nd dynasty since Hotepsekhemwy was the first ruler of that dynasty. Thus Helck proposed that Horus Sa is the Horusname of another shadowy ruler of the 
2 nd dynasty Weneg whose Horusname is otherwise unknown.6 The Egyptologist Jochem Kahl recently challenged this hypothesis identifying Weneg with Raneb.7 Alternatively Kaplony reconstructed the Horusname of Weneg from the Cairo fragment of the Palermo stone as Wenegsekhemwy.8 In both cases Horus Sa cannot be the Horusname of Weneg and the two would not designate the same king. Consequently Kaplony equated Horus Sa with njswtbity WrZaKhnwm The king of Upper and Lower Egypt Wersakhnum and credited him a reign of 2 months and 23 days during the interregnum between Khasekhemwy and Djoser.9 However Kaplonys hypothesis has been undermined by the discovery of clay seals of Djoser in Khasekhemwys tomb indicating that the former immediately succeeded and buried the latter.10 Horus Sa could instead be the Horusname of Senedj or another 
2 nd dynasty king ruling in Memphis during the troubled period following the reign of Nynetjer.11 However Egyptologists such as JeanPhilippe Lauer Pierre Lacau and Ilona Regulski call for caution of the correct reading of the inscriptions. Especially the birdsign at the top of the Kahouse might also depict a swallow which would make the inscription to be read as WersahutKa great protection of the Kahouse. Regulski prefers the reading as a Horusbird though she doesnt explicitly see it as the name of a king. She dates the inscriptions to the end of Khasekhemwys reign.1 Tombedit The burial place of Horus Sa is unknown. Nabil Swelim associated Horus Sa with the unfinished enclosure of Gisr elMudir in west Saqqara.12 This hypothesis has not gained wide acceptance and the Gisr elMudir has been attributed to various second dynasty kings in particular Khasekhemwy.13 Alternatively the Egyptologist Joris van Wetering proposed that the gallery tomb used by the high priest of Aten MeryraMeryneith in north Saqqara was originally that of Horus Sa since an inscription wtk3 rwz3 was found in the close vicinity of the tomb.34 Further readingedit Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 Pierre Lacau  JeanPhilippe Lauer La Pyramide  Degrs V.  Inscriptions Graves sur les Vases Fouilles  Saqqarah Service des antiquits de lgypte Kairo 1936 Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 Nabil Swelim Some Problems on the History of the Third Dynasty Archaeology Society Alexandria 1983 Ilona Regulski Second dynasty ink inscriptions from Saqqara paralleled in the Abydos material from the Royal Museums of Art and History in Brussels. In Stan Hendrickx R.F. Friedman Barbara Adams  K. M. Cialowicz Egypt at its origins. Studies in memory of Barbara Adams. Proceedings of the international Conference Origin of the State Predynastic and Early Dynastic Egypt Krakw 
28 th August  
1 st September 2002  Orientalia Lovaniensia analecta. Vol. 138. Peeters Publishers Leuven NL 2004 ISBN 9042914696. Referencesedit  a b Ilona Regulski Second dynasty ink inscriptions from Saqqara paralleled in the Abydos material from the Royal Museums of Art and History in Brussels. pp. 953959.  Wolfgang Helck Die Datierung der Gefaufschriften aus der Djoserpyramide in Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde 106 1979 ISSN 00442
16 X pp. 120132.  a b c Joris van Wetering The Royal Cemetery of the Early Dynastic Period at Saqqara and the Second Dynasty Royal Tombs in Proceedings of the Krakow Conference 2002.  a b Ren van Walsem Sporen van een revolutie in Saqqara. Het nieuw ontdekte graf van Meryneith alias Meryre en zijn plaats in de Amarnaperiode Phoenix  bulletin uitgegeven door het VooraziatischEgyptisch Genootschap Ex Oriente Lux 47 12 pp. 6989. see also M. J. Raven and R. Walsem Preliminary report on the Leiden Excavations at Saqqara 2001 2003 2004 2007 Complete list Archived 17 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen p. 243.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit p. 103 and 108.  Jochem Kahl Ra is my Lord  Searching for the rise of the Sun God at the dawn of Egyptian history Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2007 ISBN 3447055405 pp. 1214  74.  Peter Kaplony Steingefsse mit Inschriften der Frhzeit und das Alten Reiches. Monographies Reine Elisabeth Bruxelles 1968  Peter Kaplony Die Inschriften der gyptischen Frhzeit. O. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1963 pp. 380 468  611.  Toby Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London 1999 p. 83  95  Thomas Von der Way Zur Datierung des LabyrinthGebudes auf dem Tell elFarain Buto in Gttinger Miszellen 157 1997 107111  Nabil Swelim Some Problems on the History of the Third Dynasty p. 33 and 181182.  Ian Mathieson Elizabeth Bettles Joanne Clarke Corinne Duhig Salima Ikram Louise Maguire Sarah Quie Ana Tavares The National Museums of Scotland Saqqara Survey Project 19931995. In Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 83 1997 S. 1753 hier S.36 
38 ff. 53. Preceded by Nubnefer Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Weneg pharaoh v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHorusSaoldid1212369597 Categories 
27 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Pharaohs of the Third Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Articles with VIAF identifiers This page was last edited on 7 March 2024 at 1416 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width