Hudjefa I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name sources 
2 Identity 
3 Reign 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Hudjefa I 22 languages etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Galego Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands Polski Portugus  Slovenina Svenska Tagalog    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Hudjefa I in hieroglyphs Reign possibly 2 years Predecessor Neferkasokar Successor Khasekhemwy Hudjefa wf3 Turin canon Hudjefa wf3 Sakkara kinglist Hudjefa Ancient Egyptian for erased or missing is the pseudonym for a 
2 nd Dynasty pharaoh as reported on the Turin canon a list of kings written during the reign of Ramses II. Hudjefa is now understood to mean that the name of the king was already missing from the document from which the Turin canon was copied. The length of the reign associated to Hudjefa on the canon is 11 years.1 Because of the position of Hudjefa on the Turin list he is sometimes identified with a king Sesochris reported in the Aegyptiaca a history of Egypt written by the Egyptian priest Manetho in the 
3 rd century BC. Manetho credits this pharaoh with 48 years of reign. Egyptologists have attempted to relate Hudjefa with archaeologically attested kings of the period in particular SethPeribsen. Name sourcesedit The name Hudjefa appears only in the Royal Table of Sakkara and in the Royal Canon of Turin. Both king lists describe Hudjefa I as the immediate successor of king Neferkasokar and as the predecessor of king Khasekhemwy here named Bebty.234 Identityedit Egyptologists and historians have had great difficulty linking Hudjefa I to any archaeologically identified ruler. The problem is that Hudjefa is not a personal name in the conventional sense. Hudjefa means erased and might reveal that the original kings name originally listed in a document or inscribed on some object was unreadable when the scribe tried to compile the king list. It is thought that a scribe simply noted erased but then erroneously put the word into a cartouche thus making it look like a personal name. Later scribes and students of Egyptian history misinterpreted the arrangement and adopted it into their documents as a kings name.25 The ancient Greek historian Manetho probably called Hudjefa I Sschris and reported that this kings body had a measurement of five cubits in its height and three hands in its breadth. Egyptologists doubt the basis of this observation as no burial site for Hudjefa I has ever been found.46 Egyptologists such as N. Dautzenberg and Wolfgang Helck once considered that Hudjefa I might be identical with king SethPeribsen. To support their theory they pointed out that an 
11 year reign  as noted in the Royal Canon of Turin  would be inconsistent with a king whose name has been lost. Rather in their opinion it would make sense if the rulers name was not allowed to be mentioned in later times. This was already considered to be the case of king Peribsen whose birth name was banished from Ramesside king lists.7 Reignedit Egyptologists such as Wolfgang Helck Nicolas Grimal Hermann Alexander Schlgl and Francesco Tiradritti believe that king Nynetjer the third ruler of 
2 nd dynasty and a predecessor of Peribsen left a realm that was suffering from an overly complex state administration and that Nynetjer decided to split Egypt to leave it to his two sons or at least two chosen successors who would rule two separate kingdoms in the hope that the two rulers could better administer the states.89 In contrast Egyptologists such as Barbara Bell believe that an economic catastrophe such as a famine or a long lasting drought affected Egypt. Therefore to better address the problem of feeding the Egyptian population Ninetjer split the realm into two and his successors founded two independent realms until the famine came to an end. Bell points to the inscriptions of the Palermo stone where in her opinion the records of the annual Nile floods show constantly low levels during this period.10 Bells theory is refuted today by Egyptologists such as Stephan Seidlmayer who corrected Bells calculations. Seidlmayer has shown that the annual Nile floods were at usual levels at Nynetjers time up to the period of the Old Kingdom. Bell had overlooked that the heights of the Nile floods in the Palermo stone inscription only takes into account the measurements of the nilometers around Memphis but not elsewhere along the river. Any longlasting drought can therefore be excluded.11 It is accepted amongst a number of Egyptologists that Hudjefa I had to share his throne with another ruler although it is unclear as to who that ruler was. Later king lists such as the Sakkara list and the Turin Canon list the kings Neferkara I and Neferkasokar as his predecessors and king Khasekhemwy as immediate successors. The Abydos list skips the rulers Neferkara I Neferkasokar and Hudjefa I completely and name a king Djadjay identical with king Khasekhemwy. If Egypt was already divided when Hudjefa I gained the throne kings like Sekhemib and Peribsen would have ruled Upper Egypt whilst Hudjefa I and his predecessors would have ruled Lower Egypt. The division of Egypt was brought to an end by king Khasekhemwy.12 Referencesedit  Gardiner Alan H. 1997. The Royal Canon of Turin. Oxford Griffith Institute of Oxford. ISBN 0900416483. p. 15 and Table I.  a b Iorwerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards The Cambridge Ancient History Vol. 1 Pt. 2 Early history of the Middle East 
3 rd volume Reprint. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2006 ISBN 0521077915 page 35.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen. Deutscher Kunstverlag MnchenBerlin 1984 page 49.  a b Winfried Bartha in Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde ZAS volume 108. AkademieVerlag Berlin 1981 ISSN 00442
16 X page 1214.  Herman Alexander Schlgl Das Alte gypten Geschichte und Kultur von der Frhzeit bis zu Kleopatra. Beck Hamburg 2006 ISBN 3406549888 page 78.  Walter Bryan Emery gypten Geschichte und Kultur der Frhzeit 32002800 v. Chr. page 19.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit gyptologische Abhandlungen. Volume 45. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 page 125.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell Weinheim 1994 ISBN 9780631193968 page 55.  Francesco Tiradritti  Anna Maria Donadoni Roveri Kemet Alle Sorgenti Del Tempo. Electa Milano 1998 ISBN 8843560425 page 8085.  Barbara Bell Oldest Records of the Nile Floods In Geographical Journal No. 136. 1970 page 569573 M. Goedike Journal of Egypt Archaeology No. 42. 1998 page 50.  Stephan Seidlmayer Historische und moderne Nilstnde Historische und moderne Nilstnde Untersuchungen zu den Pegelablesungen des Nils von der Frhzeit bis in die Gegenwart. Achet Berlin 2001 ISBN 3980373088 page 8789.  Hermann Alexander Schlgl Das Alte gypten Geschichte und Kultur von der Frhzeit bis zu Kleopatra. Beck Hamburg 2006 ISBN 3406549888 page 7778  415. Preceded by Neferkasokar Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Khasekhemwy v t e Second Dynasty of Ancient Egypt Attested pharaohs Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Weneg Nynetjer SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Khasekhemwy Obscure pharaoh names Horus Ba Ba Horus Sa Hudjefa I Neferkara I Neferkasokar Nubnefer Senedj Sneferka Wadjenes Queens consort Menka Nimaathap Other royals Khenmetptah Satkhnum Sehener Shepsetipet Wadjitefni Mesenka Nisuheqet Perneb Other people Inykhnum NeferSetekh PehenPtah Monument Gisr elMudir Shunet El Zebib Capital Thinis v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHudjefaIoldid1114879328 Categories 
28 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Second Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 October 2022 at 1900 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width