Horus - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Horus and the pharaoh 
3 Origin mythology Toggle Origin mythology subsection 
3.1 Genealogy 
4 Mythological roles Toggle Mythological roles subsection 
4.1 Sky god 
4.2 Conflict between Horus and Set 
4.3 Golden Horus Osiris 
5 Other forms of Horus Toggle Other forms of Horus subsection 
5.1 Heruur Horus the Elder 
5.2 Herupakhered Horus the Younger 
5.3 HeruBehdeti Horus of Behdet 
5.4 Heremakhet Horus in the Horizon 
6 Celebrations of Horus 
7 Suggested influence on Christianity 
8 In popular culture 
9 Gallery 
10 See also 
11 Notes 
12 See also 
13 References 
14 External links Toggle the table of contents Horus 87 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Asturianu Azrbaycanca    Boarisch  Brezhoneg Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Jawa  Kiswahili Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Malagasy    Bahasa Melayu     Mngdngng  Nederlands   Norsk bokml Occitan    Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Trke   Ting Vit Winaray   Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian war and sky deity This article is about the ancient Egyptian deity. For the Roman poet see Horace. For other uses see Horus disambiguation. Horus Horus was often the ancient Egyptians national tutelary deity. He was usually depicted as a falconheaded man wearing the pschent or a red and white crown as a symbol of kingship over the entire kingdom of Egypt. Name in hieroglyphs Major cult center Nekhen Edfu1 Symbol Eye of Horus Personal information Parents Osiris and Isis Osiris and Nephthys2 Hathor3 Siblings Anubisa Bastetb Consort Hathor Isis Serket4 Nephthys2 Offspring Ihy Four Sons of Horus Horus the Elder Equivalents Greek equivalent Apollo Nubian equivalent Mandulis Horus also known as Heru Har Her or Hor5 in Ancient Egyptian is one of the most significant ancient Egyptian deities who served many functions most notably as the god of kingship healing protection the sun and the sky. He was worshipped from at least the late prehistoric Egypt until the Ptolemaic Kingdom and Roman Egypt. Different forms of Horus are recorded in history and these are treated as distinct gods by Egyptologists.6 These various forms may be different manifestations of the same multilayered deity in which certain attributes or syncretic relationships are emphasized not necessarily in opposition but complementary to one another consistent with how the Ancient Egyptians viewed the multiple facets of reality.7 He was most often depicted as a falcon most likely a lanner falcon or peregrine falcon or as a man with a falcon head.8 The earliest recorded form of Horus is the tutelary deity of Nekhen in Upper Egypt who is the first known national god specifically related to the ruling pharaoh who in time came to be regarded as a manifestation of Horus in life and Osiris in death.6 The most commonly encountered family relationship describes Horus as the son of Isis and Osiris and he plays a key role in the Osiris myth as Osiriss heir and the rival to Set the murderer and brother of Osiris. In another tradition Hathor is regarded as his mother and sometimes as his wife.6 Claudius Aelianus wrote that Egyptians called the god Apollo Horus in their own language.9 However Plutarch elaborating further on the same tradition reported by the Greeks specified that the one Horus whom the Egyptians equated with the Greek Apollo was in fact Horus the Elder who is distinct from Horus the son of Osiris and Isis that would make him the Younger.10 Etymology Horus is recorded in Egyptian hieroglyphs as r.w Falcon  the original pronunciation has been reconstructed as auw in Old Egyptian and early Middle Egyptian a in later Middle Egyptian and o in Late Egyptian. Additional meanings are thought to have been the distant one or one who is above over.11 As the language changed over time it appeared in Coptic varieties variously as ho or o  and was adopted into ancient Greek as  Hros pronounced at the time as hros. It also survives in Late Egyptian and Coptic theophoric name forms such as Siese son of Isis and Harsiese Horus Son of Isis. Horus and the pharaoh Horus offers life to the pharaoh Ramesses II. Painted limestone. c.1275 BCE 
19 th dynasty. From the small temple built by Ramses II in Abydos Louvre museum Paris France. The pharaoh was associated with many specific deities. He was identified directly with Horus who represented kingship itself and was seen as a protector of the pharaoh12 and he was seen as the son of Ra who ruled and regulated nature as the pharaoh ruled and regulated society. The Pyramid Texts c.24002300 BCE describe the nature of the pharaoh in different characters as both Horus and Osiris. The pharaoh as Horus in life became the pharaoh as Osiris in death where he was united with the other gods. New incarnations of Horus succeeded the deceased pharaoh on earth in the form of new pharaohs.13 Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Cosmology Duat Maat Mythology Index Numerology Philosophy Soul Practices Funerals Offerings Offering formula Temples Priestess of Hathor Pyramids Deities list Ogdoad Amun Amunet Hauhet Heh Kauket Kek Naunet Nu Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun Duau god F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mandulis Medjed Mafdet Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nemty Nekhbet Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Locations Aaru Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Aani Abtu Ankh Atef Atet Book of Thoth Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Griffin Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Hieracosphinx Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Matet boat Medjed Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Serpopard Set animal Shen ring Sphinx Tyet Uraeus Ushabti Wassceptre Winged sun Texts Funerary texts Amduat  Books of Breathing  Book of Caverns  Book of the Dead  Book of the Earth  Book of Gates Related religions Atenism Hermeticism Thelema Kemeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy  Church of the Most High Goddess Ancient Egypt portal v t e The lineage of Horus the eventual product of unions between the children of Atum may have been a means to explain and justify pharaonic power. The gods produced by Atum were all representative of cosmic and terrestrial forces in Egyptian life. By identifying Horus as the offspring of these forces then identifying him with Atum himself and finally identifying the Pharaoh with Horus the Pharaoh theologically had dominion over all the world. Origin mythology In one tale Horus is born to the goddess Isis after she retrieved all the dismembered body parts of her murdered husband Osiris except his penis which was thrown into the Nile and eaten by a catfishMedjed1415 or sometimes depicted as instead by a crab and according to Plutarchs account used her magic powers to resurrect Osiris and fashion a phallus16 to conceive her son older Egyptian accounts have the penis of Osiris surviving. After becoming pregnant with Horus Isis fled to the Nile Delta marshlands to hide from her brother Set who jealously killed Osiris and who she knew would want to kill their son.17 There Isis bore a divine son Horus. As birth death and rebirth are recurrent themes in Egyptian lore and cosmology it is not particularly strange that Horus also is the brother of Osiris and Isis by Nut and Geb together with Nephthys and Set.tone This elder Horus is called Hrwwr  HourouUr  as opposed to HrwPKhrd  the younger Horus at some point adopted by the Greeks as Harpocrates.citation needed Osiris is depicted on a lapis lazuli pillar in the center flanked by Horus on the left and Isis on the right in this Twentysecond Dynasty statuette Genealogy Ra God of the sun Tefnut Shu Geb Nut Isis Osiris Nephthys Set Horus Hathor Mythological roles rr
3 ty RaHorakhty in hieroglyphs Sky god Horus Louvre Shen rings in his grasp Detail of Horuss face from a statue of Horus and Set placing the crown of Upper Egypt on the head of Ramesses III. Twentieth Dynasty early 
12 th century BC. Since Horus was said to be the sky he was considered to also contain the Sun and Moon.18 Egyptians believed that the Sun was his right eye and the Moon his left and that they traversed the sky when he a falcon flew across it.19 Later the reason that the Moon was not as bright as the sun was explained by a tale known as The Contendings of Horus and Seth. In this tale it was said that Seth the patron of Upper Egypt and Horus the patron of Lower Egypt had battled for Egypt brutally with neither side victorious until eventually the gods sided with Horus. As Horus was the ultimate victor he became known as r.w or Horus the Great but more usually translated as Horus the Elder. In the struggle Set had lost a testicle and Horus eye was gouged out. Horus was occasionally shown in art as a naked boy with a finger in his mouth sitting on a lotus with his mother. In the form of a youth Horus was referred to as nfr r.w Good Horus transliterated Neferhor Nephoros or Nopheros reconstructed as nafiru aruw. Eye of Horus or Wedjat The Eye of Horus is an ancient Egyptian symbol of protection and royal power from deities in this case from Horus or Ra. The symbol is seen on images of Horus mother Isis and on other deities associated with her. In the Egyptian language the word for this symbol was wedjat wt.2021 It was the eye of one of the earliest Egyptian deities Wadjet who later became associated with Bastet Mut and Hathor as well. Wadjet was a solar deity and this symbol began as her allseeing eye. In early artwork Hathor is also depicted with this eye.22 Funerary amulets were often made in the shape of the Eye of Horus. The Wedjat or Eye of Horus is the central element of seven gold faience carnelian and lapis lazuli bracelets found on the mummy of Shoshenq II.23 The Wedjat was intended to protect the king here in the afterlife23 and to ward off evil. Egyptian and Near Eastern sailors would frequently paint the symbol on the bow of their vessel to ensure safe sea travel.24 Horus was also thought to protect the sky.12 Conflict between Horus and Set Isis in the form of a bird copulates with the deceased Osiris. At either side are Horus although he is as yet unborn and Isis in human form.25 Horus was told by his mother Isis to protect the people of Egypt from Set the god of the desert who had killed Horus father Osiris.2627 Horus had many battles with Set not only to avenge his father but to choose the rightful ruler of Egypt. In these battles Horus came to be associated with Lower Egypt and became its patron. Horus spears Set who appears in the form of a hippopotamus as Isis looks on According to The Contendings of Horus and Seth Set is depicted as trying to prove his dominance by seducing Horus and then having sexual intercourse with him. However Horus places his hand between his thighs and catches Sets semen then subsequently throws it in the river so that he may not be said to have been inseminated by Set. Horus or Isis herself in some versions then deliberately spreads his semen on some lettuce which was Sets favourite food. After Set had eaten the lettuce they went to the gods to try to settle the argument over the rule of Egypt. The gods first listened to Sets claim of dominance over Horus and call his semen forth but it answered from the river invalidating his claim. Then the gods listened to Horus claim of having dominated Set and call his semen forth and it answered from inside Set.2829 A personified Eye of Horus offers incense to the enthroned god Osiris in a painting from the tomb of Pashedu thirteenth century BC30 However Set still refused to relent and the other gods were getting tired from over eighty years of fighting and challenges. Horus and Set challenged each other to a boat race where they each raced in a boat made of stone. Horus and Set agreed and the race started. But Horus had an edge his boat was made of wood painted to resemble stone rather than true stone. Sets boat being made of heavy stone sank but Horus did not. Horus then won the race and Set stepped down and officially gave Horus the throne of Egypt.31 Upon becoming king after Sets defeat Horus gives offerings to his deceased father Osiris thus reviving and sustaining him in the afterlife. After the New Kingdom Set was still considered the lord of the desert and its oases.32 In many versions of the story Horus and Set divide the realm between them. This division can be equated with any of several fundamental dualities that the Egyptians saw in their world. Horus may receive the fertile lands around the Nile the core of Egyptian civilization in which case Set takes the barren desert or the foreign lands that are associated with it Horus may rule the earth while Set dwells in the sky and each god may take one of the two traditional halves of the country Upper and Lower Egypt in which case either god may be connected with either region. Yet in the Memphite Theology Geb as judge first apportions the realm between the claimants and then reverses himself awarding sole control to Horus. In this peaceable union Horus and Set are reconciled and the dualities that they represent have been resolved into a united whole. Through this resolution the order is restored after the tumultuous conflict.33 Horus and Set binding together upper and lower Egypt Egyptologists have often tried to connect the conflict between the two gods with political events early in Egypts history or prehistory. The cases in which the combatants divide the kingdom and the frequent association of the paired Horus and Set with the union of Upper and Lower Egypt suggest that the two deities represent some kind of division within the country. Egyptian tradition and archaeological evidence indicate that Egypt was united at the beginning of its history when an Upper Egyptian kingdom in the south conquered Lower Egypt in the north. The Upper Egyptian rulers called themselves followers of Horus and Horus became the tutelary deity of the unified polity and its kings. Yet Horus and Set cannot be easily equated with the two halves of the country. Both deities had several cult centers in each region and Horus is often associated with Lower Egypt and Set with Upper Egypt. Other events may have also affected the myth. Before even Upper Egypt had a single ruler two of its major cities were Nekhen in the far south and Nagada many miles to the north. The rulers of Nekhen where Horus was the patron deity are generally believed to have unified Upper Egypt including Nagada under their sway. Set was associated with Nagada so it is possible that the divine conflict dimly reflects an enmity between the cities in the distant past. Much later at the end of the Second Dynasty c.28902686 BCE Pharaoh SethPeribsen used the Set animal to write his serekh name in place of the falcon hieroglyph representing Horus. His successor Khasekhemwy used both Horus and Set in the writing of his serekh. This evidence has prompted conjecture that the Second Dynasty saw a clash between the followers of the Horus king and the worshippers of Set led by SethPeribsen. Khasekhemwys use of the two animal symbols would then represent the reconciliation of the two factions as does the resolution of the myth.34 Golden Horus Osiris Horus gradually took on the nature as both the son of Osiris and Osiris himself. He was referred to as Golden Horus Osiris.35363738 In the temple of Denderah he is given the full royal titulary of both that of Horus and Osiris. He was sometimes believed to be both the father of himself as well as his own son and some later accounts have Osiris being brought back to life by Isis.39 Other forms of Horus Horus represented as a crowned falcon Haremakhet a form of Horus in which he had the body of a lion based on depictions from antiquity Horimyshenut a form of Horus in which he had the body of a crocodile Heruur Major cult center Heliopolis Gizah Symbol hawkheaded man Personal information Parents Geb and Nut Siblings Osiris Isis Set and Nephthys Consort Serqet Hathor TaBitjet Offspring Imset Hapi Duamutef Qebehsenuef Heruur Horus the Elder Heruur or Herwer and Haroeris to the Ptolemaic Greeks also known as Horus the Elder was a form of Horus where he was the son of Geb and Nut. He was one of the oldest gods of ancient Egypt being worshipped at the influential Predynastic town of Nekhen Hierakonpolis.40 By the Old Kingdom he had become the first national god and the patron of the Pharaoh.41 He was called the son of truth42 signifying his role as an important upholder of Maat. His right eye was the Sun and his left eye was the Moon. Heruur was sometimes depicted fully as a falcon he was sometimes given the title Kemwer meaning the great black one. Other variants include Hor Merti Horus of the two eyes and Horkhenti Irti.43 Herupakhered Horus the Younger Herupakhered Harpocrates to the Ptolemaic Greeks also known as Horus the Younger is represented in the form of a youth wearing a lock of hair a sign of youth on the right of his head while sucking his finger. In addition he usually wears the united crowns of Egypt the crown of Upper Egypt and the crown of Lower Egypt. He is a form of the rising sun representing its earliest light.41 Horus represented as a child with the unified Egyptian crown and sistrum. HeruBehdeti Horus of Behdet The winged sun of Horus of Edfu is a symbol in associated with divinity royalty and power in ancient Egypt.44 The winged sun is symbolic also of the eternal soul. When placed above the temple doors it served as a reminder to the people of their eternal nature.4546 The winged sun was depicted on the top of pylons in the ancient temples throughout Egypt. Heremakhet Horus in the Horizon Heremakhet or Horemakhet Harmakhis in Greek represented the dawn and the early morning sun. He was often depicted as a sphinx with the head of a man like the Great Sphinx of Giza or as a hieracosphinx a creature with a lions body and a falcons head and wings sometimes with the head of a lion or ram the latter providing a link to the god Khepri the rising sun. It was believed that he was the inspiration for the Great Sphinx of Giza constructed under the order of Khafre whose head it depicts. Other forms of Horus include Hor Merti Horus of the Two Eyes Horkhenti Irti43 Hersematawy Horus Uniter of the Two Lands the Greek Harsomptus depicted like the doublecrowned Horus Heriunmutef or Iunmutef depicted as a priest with a leopardskin over the torso Herui the double falcon or Horuses the 
5 th nome god of Upper Egypt in Coptos Herupakhered Horus the younger known as Harpocrates to the Greeks in the form of a child wearing the pschent and a sidelock of youth HeruBehdeti Horus of Behedet as a winged sun disk on the ceiling to the entrance to the temple of Ramses III Heremakhet Greek Harmakhis the wall relief of a hieracosphinx depicted at the Temple of Horus in Edfu Hersematawy Horus Uniter of the Two Lands tying the papyrus and reed plants in the sema tawy symbol for the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt opposite with Set Sutekh Heriunmutef Iunmutef Horus Pillar of His Mother depicted as a priest wearing a leopardskin over torso in the Tomb of Nefertari Valley of the Queens Herui the 
5 th nome god of Upper Egypt in Coptos besides the pharaoh Sahure Celebrations of Horus The Festival of Victory Egyptian Heb Nekhtet was an annual Egyptian festival dedicated to the god Horus. The Festival of Victory was celebrated at the Temple of Horus at Edfu and took place during the second month of the Season of the Emergence or the sixth month of the Egyptian calendar. The ceremonies which took place during the Festival of Victory included the performance of a sacred drama which commemorated the victory of Horus over Set. The main actor in this drama was the king of Egypt himself who played the role of Horus. His adversary was a hippopotamus who played the role of Set. In the course of the ritual the king would strike the hippopotamus with a harpoon. The destruction of the hippopotamus by the king commemorated the defeat of Set by Horus which also legitimised the king. It is unlikely that the king attended the Festival of Victory every year in many cases he was probably represented by a priest. It is also unlikely that a real hippopotamus was used in the festival every year in many cases it was probably represented by a model.47 The 
4 thcentury Roman author Macrobius mentions another annual Egyptian festival dedicated to Horus in his Chronicon. Macrobius specifies this festival as occurring on the winter solstice. The 
4 thcentury Christian bishop Epiphanius of Salamis also mentions a winter solstice festival of Horus in his Panarion.48 However this festival is not attested in any native Egyptian sources. Suggested influence on Christianity William R. Coopers 1877 book and Acharya Ss selfpublished 2008 book among others have suggested that there are many similarities between the story of Horus and the much later story of Jesus.4950 This outlook remains very controversial and is disputed.515253 In popular culture Declan Hannigan portrays Horus in the Marvel Cinematic Universe MCU television series Moon Knight 20
22.5 4 In the film series Night at the Museum a group of underworld warrior deities appear in Night at the Museum Battle of the Smithsonian when Kahmunrah uses the combination to open the gate to the underworld and summon an army of Horus warriors. The warriors appear from the underworld carrying spears ready to attack and join Kahmunrahs fight to take over the world. Horus is a Warrior class God in the multiplayer online battle arena game Smite with the title of The Rightful Heir.55 In the book trilogy The Kane Chronicles by Rick Riordan main character Carter Kane hosts the spirit of Horus when he is released in the British Museum along with four other Egyptian deities. Horus speaks to Carter throughout the trilogy offering him his advice and wisdom. In the fantasy action film Gods of Egypt Horus is portrayed by Nikolaj CosterWaldau. In the film he helps out a mortal named Bek to stop his uncle Set while also trying to reclaim his throne and bring peace to Egypt. Horus appears in a 1980 science fiction graphic novel La Foire aux immortels written and illustrated by French cartoonist and storyteller Enki Bilal. Gallery Horus patron deity of Hierakonpolis near Edfu the predynastic capital of Upper Egypt. Its head was executed by means of beating the gold then connecting it with the copper body. A uraeus is fixed to the diadem which supports two tall openwork feathers. The eyes are inlaid with obsidian. Sixth Dynasty. Horus right in the Tomb of Horemheb KV57 in the Valley of the Kings Horus relief in the Temple of Edfu In Duat Horus conducts Hunefer to a shrine in which Osiris sits enthroned Relief in the temple of Seti I of pharaoh Seti I presenting an offering to Horus Head of Horus statue 66430 BCE Late PeriodPtolemaic Period Copperalloy of Horus centre as a Roman officer with contrapposto stances National Archaeological Museum Athens Relief of Horus in the temple of Seti I in Abydos God Horus as a falcon wearing the Double Crown of Egypt. 
27 th dynasty. State Museum of Egyptian Art Munich Statue of Horus from the reign of Amenhotep II Eighteenth Dynasty c.1400 BCE in the Muse royal de Mariemont Belgium Head of Horus from Memphis 1196 BCE Penn Museum Horus represented in relief with Wadjet and wearing the double crown. Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut Statue of Horus in the Temple of Edfu Falcon Horus deity of Hierakonpolis on a Naqada IIC jar c.3500 BCE British Museum EA363
28.5 657 See also Sky deity Hawk of Quraish Notes  In some accounts.  Rarely attested. See also Hauron Egyptian deity References  Sims Lesley 2000. Gods  goddesses. A Visitors Guide to Ancient Egypt. Saffron Hill London Usborne Publishing. p. 29. ISBN 0746030673.  a b Lvai Jessica 2007. Aspects of the Goddess Nephthys Especially During the GraecoRoman Period in Egypt. UMI. Archived from the original on 20230403. Retrieved 20211117.  Najovits Simson R. 2003. Egypt Trunk of the Tree Vol. I A Modern Survey of and Ancient Land. Algora Publishing. ISBN 9780875862347. Archived from the original on 20230403. Retrieved 20211117.  Littleson C. Scott 2005. Gods Goddesses and Mythology Volume 4. Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 0761475
63 X.  Horus  Story Appearance Symbols  Facts  Britannica. www.britannica.com. 20230705. Retrieved 20230802.  a b c The Oxford Guide Essential Guide to Egyptian Mythology Edited by Donald B. Redford Horus by Edmund S. Meltzer pp. 164168 Berkley 2003 ISBN 0425190
96 X.  The Oxford Guide Essential Guide to Egyptian Mythology Edited by Donald B. Redford p106  p165 Berkley 2003 ISBN 0425190
96 X.  Wilkinson Richard H. 2003. The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p. 202.  Aelian Characteristics of Animals 
10.1 4. Archived from the original on 20200806. Retrieved 20210220.   Moralia De Iside et Osiride Isis and Osiris 12. 3
56 A. Archived from the original on 20230403. Retrieved 20220816.  Meltzer Edmund S. 2002. Horus. In D. B. Redford Ed. The ancient gods speak A guide to Egyptian religion pp. 164. New York Oxford University Press USA.  a b Pearson Patricia OConnell Holdren John May 2021. World History Our Human Story. Versailles Kentucky Sheridan Kentucky. p. 29. ISBN 9781601531230.  Allen James P. 2005. The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts. Society of Biblical Literature. ISBN 9781589831827.  New York Folklore Society 1973. New York folklore quarterly. Vol. 29. Cornell University Press. p. 294. Archived from the original on 20230403. Retrieved 20201112.  Ian Shaw 2003. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198150343.  Piotr O. Scholz 2001. Eunuchs and castrati a cultural history. Markus Wiener Publishers. p. 32. ISBN 9781558762015. Archived from the original on 20230403. Retrieved 20201112.  Roy G. Willis 1993. World Mythology. Macmillan. p. 43. ISBN 9780805027013. Archived from the original on 20230403. Retrieved 20201112.  Horus. World History Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 20210414. Retrieved 20190222.  Wilkinson Richard H. 1992. Reading Egyptian Art A Hieroglyphic Guide to Ancient Egyptian Painting and Sculpture. Thames  Hudson. p. 186.  Pommerening Tanja Die altgyptischen Hohlmae Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur Beiheft 10 Hamburg Helmut Buske Verlag 2005  M. Stokstad Art History  Lady of the West. hethert.org. Archived from the original on 27 January 2010. Retrieved 18 January 2015.  a b Silverman David P. 1997. Egyptian Art. Ancient Egypt. Duncan Baird Publishers. p. 228.  Charles Freeman The Legacy of Ancient Egypt Facts on File Inc. 1997. p. 91  Meeks Dimitri FavardMeeks Christine 1996 French edition 1993. Daily Life of the Egyptian Gods. Translated by Goshgarian G. M. Cornell University Press. p. 37. ISBN 9780801482489.  The Goddesses and Gods of Ancient Egypt. Archived from the original on 4 June 2010.  Ancient Egypt the Mythology  Horus. egyptianmyths.net. Archived from the original on 20191129. Retrieved 20070825.  Scott David Foutz. Theology WebSite Etext Index Egyptian Myth The 80 Years of Contention Between Horus and Seth. theologywebsite.com. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017. Retrieved 18 January 2015.  Fleming Fergus and Alan Lothian. The Way to Eternity Egyptian Myth. Duncan Baird Publishers 1997. pp. 8081  Wilkinson 1992 pp. 4243.  Mythology published by DBP Chapter Egypts divine kingship.  te Velde Herman 1967. Seth God of Confusion A Study of His Role in Egyptian Mythology and Religion. Probleme der gyptologie 6. Translated by van BaarenPape G. E. 
2 nd ed.. Leiden E. J. Brill. ISBN 9789004054028.  te Velde 1967 pp. 5963.  Meltzer in Redford pp. 165166  Yoyotte Jean Une notice biographique du roi Osiris BIFAO 77 1977 p.145  Hymn to Osiris UnNefer Translated by E.A.Wallis Budge  Budge E.A. Wallis 1901 Egyptian Magic Kegan Paul Trench and Trbner  Co. London  Roxburgh Kevin. Horus  Egyptian God Horus  Egyptian Mythology  Horus  Eye of Horus. www.egyptiangods.co.uk. Archived from the original on 20160301. Retrieved 20180602.  E.A. Wallis Budge Osiris and the Egyptian resurrection Volume 2 London P. L. Warner New York G. P. Putnams Sons 1911 31.  Wilkinson Richard H. 2003. The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p. 200  a b Strudwick Helen 2006. The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. New York Sterling Publishing Co. Inc. pp. 158159. ISBN 9781435146549.  Wilson Erasmus January 1 1877. Cleopatras needle With brief notes on Egypt and Egyptian obelisks. London Brain  Company. p. 208. Retrieved 6 December 2014.  a b Patricia Turner Charles Russell Coulter Dictionary of ancient deities 2001.  Rhys Dani 20201122. What Was the Winged Sun in Egyptian Mythology. Symbol Sage. Retrieved 20230313.  Spydaman13 November 12 2011. Illuminati Sun Symbolism  Auto Logos Winged SolarDisk Part 33. 12160.info. Retrieved 20230313.  Adventist Logo Change. The Straight Testimony. Archived from the original on 21 Mar 2024. Retrieved 20230313.  H. W. Fairman. The Triumph of Horus An Ancient Egyptian Sacred Drama. London 1974  MACROBIUS Saturnalia  Loeb Classical Library. Loeb Classical Library. Archived from the original on 20150709. Retrieved 20150709.  Murdock D. M. S Acharya December 2008. Christ in Egypt The HorusJesus Connection. Stellar House Publishing. ISBN 9780979963117. Archived from the original on 20230403. Retrieved 20201112.  Cooper William Ricketts 1877. The Horus Myth in Its Relation to Christianity. Hardwicke  Bogue. p. 3. jesus horus.  Ehrman Bart D. 2012. Did Jesus Exist The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth. HarperOne. ISBN 9780062206442.  C Henderson S Hayes Debunking the HorusJesus Connection 2015 Minneapolis Fortress Press 1996  Houdmann S. Michael Questions about Jesus Christ WestBow Press 2013  Silverio Ben F. April 13 2022. A Guide To The Council Of Gods On Moon Knight Whos Who. Film. Archived from the original on April 13 2022. Retrieved April 19 2022.  Smite  Horus and Set Reveal Trailer  IGN archived from the original on 20230209 retrieved 20230209  British Museum notice. 23 January 2020. Archived from the original on 3 April 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2020.  Jar British Museum. The British Museum. Archived from the original on 20201017. Retrieved 20201016. External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Horus. Britannica Online Horus Egyptian God v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal v t e Kushite religion Beliefs Afterlife Christianity Creation myths Egyptian religion Eye of Ra Flooding of the Nile Maat Mythology Philosophy Prophecy of Neferti Soul Practices Burials Execration texts Funerals Mortuary temple Pilgrimage Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Triads Elephantine Naqa A Aman Amanete Amesemi Anaka Apedemak Aqedise Arensnuphis Ariten B Bes Breith D Dedun H Heka Hemen K M Makedeke Mash Mehit Menhit Merul Miket N R S Sabomakal T W Wusa Cultures AGroup Alodia BGroup Blemmyes CGroup Kerma Kingdom of alAbwab Makuria Medja Mero Napata Nobatia XGroup Locations Aniba Ballana Bigeh Deir elBahari Dodekaschoinos Dotawo Elephantine Jebel Barkal Kawa Lisht Musawwarat esSufra Philae temple complex Qasr Ibrim Qustul Semna Temple of Amun Temple of Dendur Temple of Mut Throne Hall of Dongola Tombos Sacred animals Abtu Barbary lion Cattle Falcon Hieracosphinx Medjed Nile crocodile North African elephant Ram Serpopard Sphinx Taweret Uraeus Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Christian cross Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Gold Hafir Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Languages Blemmyes language Egyptian language Meroitic language Meroitic alphabet Nubian language Category Portals Ancient Egypt Egypt Myths Religion Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Israel United States Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHorusoldid1222570055 Categories Horus Egyptian gods Falcon deities Savior gods Sky and weather gods Solar gods Lunar gods Tutelary deities Mythological kings Lion gods Avian humanoids Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semiprotected from banned users Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2022 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 6 May 2024 at 1806 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width