Sanakht - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identity 
2 Reign 
3 Tomb 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Sanakht 35 languages    Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Sanakht Nebka  Horus Sa  Relief fragment of Sanakht in the pose of smiting an enemy. Originally from the Sinai now EA 691 on display at the British Museum. Pharaoh Reign 18 years according to the Turin Canon most likely less starting ca. 2650 BC Predecessor uncertain Sekhemkhet most likely or Khaba Djoser Khasekhemwy Successor uncertain Khaba most likely or Sekhemkhet Huni Qahedjet Djoser Royal titulary Horus name HorSanakht rS3.nt Horus the victorious protector Father Khasekhemwy  Mother Nimaathap  Burial mastaba K2 at Beit Khallaf Dynasty 
3 rd Dynasty Not to be confused with Setnakhte. Sanakht also read as HorSanakht is the Horus name of an ancient Egyptian king pharaoh of the Third Dynasty during the Old Kingdom. His chronological position is highly uncertain though he is more likely to have reigned towards the end of the dynasty and it is also unclear under which Hellenized name the ancient historian Manetho could have listed him. Many Egyptologists connect Sanakht with the Ramesside cartouche name Nebka. However this remains disputed because no further royal title of that king has ever been found either in contemporary source or later ones. There are two relief fragments depicting Sanakht originally from the Wadi Maghareh on the Sinai Peninsula. Identityedit Sanakhts identity and position in the Third Dynasty is not entirely clear and remains the subject of debate. While Sanakhts existence is attested by seal fragments from mastaba K2 at Beit Khallaf and a graffito his position as the founder of the Third Dynasty as recorded by Manetho and the Turin Canon has been seriously undermined by recent archaeological discoveries at Abydos. These discoveries establish that it was likely Djoser who helped buryand thus succeedKhasekhemwy rather than Sanakht. This is determined from seals bearing Djosers name found at the entrance to the latters tomb.1 Relief of Sanakht from the Wadi Maghareh. Proponents of the theory that Sanakht was nonetheless the founder of the dynasty object that the presence of Djosers seals in Khasekhemwys tomb only shows that Djoser conducted cultural rituals in honor of this king and does not necessarily imply that Djoser was Khasekhemwys immediate successor.2 Sanakht could then have married Queen Nimaethap with Nimaethap being the daughter of Khasekhemwy rather than his wife. Together with Sanakht they could be the parents of Djoser. Alternatively some have considered Sanakht to be Djosers elder brother. Presently the dominant theory is that Sanakhts reign dates to the later Third Dynasty after Djoser. Egyptologists Toby Wilkinson Stephan Seidlmayer Kenneth Kitchen and Rainer Stadelmann equate Sanakht with Nebka a name appearing in Ramesside king lists. In support of this theory is a clay seal fragment on which the lower part of a cartouche appears. In this cartouche Wilkinson Seidlmayer and Stadelmann see traces of a Kasign the end of the name Nebka.34 Likewise Dietrich Wildung favors equating Nebka with Sanakht although he questions the validity of the seal as evidence given that it is too badly damaged to read the inscription within the cartouche as Nebka with any certainty.5 John D. Degreef Nabil Swelim and Wolfgang Helck are against equating Nebka with Sanakht. They refer to the fact that the name Nebka is not attested on any monument nor in any document dating to before Djoser.5 Instead Nabil Swelim identifies Nebka with the Horus name Khaba.6 He further identifies Sanakht with a king Mesochris mentioned by Manetho regarding this as a Hellenized form of the throne name of Sanakht. He dated Sanakhts reign to between the seventh and eighth king of the Third Dynasty.6 Jrgen von Beckerath Wolfgang Helck Dietrich Wildung and Peter Kaplony proposed that Sanakhts Horus name is that of the shadowy Horus Sa seeing the name Sa as a short form of Sanakht.7 From this Wolfgang Helck holds that Sanakhts NisutBiti name was Weneg. King Weneg however is widely held to have ruled during the Second Dynasty and Helcks theory has been greeted with skepticism.8 Sanakhts name was once read Hen Nekht by Egyptologists such as Ernest Wallis Budge. Today this reading is not in use anymore the uptodate reading is Sanakht or seldom NakhtSa.910 Reignedit Clay seal fragment bearing Sanakhts serekh from mastaba K2 at Beit Khallaf. The exact duration of Sanakhts time on the throne is unknown. Unlike Djoser few relics survive from his reign which casts serious doubts on the traditional figure of 18 years of reign for this king as given by both Manetho and the Turin Canon. It must be stressed that the Turin Canon and Manetho were more than one and two thousand years removed from the time of Egypts Third Dynasty and would be expected to contain some inaccurate or unreliable data. The Turin Canon for instance was transcribed on papyri that dates to the reign of the New Kingdom king Ramesses II who ruled Egypt from 12791213 BC. Very little is known of Sanakhts activities during his reign. The presence of reliefs depicting him in the Sinai at Wadi Maghareh together with those of Djoser and Sekhemkhet suggest an important Egyptian presence there at the time of the Third Dynasty.11 Expeditions were launched to that location for the procurement of mineral resources in particular turquoise. Tombedit Possible skull of Pharaoh Sanakht from mastaba K2 at Beit Khallaf. The location of Sanakhts tomb is not known with certainty. It was long thought that Sanakhts tomb was the large mastaba K2 at Beit Khallaf as excavations there yielded relief fragments bearing his name. However some Egyptologists now regard this mastaba as the burial of a high official prince or queen rather than that of a pharaoh12 while others continue to support the first hypothesis.13 In the mastaba were found the skeletal remains of a man over 
1.8 7 m 6 ft 112 in tall. According to Charles S. Myers this stature was considerably taller than the 
1.6 7 m 5 ft 6 in average of prehistoric and later Egyptians. The specimens skull was very large and capacious. Although his cranial index was unusually broad and almost brachycephalic the proportions of his long bones were tropically adapted like those of most other ancient Egyptians especially those from the predynastic period. His overall cranial features however were closer to those of dynastic period Egyptian skulls.9 Consequently the mastaba has been associated with an anecdote related by Manetho in which he tells of a late Second Dynasty king called Sesochris who he describes as being particularly tall. The Egyptologist Wolfgang Helck proposed another hypothesis namely that Sanakhts tomb is an unfinished structure west of the pyramid of Djoser.8 While the case of Sanakht has often appeared in the medical literature as a potential case of pituitary disease no definitive consensus has existed for many years on whether it was acromegaly or gigantism. In 2017 palaeopathologist Francesco M. Galassi and Egyptologist Michael E. Habicht from Zurich Universitys Institute of Evolutionary Medicine coordinated an international team of researchers to reassess this case. Their conclusion was that the alleged remains of Sanakht are clearly the oldest known case of gigantism in the world.1415 See alsoedit List of Pharaohs List of Egyptian pyramids List of megalithic sites Referencesedit  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Strategies Society and Security. Routledge London u. a. 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 83  95.  Illaria Incordino The third dynasty A historical hypothesis. in Jean Claude Goyon Christine Cardin Proceedings of the Ninth International Congress of Egyptologists. p. 965 1  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Strategies Society and Security. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 101  104.  Kenneth Anderson Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions Translated and Annotated Notes and Comments vol. 2. Blackwell Oxford 1999 ISBN 0631184
35 X p. 534  538.  a b Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewusstsein ihrer Nachwelt. Band 1 Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien  Mnchner gyptologische Studien vol. 17.. Hessling Berlin 1969 p. 54  58.  a b Nabil Swelim Some Problems on the History of the Third Dynasty. in Archaeological and Historical Studies The Archaeological Society of Alexandria Alexandria 1983 pp. 95 217220 and 224.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen  Mnchner gyptologische Studien. vol. 49. von Zabern Mainz 1999 ISBN 3805325916 p. 49 283  293.  a b Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit  gyptologische Abhandlungen vol. 45. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1987 ISBN 3447026774 p. 20  21.  a b Myers Charles S. 1901. The Bones of Hen Nekht an Egyptian King of the Third Dynasty. Man. 131 152153. doi
10.2 3072839307. JSTOR 2839307.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewusstsein ihrer Nachwelt. Band 1 Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien  Mnchner gyptologische Studien vol. 17.. Hessling Berlin 1969 p. 5458.  Illaria Incordino The third dynasty A historical hypothesis. in Jean Claude Goyon Christine Cardin Proceedings of the Ninth International Congress of Egyptologists. p. 966  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt. BlackwellPublishing Oxford 1992 ISBN 0631193960 p. 64.  Ilaria Incordino Reign of Horus Sanakht possible founder of the Third Dynasty. In Francesco Raffaele Massimiliano Nuzzolo and Ilaria Incordino Recent Discoveries and Latest Researches in Egyptology. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2010 ISBN 9783447062510 p. 145155.  Francesco M. Galassi Maciej Henneberg Wouter de Herder Frank Rhli Michael E. Habicht Oldest case of gigantism Assessment of the alleged remains of SaNakht king of ancient Egypt. Lancet Diabetes  Endocrinology. 2017 Vol 5 8 p. 580581. DOI httpsdx.doi.org
10.1 0
16 S2213858717301717  Newsweek Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh Is Worlds Oldest Case of Gigantism httpwww.newsweek.comancientegyptgiantpharaohkingsanakht647292 External linksedit Egyptian kings Sanakht v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSanakhtoldid1167590039 Categories 
27 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Third Dynasty of Egypt People with gigantism Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 28 July 2023 at 1757 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width