Thutmose III - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Family 
3 Dates and length of reign 
4 Military campaigns Toggle Military campaigns subsection 
4.1 First Campaign 
4.2 Tours of Canaan and Syria 
4.3 Conquest of Syria 
4.4 Attack on Mitanni 
4.5 Tours of Syria 
4.6 Nubian campaign 
5 Monumental construction Toggle Monumental construction subsection 
5.1 Artistic developments 
5.2 Karnak 
6 Defacing of Hatshepsuts monuments 
7 Death and burial Toggle Death and burial subsection 
7.1 Mummy 
8 See also 
9 References 
10 Further reading 
11 External links Toggle the table of contents Thutmose III 71 languages Afrikaans   Asturianu  Azrbaycanca   Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego    Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Jawa   Kiswahili Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar Malagasy  Bahasa Melayu  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Sixth Egyptian Pharaoh of the 
18 th Dynasty c. 1479  1425 BC For other people named Thutmose or Thutmosis see Thutmose. Thutmose III Tuthmosis III Manahpirya in the Amarna letters Thutmosis III statue in Luxor Museum Pharaoh Reign 1479  1425 BC Predecessor Hatshepsut Successor Amenhotep II Royal titulary Horus name Kanakht Khaemwaset Mighty Bull Arising in Thebes Nebty name Wahnesytmireempet Enduring in kingship like Re in heaven Golden Horus Sekhempahtydsejerkhaw Powerful of strength holy of diadems Prenomen Praenomen Menkheperre Lasting is the Manifestation of Re1 Nomen Djehutymes Neferkheperu Thoth is born beautiful of forms Consort Neferure Satiah2 HatshepsutMeryetre Nebtu Menwi Merti Menhet Nebsemi Children Amenemhat Amenhotep II Beketamun Iset Menkheperre Meritamen C and Meritamen D Nebetiunet Nefertiri Siamun2 Father Thutmose II Mother Iset Born 1481 BC Died 1425 BC aged 56 Burial KV34 Mummy found in the Deir elBahri royal cache Theban Necropolis Monuments Cleopatras Needle Obelisk of Theodosius Dynasty 
18 th Dynasty Thutmose III variously also spelt Tuthmosis or Thothmes sometimes called Thutmose the Great3 was the sixth pharaoh of the 
18 th Dynasty. Officially he ruled Egypt from 28 April 1479 BC until 11 March 1425 BC commencing with his coronation at the age of two and concluding with his death aged fiftysix however during the first 22 years of his reign he was coregent with his stepmother and aunt Hatshepsut who was named the pharaoh. While he was shown first on surviving monuments both were assigned the usual royal names and insignia and neither is given any obvious seniority over the other.4 Thutmose served as the head of Hatshepsuts armies. During the final two years of his reign he appointed his son and successor Amenhotep II as his junior coregent. His firstborn son and heir to the throne Amenemhat predeceased Thutmose III. Thutmose III is regarded as one of the greatest warriors military commanders and military strategists of all time5 as Egypts preeminent warrior pharaoh and conqueror67 and as a dominant figure in the New Kingdom period itself considered the height of Egyptian power.8 He became sole ruler after Hatshepsuts death and conducted no fewer than 17 campaigns up to 20 in total all victorious while expanding Egypts empire to its largest extent.9 Numerous recordings of his military campaigns are detailed in the inscriptions known as the Annals of Thutmose III. He is also considered the father of the ancient Egyptian navy creating the first combat navy in the ancient world.10 He has been referred to as the Napoleon of Egypt.11 Nameedit A fragment of a wall block inscribed with the birthname of Thutmose III. Now in the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Thutmoses two main names transliterate as mnprr wtyms. The first name is usually transcribed as Menkheperre and means Lasting is the manifestation of Ra or The lasting one of the manifestation of Ra. The second name is transliterated as Thutmose or Tuthmosis and means Born of Thoth or Thoth is born.112 Manetho in his Aegyptiaca History of Egypt written in Greek According to Eusebius called him Miphrs and Misphragmuthsis.13 Familyedit See also Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Upper part of a statue of Thutmose III Thutmose III was the son of Thutmose II by a secondary wife Iset or Aset.1415 His fathers great royal wife was Queen Hatshepsut. Her daughter Neferure was Thutmoses halfsister. When Thutmose II died Thutmose III was too young to rule. Hatshepsut became his regent soon his coregent and shortly thereafter declared herself to be the pharaoh while never denying kingship to Thutmose III. Thutmosis III had little power over the empire while Hatshepsut exercised the formal titulary of kingship. Her rule was quite prosperous and marked by great advancements. When Thutmose III reached a suitable age and demonstrated the capability she appointed him to head her armies.citation needed Some Egyptologists speculate that Thutmose married his halfsister Neferure
16 page needed but there is no conclusive evidence for this marriage. It has been suggested that Neferure may have been the mother of Thutmoses firstborn son Amenemhat.2 Alternatively the Great Royal Wife Satiah is believed to have been the mother of Amenemhat.16 Amenemhat predeceased his father.2 Several other wives of Thutmose are attested to by surviving records. He is known to have at least three foreign wives Menwi Merti and Menhet who were buried together.2 At least one other wife Nebtu is known from a pillar in Thutmoses tomb.2 Following the death of Satiah a woman named MerytreHatshepsut became the Great Royal Wife. She was the mother of several of his children including the future king Amenhotep II and another son Menkheperre and at least four daughters Nebetiunet Meritamen C and Meritamen D and Iset. 
16 page needed Dates and length of reignedit Annals of Thutmose III at Karnak depicting him standing before the offerings made to him after his foreign campaigns Thutmose III reigned from 1479 BC to 1425 BC according to the Low Chronology of Ancient Egypt. This has been the conventional Egyptian chronology in academic circles since the 19
60 s17 though in some circles the older dates 1504 BC to 1450 BC are preferred from the High Chronology of Egypt.18 These dates just as all the dates of the Eighteenth Dynasty are open to dispute because of uncertainty about the circumstances surrounding the recording of a Heliacal Rise of Sothis in the reign of Amenhotep I.19 A papyrus from Amenhotep Is reign records this astronomical observation which theoretically could be used to perfectly correlate the Egyptian chronology with the modern calendar however to do this the latitude where the observation was taken must also be known. This document has no note of the place of observationcitation needed but it can safely be assumed that it was taken in either a Delta city such as Memphis or Heliopolis or in Thebes. These two latitudes give dates 20 years apart the High and Low chronologies respectively.citation needed The length of Thutmose IIIs reign is known to the day thanks to information found in the tomb of the military commander AmenemhebMahu.20 AmenemhebMahu records Thutmose IIIs death to his masters 
54 th regnal year21 on the 
30 th day of the third month of Peret.22 The day of Thutmose IIIs accession is known to be I Shemu day four and astronomical observations can be used to establish the exact dates of the beginning and end of the kings reign assuming the low chronology from 28 April 1479 BC to 11 March 1425 BC respectively.23 Military campaignsedit Further information Djehuty general and The Taking of Joppa Thutmose III conducted at least 16 campaigns in 20 years.24 American Egyptologist James Breasted referred to him as the Napoleon of Egypt for his conquests and expansionism.1425 Thutmose III is recorded to have captured 350 cities during his rule and conquered much of the Near East from the Euphrates to Nubia during seventeen known military campaigns. He was the first pharaoh after Thutmose I to cross the Euphrates doing so during his campaign against Mitanni. His campaign records were inscribed onto the walls of the temple of Amun at Karnak transcribed in Urkunden IV. He transformed Egypt into an international superpower by creating an empire that stretched from the Asian regions of Syria to the North to Upper Nubia to the south.26 Much is known about Thutmose the warrior not only because of his military achievements but also because of his royal scribe and army commander Thanuny who wrote about his conquests and reign. Thutmose III was able to conquer such a large number of lands because of revolutionary developments in military technology. The Hyksos may have brought advanced weaponry such as horsedrawn chariots around 1650 BC. In the process of driving them out the people of Egypt learned to use these weapons. Thutmose III encountered little resistance from neighbouring kingdoms allowing him to expand his realm of influence easily. His army also carried boats on dry land.27 First Campaignedit Thutmose III smiting his enemies. Relief on the seventh pylon in Karnak When Hatshepsut died on the 
10 th day of the sixth month of Thutmose IIIs 
21 st year according to information from a single stela from Armant the king of Kadesh advanced his army to Megiddo.28 Thutmose III mustered his own army and departed Egypt passing through the border fortress of Tjaru Sile on the 
25 th day of the eighth month. Thutmose marched his troops through the coastal plain as far as Jamnia then inland to Yehem a small city near Megiddo which he reached in the middle of the ninth month of the same year.29 The ensuing Battle of Megiddo probably was the largest battle of Thutmoses 17 campaigns. A ridge of mountains jutting inland from Mount Carmel stood between Thutmose and Megiddo and he had three potential routes to take.30 The northern route and the southern route both of which went around the mountain were judged by his council of war to be the safest but Thutmose in an act of great bravery or so he boasts but such selfpraise is normal in Egyptian texts accused the council of cowardice and took a dangerous route31 through the Aruna mountain pass which he alleged was only wide enough for the army to pass horse after horse and man after man.29 Despite the laudatory nature of Thutmoses annals such a pass does indeed exist although not as narrow as Thutmose indicates32 and taking it was a brilliant strategic move since when his army emerged from the pass they were situated on the plain of Esdraelon directly between the rear of the Canaanite forces and Megiddo itself.30 For some reason the Canaanite forces did not attack him as his army emerged31 and his army routed them decisively.30 The size of the two forces is difficult to determine but if as Redford suggests the amount of time it took to move the army through the pass may be used to determine the size of the Egyptian force and if the number of sheep and goats captured may be used to determine the size of the Canaanite force then both armies were around 10000 men.33 Most scholars believe that the Egyptian army was more numerous.citation needed According to Thutmose IIIs Hall of Annals in the Temple of Amun at Karnak the battle occurred on Year 23 I Shemu day 21 the exact day of the feast of the new moon34 a lunar date. This date corresponds to 9 May 1457 BC based on Thutmose IIIs accession in 1479 BC. After victory in battle his troops stopped to plunder the enemy and the enemy was able to escape into Megiddo.35 Thutmose was forced to besiege the city but he finally succeeded in conquering it after a siege of seven or eight months see Battle of Megiddo 
15 th century BC.35 This campaign drastically changed the political situation in the ancient Near East. By taking Megiddo Thutmose gained control of all of northern Canaan and the Syrian princes were obligated to send tribute and their own sons as hostages to Egypt.36 Beyond the Euphrates the Assyrian Babylonian and Hittite kings all gave Thutmose gifts which he alleged to be tribute when he recorded it on the walls of Karnak.37 The only noticeable absence is Mitanni which would bear the brunt of the following Egyptian campaigns into Western Asia. Tours of Canaan and Syriaedit Thutmoses tekhen waty today standing in Rome as the Lateran obelisk. The move from Egypt to Rome was initiated by Constantine the Great Roman Emperor 324337 in 326 though he died before it could be shipped out of Alexandria. His son the Emperor Constantius II completed the transfer in 357. An account of the shipment was written by contemporary historian Ammianus Marcellinus. Thutmoses second third and fourth campaigns appear to have been nothing more than tours of Syria and Canaan to collect tribute.38 Traditionally the material directly after the text of the first campaign has been considered to be the second campaign.39 This text records tribute from the area which the Egyptians called Retjenu roughly equivalent to Canaan and it was also at this time that Assyria paid a second tribute to Thutmose III.40 It is probable that these texts come from Thutmoses 
40 th year or later and thus have nothing to do with the second campaign at all. If so no records of this campaign have been found.39 Thutmoses third campaign was not considered significant enough to appear in his otherwise extensive Annals at Karnak. A survey was made of the animals and plants he found in Canaan which was illustrated on the walls of a special room at Karnak.41 This survey is dated to Thutmoses 
25 th year.42 No record remains of Thutmoses fourth campaign43 but at some point a fort was built in lower Lebanon and timber was cut for construction of a processional barque and this probably fits best during this time frame.44 Conquest of Syriaedit The fifth sixth and seventh campaigns of Thutmose III were directed against the Phoenician cities in Syria and against Kadesh on the Orontes. In Thutmoses 
29 th year he began his fifth campaign where he first took an unknown city the name falls in a lacuna which had been garrisoned by Tunip.45 He then moved inland and took the city and territory around Ardata46 the town was pillaged and the wheatfields burned. Unlike previous plundering raids Thutmose III garrisoned the area known as Djahy which is probably a reference to southern Syria.38 This permitted him to ship supplies and troops between Syria and Egypt. Although there is no direct evidence for it it is for this reason that some have supposed that Thutmoses sixth campaign in his thirtieth year commenced with a naval transportation of troops directly to Byblos bypassing Canaan entirely.46 After the troops arrived in Syria by whatever means they proceeded into the Jordan River valley and moved north pillaging Kadeshs lands.47 Turning west again Thutmose took Simyra and quelled a rebellion in Ardata which apparently had rebelled again.48 To stop such rebellions Thutmose began taking hostages from the cities in Syria. The policy of these cities was driven by their elites aligned to Mitanni and typically consisting of a king and a small number of foreign Maryannu. Thutmose III found that by taking family members of these key people to Egypt as hostages he could drastically increase their loyalty to him.47 Syria rebelled again in Thutmoses 
31 st year and he returned to Syria for his seventh campaign took the port city of Ullaza47 and the smaller Phoenician ports48 and took more measures to prevent further rebellions.47 All the excess grain which was produced in Syria was stored in the harbors he had recently conquered and was used for the support of the military and civilian Egyptian presence ruling Syria.47 This left the cities in Syria desperately impoverished. With their economies in ruins they had no means of funding a rebellion.49 Depiction of Syrians bringing presents to Tuthmosis III in the tomb of Rekhmire c.1400 BC actual painting and interpretational drawing. They are labeled Chiefs of Retjenu.5051 Attack on Mitanniedit After Thutmose III had taken control of the Syrian cities the obvious target for his eighth campaign was the state of Mitanni a Hurrian country with an IndoAryan ruling class. However to reach Mitanni he had to cross the Euphrates River. He sailed directly to Byblos52 and made boats which he took with him over land on what appeared to otherwise be just another tour of Syria48 and he proceeded with the usual raiding and pillaging as he moved north through the lands he had already taken.53 He continued north through the territory belonging to the still unconquered cities of Aleppo and Carchemish and quickly crossed the Euphrates in his boats taking the Mitannian king entirely by surprise.53 It appears that Mitanni was not expecting an invasion so they had no army of any kind ready to defend against Thutmose although their ships on the Euphrates did try to defend against the Egyptian crossing.52 Thutmose III then went freely from city to city and pillaged them while the nobles hid in caves or at least this is the typically propagandistic way Egyptian records chose to record it. During this period of no opposition Thutmose put up a second stele commemorating his crossing of the Euphrates next to the stele his grandfather Thutmose I had put up several decades earlier. A militia was raised to fight the invaders but it fared very poorly.53 Thutmose III then returned to Syria by way of Niy where he records that he engaged in an elephant hunt.54 He collected tribute from foreign powers and returned to Egypt in victory.52 Tours of Syriaedit Painted relief depicting Thutmose III Luxor Museum Thutmose III returned to Syria for his ninth campaign in his 
34 th year but this appears to have been just a raid of the area called Nukhashshe a region populated by seminomadic people.55 The plunder recorded is minimal so it was probably just a minor raid.56 Records from his 
10 th campaign indicate much more fighting. By Thutmoses 
35 th year the king of Mitanni had raised a large army and engaged the Egyptians around Aleppo. As usual for any Egyptian king Thutmose boasted a total crushing victory but this statement is suspect due to the very small amount of plunder taken.57 Thutmoses annals at Karnak indicate he only took a total of 10 prisoners of war.58 He may have fought the Mitannians to a stalemate57 yet he did receive tribute from the Hittites after that campaign which seems to indicate the outcome of the battle was in Thutmoses favor.54 The details about his next two campaigns are unknown.54 His 
11 th is presumed to have happened in his 
36 th regnal year and his 
12 th is presumed to have happened in his 
37 th year since his 
13 th is mentioned at Karnak as happening in his 
38 th regnal year.59 Part of the tribute list for his 
12 th campaign remains immediately before his 
13 th begins and the contents recorded specifically wild game and certain minerals of uncertain identification might indicate that it took place on the steppe around Nukhashshe but this remains mere speculation.60 In his 
13 th campaign Thutmose returned to Nukhashshe for a very minor campaign.59 His 
14 th campaign waged during his 
39 th year was against the Shasu. The location of this campaign is impossible to determine since the Shasu were nomads who could have lived anywhere from Lebanon to the Transjordan to Edom.61 After this campaign the numbers given by Thutmoses scribes to his campaigns all fall in lacunae so they can only be counted by date. In his 
40 th year tribute was collected from foreign powers but it is unknown if this was considered a campaign i.e. if the king went with it or if it was led by an official.62 Only the tribute list remains from Thutmoses next campaign63 and nothing may be deduced about it except that it was probably another raid to the frontiers around Niy.64 His final Asian campaign is better documented. Sometime before Thutmoses 
42 nd year Mitanni apparently began spreading revolt among all the major cities in Syria. Thutmose moved his troops by land up the coastal road and put down rebellions in the Arka plain Arkantu in Thutmoses chronicle and moved on Tunip.64 After taking Tunip his attention turned to Kadesh again. He engaged and destroyed three surrounding Mitannian garrisons and returned to Egypt in victory.65 His victory in this final campaign was neither complete nor permanent since he did not take Kadesh65 and Tunip could not have remained aligned to him for very long certainly not beyond his own death.66 This victory however must have had quite an impact for the next tribute lists include Adana a Cilician city.67 Nubian campaignedit Thutmoses last campaign was waged in his 
50 th regnal year. He attacked Nubia but only went so far as the fourth cataract of the Nile. Although no king of Egypt had ever penetrated so far with an army previous kings campaigns had spread Egyptian culture that far already and the earliest Egyptian document found at Gebel Barkal dates from three years before Thutmoses campaign.48 Monumental constructionedit Thutmose III was a great builder and constructed over 50 temples although some of these are now lost and only mentioned in written records.18 He also commissioned the building of many tombs for nobles which were made with greater craftsmanship than ever before. His reign was also a period of great stylistic changes in the sculpture paintings and reliefs associated with construction much of it beginning during the reign of Hatshepsut. Artistic developmentsedit Glass making advanced during the reign of Thutmose III and this cup bears his name. Depiction of Tuthmose III at Karnak holding a Hedj Club and a Sekhem Scepter standing before two obelisks he had erected there Thutmoses architects and artisans showed great continuity with the formal style of previous kings but several developments set him apart from his predecessors. Although he followed the traditional relief styles for most of his reign after his 
42 nd year he began having himself depicted wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt and a ndytkilt an unprecedented style.68 Architecturally his use of pillars also was unprecedented. He built Egypts only known set of heraldic pillars two large columns standing alone instead of being part of a set supporting the roof. His jubilee hall was also revolutionary and is arguably the earliest known building created in the basilica style.69 Thutmoses artisans achieved new heights of skill in painting and tombs from his reign were the earliest to be entirely painted instead of painted reliefs.68 Although not directly pertaining to his monuments it appears that Thutmoses artisans had learned glass making skills developed in the early 
18 th Dynasty to create drinking vessels by the coreformed method.70 Karnakedit Thutmose dedicated far more attention to Karnak than any other site. In the Iputisut the temple proper in the center he rebuilt the hypostyle hall of his grandfather Thutmose I dismantled the red chapel of Hatshepsut built Pylon VI a shrine for the bark of Amun in its place and built an antechamber in front of it the ceiling of which was supported by his heraldic pillars. He built a temenos wall around the central chapel containing smaller chapels along with workshops and storerooms. East of the main sanctuary he built a jubilee hall in which to celebrate his Sed festival. The main hall was built in basilica style with rows of pillars supporting the ceiling on each side of the aisle. The central two rows were higher than the others to create windows where the ceiling was split.69 Two of the smaller rooms in this temple contained the reliefs of the survey of the plants and animals of Canaan which he took in his third campaign.71 East of the IputIsut he erected another temple to Aten where he was depicted as being supported by Amun.72 It was inside this temple that Thutmose planned on erecting his tekhen waty or unique obelisk.72 The tekhen waty was designed to stand alone instead as part of a pair and is the tallest obelisk ever successfully cut. It was not however erected until Thutmose IV raised it72 35 years later.73 It was later moved to Rome by Emperor Constantius II and is now known as the Lateran Obelisk. In 390 AD Christian Roman Emperor Theodosius I reerected another obelisk from the Temple of Karnak in the Hippodrome of Constantinople now known as the Obelisk of Theodosius. Thutmose also undertook building projects to the south of the main temple between the sanctuary of Amun and the temple of Mut. Immediately to the south of the main temple he built the seventh pylon on the northsouth road which entered the temple between the fourth and fifth pylons. It was built for use during his jubilee and was covered with scenes of defeated enemies. He set royal colossi on both sides of the pylon and put two more obelisks on the south face in front of the gateway. The eastern obelisks base remains in place but the western obelisk was transported to the Hippodrome in Constantinople.72 Farther south along the road he put up Pylon VIII which Hatshepsut had begun.69 East of the road he dug a sacred lake of 250 by 400 feet and placed another alabaster bark shrine near it.69 He commissioned royal artists to depict his extensive collections of fauna and flora in the Botanical garden of Thutmosis III. Defacing of Hatshepsuts monumentsedit This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. April 2022 Learn how and when to remove this message For many years egyptologists theorized that following the death of Thutmose II Hatshepsut usurped the throne from Thutmose III. Although Thutmose III was a coregent during this time early historians have speculated that Thutmose III never forgave his stepmother for denying him access to the throne for the first two decades of his reign.74 However in recent times this theory has been revised after questions arose as to why Hatshepsut would have allowed a resentful heir to control armies which it is known she did. This view is supported further by the fact that no strong evidence has been found to show Thutmose III sought to claim the throne. He kept Hatshepsuts religious and administrative leaders. Added to this is that the monuments of Hatshepsut were not damaged until at least 25 years after her death late in the reign of Thutmose III when he was quite elderly. He was in another coregency this one with his son who would become Amenhotep II who is known to have attempted to identify the works of Hatshepsut as his own. Additionally Thutmose IIIs mortuary temple was built directly next to Hatshepsuts an act that would have been unlikely to occur if Thutmose III bore a grudge against her. citation needed After her death many of Hatshepsuts monuments and depictions were subsequently defaced or destroyed including those in her famous mortuary temple complex at Deir elBahri. Traditionally these have been interpreted by early modern scholars to be evidence of acts of damnatio memoriae condemning a person by erasure from recorded existence by Thutmose III. However recent research by scholars such as Charles Nims and Peter Dorman has reexamined these erasures and found that the acts of erasure which could be dated only began sometime during year 46 or 47 of Thutmoses reign c.14332 BC.75 Another often overlooked fact is that Hatshepsut was not the only one who received this treatment. The monuments of her chief steward Senenmut closely associated with her rule were similarly defaced where they were found.76 All of this evidence casts serious doubt upon the popular theory that Thutmose III ordered the destruction in a fit of vengeful rage shortly after his accession.citation needed Currently the purposeful destruction of the memory of Hatshepsut is seen as a measure designed to ensure a smooth succession for the son of Thutmose III the future Amenhotep II as opposed to any of the surviving relatives of Hatshepsut who had an equal or better claim to the throne. It also may be likely that this measure could not have been taken until the deaths of powerful religious and administrative officials who had served under both Hatshepsut and Thutmose III.75 Later Amenhotep II even claimed that he had built the items he defaced.citation needed Death and burialedit A scene from the Amduat on the walls of the tomb of Thutmose III KV34 in the Valley of the Kings. Thutmoses tomb KV34 was discovered by Victor Loret in 1898 in the Valley of the Kings. It uses a plan which is typical of 
18 th Dynasty tombs with a sharp turn at the vestibule preceding the burial chamber. Two stairways and two corridors provide access to the vestibule which is preceded by a quadrangular shaft or well.citation needed A complete version of Amduat an important New Kingdom funerary text is in the vestibule making it the first tomb where Egyptologists found the complete text. The burial chamber which is supported by two pillars is ovalshaped and its ceiling decorated with stars symbolizing the cave of the deity Sokar. In the middle lies a large red quartzite sarcophagus in the shape of a cartouche. On the two pillars in the middle of the chamber there are passages from the Litanies of Re a text that celebrates the later sun deity who is identified with the pharaoh at this time. On the other pillar is a unique image depicting Thutmosis III being suckled by the goddess Isis in the guise of the tree.citation needed The wall decorations are executed in a simple diagrammatic way imitating the manner of the cursive script one might expect to see on a funerary papyrus rather than the more typically lavish wall decorations seen on most other royal tomb walls. The colouring is similarly muted executed in simple black figures accompanied by text on a cream background with highlights in red and pink. The decorations depict the pharaoh aiding the deities in defeating Apep the serpent of chaos thereby helping to ensure the daily rebirth of the sun as well as the pharaohs own resurrection.77 According to the American Egyptologist Peter Der Manuelian a statement in the tomb biography of an official named Amenemheb establishes that Thutmose III died in Year 54 III Peret day 30 of his reign after ruling Egypt for 53 years 10 months and 26 days Urk. 1
80.1 5. Thutmose III died one month and four days shy of the start of his 
54 th regnal year.78 When the coregencies with Hatshepsut and Amenhotep II are deducted he ruled alone as pharaoh for just over 30 of those years. Mummyedit Sarcophagus of Thutmose III Thutmose IIIs mummy was discovered in the Deir elBahri Cache above the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut in 1881. He was interred along with those of other 
18 th and 
19 th Dynasty leaders Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II and Ramesses IX as well as the 
21 st Dynasty pharaohs Pinedjem I Pinedjem II and Siamun.citation needed Mummy of Thutmose III before unwrapping showing damage by tomb robbers While it is popularly thought that his mummy originally was unwrapped by Gaston Maspero in 1886 it was in fact first unwrapped by mile Brugsch the Egyptologist who supervised the evacuation of the mummies from the Deir elBahri Cache in 1881. It was unwrapped soon after its arrival in the Boulak Museum while Maspero was away in France and the Director General of the Egyptian Antiquities Service ordered the mummy rewrapped. So when it was officially unwrapped by Maspero in 1886 he almost certainly knew it was in relatively poor condition.79 Mummified head of Thutmose III following unwrapping The mummy had been damaged extensively in antiquity by tomb robbers and its wrappings subsequently cut into and torn by the Rassul family who had rediscovered the tomb and its contents only a few years before.80 Masperos description of the body provides an idea as to the magnitude of the damage done His mummy was not securely hidden away for towards the close of the 
20 th dynasty it was torn out of the coffin by robbers who stripped it and rifled it of the jewels with which it was covered injuring it in their haste to carry away the spoil. It was subsequently reinterred and has remained undisturbed until the present day but before reburial some renovation of the wrappings was necessary and as portions of the body had become loose the restorers in order to give the mummy the necessary firmness compressed it between four oarshaped slips of wood painted white and placed three inside the wrappings and one outside under the bands which confined the windingsheet.81 Of the face which was undamaged Maspero says the following Happily the face which had been plastered over with pitch at the time of embalming did not suffer at all from this rough treatment and appeared intact when the protecting mask was removed. Its appearance does not answer to our ideal of the conqueror. His statues though not representing him as a type of manly beauty yet give him refined intelligent features but a comparison with the mummy shows that the artists have idealised their model. The forehead is abnormally low the eyes deeply sunk the jaw heavy the lips thick and the cheekbones extremely prominent the whole recalling the physiognomy of Thtmosis II though with a greater show of energy.81 Maspero was so disheartened at the state of the mummy and the prospect that all of the other mummies were similarly damaged as it turned out few were in so poor a state that he would not unwrap another for several years.80 Unlike many other examples from the Deir elBahri Cache the wooden mummiform coffin that contained the body was original to the pharaoh though any gilding or decoration it might have had had been hacked off in antiquity. In his examination of the mummy the anatomist Grafton Elliot Smith stated the height of Thutmose IIIs mummy to be 
1.6 15 m 5 ft 
3.5 8 in82 but the mummy was missing its feet so Thutmose III was undoubtedly taller than the figure given by Smith.83 The mummy of Thutmose III resided in the Royal Mummies Hall of the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities catalog number CG 6106884 until April 2021 when his mummy was moved to National Museum of Egyptian Civilization along with those of 17 other kings and four queens in an event termed the Pharaohs Golden Parade.85 See alsoedit Cleopatras Needles. History of ancient Egypt. Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree. Referencesedit  a b Clayton Peter. Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd. 1994. p. 104  a b c d e f Dodson Aidan. Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt Thames and Hudson. p. 132. 2004. ISBN 0500051283  Ancient Egypts Greatest Warrior TuthmosIs The 
3 rd  Egypts Napoleon Full History Documentary. dokus
4 free. 18 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019.  Partridge R. 2002. Fighting Pharaohs Weapons and warfare in ancient Egypt. Manchester Peartree. pp. 202203  Gabriel Richard A. 2009. Thutmose III A Military Biography of Egypts Greatest Warrior King 
1 st ed.. Dulles Virginia Potomac Books. pp. 3 2123 81. ISBN 9781597973731.  Edwards I. E. S. Gadd C. J. Hammond N. G. L Sollberger E. eds. 1975. The Cambridge Ancient History Volume 2 Part 2 The Middle East and the Aegean Region c. 13801000 BC. Vol. II 
3 rd ed.. Cambridge University Press. p. 21. ISBN 0521086914.  Gabriel Richard A. 2009. Thutmose III A Military Biography of Egypts Greatest Warrior King 
1 st ed.. Dulles Virginia Potomac Books. pp. 23 26 81 203204. ISBN 9781597973731.  Putnam James 1990. An Introduction to Egyptology. Crescent Books. pp. 3334. ISBN 9780517023365.  Gabriel Richard A. 2009. Thutmose III A Military Biography of Egypts Greatest Warrior King 
1 st ed.. Dulles Virginia Potomac Books. pp. 3 23 199. ISBN 9781597973731.  Gabriel Richard A. 2001. Great Captains of Antiquity 
1 st ed.. Greenwood Press. pp. 4344. ISBN 0313312850.  Gabriel Richard A. 2001. Great Captains of Antiquity 
1 st ed.. Greenwood Press. p. 20. ISBN 0313312850.  Leprohon Ronald 2013. The Great Name Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary Atlanta Society of Biblical Literature. p. 98  Manetho 1940. History of Egypt and Other Works. Translated by Waddell W.G. Cambridge MA Harvard University Press  Loeb Classical Library no. 350. p. 115.  a b Strudwick Helen 2006. The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. New York Sterling Publishing Co. Inc. pp. 7273. ISBN 9781435146549.  Joyce Tyldesley Hatchepsut The Female Pharaoh pp. 9495 Viking 1996.  a b c OConnor David and Cline Eric H. Thutmose III A New Biography The University of Michigan Press 2006 ISBN 04721146
70 page needed  Campbell Edward Fay Jr. The Chronology of the Amarna Letters with Special Reference to the Hypothetical Coregency of Amenophis III and Akhenaten. p. 5. Baltimore The Johns Hopkins Press 1964.  a b Lipinska Jadwiga. Thutmose III p. 401. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Ed. Donald Redford. Vol. 3 pp. 401403. Oxford University Press 2001.  Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. p. 202. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988.  Redford Donald B. The Chronology of the Eighteenth Dynasty. Journal of Near Eastern Studies Vol 25 No 2. p. 119. University of Chicago Press 1966.  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 234. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906.  Murnane William J. Ancient Egyptian Coregencies. p. 44. The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago 1977.  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des Pharaonischen gypten. Mainz Philipp von Zabern 1997. p. 189  Lichtheim Miriam 2019. Ancient Egyptian Literature. Univ of California Press. p. 340. ISBN 9780520305847. Retrieved 22 October 2019.  J.H. Breasted Ancient Times A History of the Early World An Introduction to the Study of Ancient History and the Career of Early Man. Outlines of European History 1. Boston Ginn and Company 1914 p. 85  Thutmose. Britannica.  Faulkner R. O. 1946. The Euphrates Campaign of Tuthmosis III. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 3942.  Redford Donald B. Egypt Canaan and Israel in Ancient Times. p. 156. Princeton University Press Princeton NJ 1992.  a b Steindorff George and Seele Keith. When Egypt Ruled the East. p. 53. University of Chicago 1942.  a b c Redford Donald B. Egypt Canaan and Israel in Ancient Times. p. 157. Princeton University Press Princeton NJ 1992.  a b Steindorff George and Seele Keith. When Egypt Ruled the East. p. 54. University of Chicago 1947.  Gardiner Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. p. 192 Oxford University Press 1964  Redford 2003 p. 197.  Urkunden der 18. Dynastie 6
57.2   a b Steindorff George and Seele Keith. When Egypt Ruled the East. p. 55. University of Chicago 1942.  Steindorff George and Seele Keith. When Egypt Ruled the East. p. 56. University of Chicago 1942.  Gardiner Alan. Egypt of the Pharaohs. p. 193 Oxford University Press 1964  a b Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. p. 214. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988.  a b Redford 2003 p. 53.  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 191. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906.  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 192. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906.  Redford 2003 p. 213.  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 193. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906.  Redford 2003 p. 214.  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II p. 195. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906.  a b Redford 2003 p. 217  a b c d e Redford 2003 p. 218.  a b c d Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. p. 215. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988.  Redford 2003 p. 219.  The foreigners of the fourth register with long hairstyles and calflength fringed robes are labeled Chiefs of Retjenu the ancient name tor the Syrian region. Like the Nubians they come with animals in this case horses an elephant and a bear they also offer weapons and vessels most likely filled with precious substance. in Hawass Zahi A. Vannini Sandro 2009. The lost tombs of Thebes life in paradise. Thames  Hudson. p. 120. ISBN 9780500051597.  Zakrzewski Sonia Shortland Andrew Rowland Joanne 2015. Science in the Study of Ancient Egypt. Routledge. p. 268. ISBN 9781317391951.  a b c Redford 2003 p. 226.  a b c Redford 2003 p. 225.  a b c Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. p. 216. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988.  Redford 2003 p. 81.  Redford 2003 p. 83.  a b Redford 2003 p. 229.  Redford 2003 p. 84.  a b Redford 2003 p. 87.  Redford 2003 p. 234.  Redford 2003 p. 92.  Redford 2003 p. 235.  Redford 2003 p. 94.  a b Redford 2003 p. 238.  a b Redford 2003 p. 240.  Redford 2003 p. 239.  Grimal Nicolas 1994. A History of Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell 1994. p. 216.  a b Lipinska Jadwiga. Thutmose III p. 403. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Ed. Donald Redford. Vol. 3 pp. 401403. Oxford University Press 2001.  a b c d Lipinska Jadwiga. Thutmose III p. 402. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Ed. Donald Redford. Vol. 3 pp. 401403. Oxford University Press 2001.  W.B. Honey. Review of Glass Vessels before GlassBlowing by Poul Fossing. p. 135. The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs Apr. 1941  Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. p. 302. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988.  a b c d Grimal Nicolas. A History of Ancient Egypt. p. 303. Librairie Arthme Fayard 1988.  Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Vol. II. p. 330. University of Chicago Press Chicago 1906.  Shaw Ian and Nicholson Paul. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. p. 120. Harry N. Abrams Inc. ISBN 0810990962. 1995.  a b Shaw Ian. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. p. 241. Oxford University Press. 2000. ISBN 0192804588  Russman Edna R. ed Eternal Egypt Masterworks of Ancient Art from the British Museum. pp. 120121. University of California Press. 2001. ISBN 1885444192.  Pemberton Delia and Fletcher Joann. Treasures of the Pharaohs. p. 61. Chronicle Books LLC. 2004. ISBN 0811844242.  Peter Der Manuelian Studies in the Reign of Amenophis II Hildesheimer gyptologische Beitrge HB Verlag 1987 p. 20  Forbes Dennis C. Tombs Treasures Mummies Seven Great Discoveries of Egyptian Archaeology pp. 4344. KMT Communications Inc. 1998.  a b Romer John. The Valley of the Kings. p. 182. Castle Books 2003. ISBN 0785815880  a b Maspero Gaston. History Of Egypt Chaldaea Syria Babylonia and Assyria Volume 5 of 12. 16 December 2005. Archived from the original on 23 May 2006. Retrieved 11 March 2015.cite book CS1 maint bot original URL status unknown link Project Gutenberg EBook Release Date 16 December 2005. EBook 17325.  Smith G Elliot. The Royal Mummies p. 34. Duckworth 2000 reprint  Forbes Dennis C. Tombs Treasures Mummies Seven Great Discoveries of Egyptian Archaeology p. 631. KMT Communications Inc. 1998.  Habicht M.E Bouwman A.S Rhli F.J 25 January 2016. Identifications of ancient Egyptian royal mummies from the 
18 th Dynasty reconsidered. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology. 159 S61 216231. doi
10.1 0
02 ajpa.22909. PMID 26808107.  Parisse Emmanuel 5 April 2021. 22 Ancient Pharaohs Have Been Carried Across Cairo in an Epic Golden Parade. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Further readingedit Eloise Jarvis McGraw Mara Daughter of the Nile Redford Donald B. 2003. The Wars in Syria and Palestine of Thutmose III. Culture and History of the Ancient Near East 16. Leiden Brill. ISBN 9789004129894. Der Manuelian Peter Studies in the Reign of Amenophis II Hildesheimer gyptologische BeitrgeHB Verlag 1987 Cline Eric H. and OConnor David Thutmose III  A New Biography University of Michigan Press 2006. ISBN 0472114670 incorporates a number of important new survey articles regarding the reign of Thutmose III including administration art religion and foreign affairs Reisinger Magnus Entwicklung der gyptischen Knigsplastik in der frhen und hohen 18. Dynastie AgnusVerlag Mnster 2005 ISBN 3000158642 Breasted James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt Volume Two The Eighteenth Dynasty University of Illinois Press 2001. ISBN 0252069749 River God by Smith Wilbur along with the rest of his Egyptian series of historical fiction novels are based in a large part on Thutmose IIIs time along with his story and that of his mother through the eyes of his mothers vizier mixing in elements of the Hyksos domination and eventual overthrow. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thutmosis III. A Short History of Ancient Egypt  Dynasties XVIII to XX with a few Thutmoside documents translated. Hatshepsut from Queen to Pharaoh an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art fully available online as PDF which contains material on Thutmose III see index Thutmose III page of Archaeowiki at the Wayback Machine archived 9 March 2012 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs v t e Rulers of the Ancient Near East Territories dates 12345 Egypt Canaan Ebla Mari Kish Assur Akshak Akkad Uruk Adab Umma Lagash Ur Elam 40003200 BCE Naqada I Naqada II EgyptMesopotamia relations PreDynastic period 40002900 BCE Susa I Uruk period 40003100 BCE Anu Ziggurat 4000 BCE Anonymous Kingpriests Susa II Uruk influence or control 32003100 BCE ProtoDynastic period Naqada III Early or legendary kings Upper Egypt Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Lower Egypt Hedju Hor NyHor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner NatHor Mekh Double Falcon Wash 31002900 BCE Early Dynastic Period First Dynasty of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer Menes Neithhotep regent HorAha Djer Djet Merneith regent Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird Canaanites Jemdet Nasr period 31002900 BCE ProtoElamite period Susa III 31002700 BCE 2900 BCE Second Dynasty of Egypt Hotepsekhemwy NebraRaneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Early Dynastic Period I 29002700 BCE First Eblaite Kingdom First kingdom of Mari Kish I dynasty Jushur Kullassinabel Nangishlishma Entarahana Babum Puannum Kalibum 2800 BCE Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab Mashda Arwium Etana Balih Enmenuna MelemKish Barsalnuna Uruk I dynasty Meshkianggasher Enmerkar conqueror of Aratta 2700 BCE Early Dynastic Period II 27002600 BCE Zamug Tizqar Ilku Iltasadum Lugalbanda Dumuzid the Fisherman Enmebaragesi made the land of Elam submit6 Aga of Kish Gilgamesh Old Elamite period 27001500 BCE IndusMesopotamia relations 2600 BCE Third Dynasty of Egypt Djoser First Egyptian pyramids Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni Early Dynastic Period III 26002340 BCE Sagisu Aburlim Agurlim IbbiDamu BabaDamu Kish II dynasty 5 kings Uhub Mesilim UrNungal Udulkalama Labashum Lagash Enhegal Lugal shaengur Ur AImdugud UrPabilsag Meskalamdug Queen Puabi Akalamdug Enundaraanna Meshe Melamanna Lugalkitun Adab Ninkisalsi Medurba Lugaldalu 2575 BCE Old Kingdom of Egypt Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis Ur I dynasty Mesannepada King of Ur and Kish victorious over Uruk 2500 BCE Phoenicia 2500539 BCE Second kingdom of Mari IkunShamash IkuShamagan Ansud Saumu IshtupIshar IkunMari IblulIl Nizi Kish III dynasty KuBaba Akshak dynasty Unzi Undalulu Uruk II dynasty Ensha kushanna Mugsi Umma I dynasty Pabilgagaltuku Lagash I dynasty UrNanshe Akurgal Aannepada Meskiagnun Elulu Balulu Awan dynasty Peli Tata Ukkutahesh Hishur 2450 BCE Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas EnarDamu IsharMalik Ush Enakalle Elamite invasions 3 kings6 Shushun tarana Napilhush 2425 BCE KunDamu Eannatum King of Lagash Sumer Akkad conqueror of Elam 2400 BCE AdubDamu IgrishHalam IrkabDamu Kish IV dynasty PuzurSuen UrZababa Urur Lugalkinishedudu Lugalkisalsi Eiginimpae Meskigal UrLumma Il Gishakidu Queen Barairnun Enannatum Entemena Enannatum II Enentarzi Ur II dynasty Nanni MeshkiangNanna II Kikusiwetempti 2380 BCE Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Adab dynasty Lugalannemundu King of the four quarters of the world 2370 BCE IsarDamu EnnaDagan IkunIshar IshqiMari Invasion by Mari Anbu Anba Bazi Zizi of Mari Limer Sharrumiter6 Ukush Lugalanda Urukagina Luhishan 2350 BCE PuzurNirah IshuIl ShuSin Uruk III dynasty Lugalzagesi Governor of Umma King of all Sumer 2340 BCE Akkadian Period 23402150 BCE Akkadian Empire Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu Akkadian Governors Eshpum Ilshurabi Epirmupi Iliishmani 2250 BCE NaramSin Lugalushumgal vassal of the Akkadians 2200 BCE First Intermediate Period Seventh Dynasty of Egypt Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Second Eblaite Kingdom Third kingdom of Mari Shakkanakku dynasty Ididish ShuDagan IshmaDagan Vassals of the Akkadians SharKaliSharri Igigi Imi Nanum Ilulu 3 years Dudu Shuturul Uruk IV dynasty Urnigin Urgigir Lagash II dynasty PuzerMama UrNingirsu I Pirigme LuBaba Lugula Kaku HishepRatep Helu Khita PuzurInshushinak 2150 BCE Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Ur III period 21502000 BCE NrMr IshtupIlum IshgumAddu Apilkin Gutian dynasty 21 kings Laerabum Sium Kuda Uruk Puzurili UrUtu Umma II dynasty Lugalannatum vassal of the Gutians UrBaba Gudea UrNingirsu Urgar Nammahani Tirigan 2125 BCE Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Uruk V dynasty Utuhengal 2100 BCE Vassals of UR III Iddiilum IliIshar TuraDagan PuzurIshtar Vassals of Ur III7 Ur III dynasty Kings of Ur Sumer and Akkad UrNammu Shulgi AmarSin ShuSin 20251763 BCE Amorite invasions IbbiSin Elamite invasions Kindattu Shimashki Dynasty Middle Kingdom of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Third Eblaite Kingdom Amorites IbbitLim Immeya Indilimma Amorite Shakkanakkus HitialErra HanunDagan ... Lim Dynasty of Mari Amorites YaggidLim YahdunLim YasmahAdad ZimriLim Queen Shibtu Old Assyria PuzurAshur I Shalimahum Ilushuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I PuzurAshur II NaramSin Erishum II IsinLarsa period Amorites Dynasty of Isin IshbiErra ShuIlishu IddinDagan IshmeDagan LipitEshtar UrNinurta BurSuen LipitEnlil Erraimitti Enlilbani Zambiya Iterpisha Urdukuga Suenmagir Damiqilishu Dynasty of Larsa Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel NurAdad SinIddinam SinEribam SinIqisham SilliAdad WaradSin RimSin I ... RimSin II Uruk VI dynasty Alilahadum Sumubinasa NaramSin of Uruk Snkid Sniribam Sngmil Ilumgamil Anam of Uruk Irdanene RimAnum Nabiiliu Sukkalmah dynasty SiwePalarKhuppak Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu 18001595 BCE Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abraham Biblical Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Yamhad Yamhad dynasty Amorites Old Assyria ShamshiAdad dynasty 18081736 BCE Amorites ShamshiAdad I IshmeDagan I MutAshkur Rimush Asinum Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Nondynastic usurpers 17351701 BCE PuzurSin Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Adaside dynasty 1700722 BCE Belbani Libaya SharmaAdad I IptarSin Bazaya Lullaya ShuNinua SharmaAdad II Erishum III ShamshiAdad II IshmeDagan II ShamshiAdad III Ashurnirari I PuzurAshur III Enlilnasir I Nurili Ashurshaduni Ashurrabi I Ashurnadinahhe I EnlilNasir II Ashurnirari II Ashurbelnisheshu Ashurrimnisheshu Ashurnadinahhe II First Babylonian dynasty Old Babylonian Period Amorites Sumuabum SumulaEl SinmuballitSabium ApilSin Sinmuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna Abieshuh Ammiditana Ammisaduqa SamsuDitana Early Kassite rulers Second Babylonian dynasty Sealand Dynasty Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Second Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hyksos Pharaoh Ahmose I slaying a Hyksos Semqen AperAnati SakirHar Khyan Apepi Khamudi Mitanni 16001260 BCE Kirta Shuttarna I Parshatatar 15311155 BCE Tutankhamun New Kingdom of Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ahmose I Amenhotep I Third Babylonian dynasty Kassites AgumKakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashmanharbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I Burnaburiash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliashu IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak II Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Elamite period 15001100 BCE Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty UntashNapirisha Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb Hittite Empire Ugarit Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret Elamite Empire Shutrukid dynasty ShutrukNakhunte 11551025 BCE Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI Third Intermediate Period Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II Phoenicia Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Kingdom of Israel Saul Ishbosheth David Solomon SyroHittite states Middle Assyria EribaAdad I Ashuruballit I Enlilnirari Arikdenili Adadnirari I Shalmaneser I TukultiNinurta I Ashurnadinapli Ashurnirari III Enlilkudurriusur NinurtaapalEkur Ashurdan I NinurtatukultiAshur MutakkilNusku Ashurreshishi I TiglathPileser I AsharidapalEkur Ashurbelkala EribaAdad II ShamshiAdad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashurnirari IV Ashurrabi II Ashurreshishi II TiglathPileser II Ashurdan II Fourth Babylonian dynasty Second Dynasty of Isin Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur NeoElamite period 1100540 BCE 1025934 BCE Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Babylonian dynasties Period of Chaos Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna Marbitiaplausur Nabmukinapli 911745 BCE Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht Bakenranef Kingdom of Samaria Kingdom of Judah NeoAssyrian Empire Adadnirari II TukultiNinurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III ShamshiAdad V Shammuramat regent Adadnirari III Shalmaneser IV AshurDan III Ashurnirari V Ninth Babylonian Dynasty Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina five kings NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabushumaukin II Nabumukinzeri HumbanTahrid dynasty Urtak Teumman Ummanigash Tammaritu I Indabibi Humbanhaltash III 745609 BCE Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa Black Pharaohs Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun NeoAssyrian Empire Sargonid dynasty TiglathPileser Shalmaneser Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Ashurnadinshumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal Ashuretililani Sinsharishkun Sinshumulishir Ashuruballit II Assyrian conquest of Egypt Assyrian conquest of Elam 626539 BCE Late Period Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III NeoBabylonian Empire Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Median Empire Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages 539331 BCE Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Achaemenid Empire Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III Twentyeighth Dynasty of Egypt Twentyninth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 331141 BCE Argead dynasty and Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV Hellenistic Period Seleukos I Nikator Tetradrachm from Babylon Argead dynasty Alexander III Philip III Alexander IV Antigonid dynasty Antigonus I Seleucid Empire Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes 14130 BCE Kingdom of Judea Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Parthian Empire Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I 30 BCE116 CE Roman Empire Roman conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Judea Syria 116117 CE Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan Parthamaspates of Parthia 117224 CE Syria Palaestina Province of Mesopotamia Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV 224270 CE Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Coin of Ardashir I Hamadan mint. Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm 270273 CE Palmyrene Empire Vaballathus Zenobia Antiochus 273395 CE Roman Empire Province of Egypt Syria Palaestina Syria Province of Mesopotamia 395618 CE Byzantine Empire Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 618628 CE Sasanian conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Shahrbaraz Sahralanyozan Shahrbaraz Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Khosrow II Kavad II 628641 CE Byzantine Empire Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran Shapuri Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 639651 CE Muslim conquest of Egypt Muslim conquest of the Levant Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia Chronology of the Neolithic period Rulers of Ancient Central Asia  Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.  Hallo W. Simpson W. 1971. The Ancient Near East. New York Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 4849.  Rulers of Mesopotamia. cdli.ox.ac.uk. University of Oxford CNRS.  Thomas Ariane Potts Timothy 2020. Mesopotamia Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 9781606066492.  Roux Georges 1992. Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532534 Chronological Tables. ISBN 9780141938257.  a b c Per Sumerian King List  Unger Merrill F. 2014. Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 9781625646064. Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany Israel United States Czech Republic People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleThutmoseIIIoldid1222930815 Categories Thutmose III 
15 thcentury BC births 
15 thcentury BC deaths 
15 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient child monarchs Ancient Egyptian mummies Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2022 CS1 maint bot original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles needing additional references from April 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers This page was last edited on 8 May 2024 at 2034 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width