Fourth Dynasty of Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Rulers 
2 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 
2.1 Sneferu 
2.2 Khufu 
2.3 Djedefre 
2.4 Khafre 
2.5 Menkaure 
2.6 Shepseskaf 
3 Other notable individuals Toggle Other notable individuals subsection 
3.1 Baka 
3.2 Khentkaus I 
4 Age of the Pyramids Toggle Age of the Pyramids subsection 
4.1 Religious changes 
4.2 Changing customs drove architectural changes 
5 Timeline 
6 See also 
7 References Toggle the table of contents Fourth Dynasty of Egypt 50 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca   Brezhoneg Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Magyar   Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit    Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Fourth dynasty of Egypt Old Kingdom dynasty c. 26132494 BC Fourth Dynasty of Egypt ca. 2613 BCca. 2494 BC Sneferus bent pyramid at Dahshur an early experiment in true pyramid building Capital Memphis Common languages Egyptian language Religion Ancient Egyptian religion Government Absolute monarchy Historical era Bronze Age  Established ca. 2613 BC  Disestablished ca. 2494 BC Preceded by Succeeded by Third Dynasty of Egypt Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Periods and dynasties of ancient Egypt All years are BC Early Predynastic period First Dynasty I c. 31502890 Second Dynasty II 28902686 Old Kingdom Third Dynasty III 26862613 Fourth Dynasty IV 26132498 Fifth Dynasty V 24982345 Sixth Dynasty VI 23452181 First Intermediate Seventh Dynasty VII spurious Eighth Dynasty VIII 21812160 Ninth Dynasty IX 21602130 Tenth Dynasty X 21302040 Early Eleventh Dynasty XI 21342061 Middle Kingdom Late Eleventh Dynasty XI 20611991 Twelfth Dynasty XII 19911803 Thirteenth Dynasty XIII 18031649 Second Intermediate Fourteenth Dynasty XIV 17051690 Fifteenth Dynasty Hyksos XV 16741535 Sixteenth Dynasty XVI 16601600 Abydos Dynasty 16501600 Seventeenth Dynasty XVII 15801549 New Kingdom Eighteenth Dynasty XVIII 15491292 Nineteenth Dynasty XIX 12921189 Twentieth Dynasty XX 11891077 Third Intermediate Twentyfirst Dynasty XXI 1069945 Twentysecond Dynasty XXII 945720 Twentythird Dynasty XXIII 837728 Twentyfourth Dynasty XXIV 732720 Twentyfifth Dynasty Nubian XXV 732653 Late Period Twentysixth Dynasty XXVI 672525 Twentyseventh Dynasty 
1 st Persian Period XXVII 525404 Twentyeighth Dynasty XXVIII 404398 Twentyninth Dynasty XXIX 398380 Thirtieth Dynasty XXX 380343 Thirtyfirst Dynasty 
2 nd Persian Period XXXI 343332 Hellenistic Egypt Thirtysecond Dynasty XXXII 332305 Thirtythird Dynasty XXXIII 30530 Roman Egypt Thirtyfourth Dynasty Roman Pharaohs XXXIV 30 BC  313 AD See also List of pharaohs by period and dynasty Periodization of ancient Egypt v t e The Fourth Dynasty of ancient Egypt notated Dynasty IV is characterized as a golden age of the Old Kingdom of Egypt. Dynasty IV lasted from c.2613 to 2494 BC.1 It was a time of peace and prosperity as well as one during which trade with other countries is documented. The Fourth Dynasty heralded the height of the pyramidbuilding age. The relative peace of the Third Dynasty allowed the Dynasty IV rulers the leisure to explore more artistic and cultural pursuits. King Sneferus building experiments led to the evolution from the mastabastyled step pyramids to the smooth sided true pyramids such as those on the Giza Plateau. No other period in Egypts history equaled Dynasty IVs architectural accomplishments.2 Each of the rulers of this dynasty except for Shepseskaf the last commissioned at least one pyramid to serve as a tomb or cenotaphcitation needed. The Fourth Dynasty was the second of four dynasties that made up the Old Kingdom. King Sneferu the first king of the Fourth Dynasty held territory from ancient Libya in the west to the Sinai Peninsula in the east to Nubia in the south. It was a successful period and this era is known for its advancement and concentrated government as seen in the organized building of pyramids and other monuments. Knowledge of the Old Kingdom comes mainly from these structures and objects discovered in the desert cemeteries of Giza. Rulersedit Initial Fourth Dynasty Royalty Personal Name Horusname Dates Pyramid Names of Wives Sneferu Nebmaat 26132589 BC Red Pyramid Bent Pyramid Pyramid at Meidum Hetepheres I Khufu Cheops Medjedu 25892566 BC Great Pyramid of Giza Meritites I Henutsen Djedefre Ratoises Kheper 25662558 BC  Pyramid of Djedefre Hetepheres II Khentetka Khafre Chephren Userib 25582532 BC Pyramid of Khafre Meresankh III Khamerernebty I Hekenuhedjet Persenet Bikheris Possibly Bakare or Baufre c. 2532 BC Unfinished Northern Pyramid of Zawyet El Aryan Menkaure Mycerinus Kakhet 25322503 BC  Pyramid of Menkaure Khamerernebty II Shepseskaf Shepsesket 25032496 BC  Mastabat alFiraun Bunefer Khentkaus I Djedefptah Existence disputed 24962494 BC Khentkaus I Summaryedit The Red Pyramid of Sneferu Dahshur. It is Egypts first successful attempt at constructing a true smoothsided pyramid. Sneferuedit Sneferu lauded as Bringer of Beauty Master of All Justice and Ruler of Lower and Upper Nile was the first pharaoh of the fourth dynasty. He descended from a family in Middle Egypt that lived near Hermopolis and most likely ascended to the throne by marrying a royal heiress. There is still debate as to who his father was with the credit often being given to Huni but this cannot be confirmed due to the break in dynasties. His mother Meresankh I was either a lesser wife or concubine of Huni. Egypt in the Third Millennium BC was by all accounts a land of peace and plenty. Elites commonly ate fattened ducks and geese and they wore fine white linens. Until his reign Egyptian kings were thought to be worldly incarnations of Horus obtaining total deification exclusively in death. Sneferu was the first king to proclaim that he was the embodiment of Ra another sun deity. Khufu would pursue his fathers path taking the name Son of the Sun God. On the whole Egypt was ruled by two centers of powerlegal authority and traditional authority. Legal authority constituted governing by the king not over the people directly but via viziers and nomarchs. Traditional authority was derived from the concept that the deities gave a king the divine right to rule as he pleased. At its heart the Fourth Dynasty Egyptian government became organized so that only the king could direct traditional authority. The Bent Pyramid was Sneferus first attempt at building a perfect structure but it slopes and eventually bends to a lower angle giving the structure a squished look. His Red Pyramid is widely considered the first true pyramid and earned its name from the reddish tint in the limestone used. The Red Pyramid was considered the first pyramid approximately 150 years after the structures built by King Djoser.3 The Red Pyramid was the first to be given a solid foundation so that it was stable enough for a taller building. He is also said to be responsible for a series of pyramids built in Seila. He commissioned a total of three pyramids but there are records that point to a fourth. Although he did not construct any of the pyramids at Giza he is known as the king who moved the most stone and brick. A lot of Sneferus political expeditions were to other countries to secure two things a substantial labor force and access to a large store of materials. He traveled to Nubia and Libya for these things. His incursions in these areas allowed Sneferu to secure a large labor force so large in fact that it caused huge devastation to the raided countries. He also needed cattle and other food sources to provide to the people building his pyramids. By the end of his military efforts he managed to capture 11000 prisoners and 13100 head of cattle.citation needed Khufuedit King Khufu built The Great Pyramid of Giza Khufu known to the Greek as Cheops and Sneferus successorthough it is unclear whether he was the biological son of Sneferuwas a widely known king. He is still known very well in presentday media being featured in movies novels and television shows. His fame stems from his pyramid on the northeastern plateau at Giza where he was buried. His mortuary temple was built on the northern end of the pyramid which is no longer accessible due to ravages by grave robbers. Only threedimensional reliefs have been recovered and have lasted into modern day including many limestone busts and clay figurines. Khufus activities in and out of Egypt are not well documented except his architecture work and was highly romanticized by the Ancient Greeks. These Greeks felt that Khufu was a wicked man who offended the deities and forced his subjects into slavery.4 Khufu as the son of Sneferu was believed to be illegitimate and therefore unworthy of the throne. Even if he was Sneferus true son he did very little to expand the country of Egypt and failed to follow his fathers footsteps. There are only a few records that stated he was involved in any political activities. The best guess historians can make is that there is evidence of construction of a harbor on the coast of the Red Sea that was excavated by John Gardner Wilkinson and James Burton in 1823. Giza pyramid complex pyramids. From left to right the Pyramid of Menkaure Pyramid of Khafre the Great Sphinx of Giza and Khufus Great Pyramid of Giza Djedefreedit Painted limestone Sphinx of Hetepheres II possibly the first depiction of a sphinx she was one of the longest lived members of the fourth dynasty royal family a daughter of Khufu she was the wife of Djedefre and lived into the reign of Shepseskaf Djedefre is credited by historians with a reign of eight years. Not much is known of Djedefre including his inconclusive lineage. It is possible that he is Khufus son or that he was Khufus brother. It is widely suggested that he is the son of a lesser queen who murdered the rightful heir to the throne and Djedefres half brother the crown prince Kawab. Djedefre chose to build his pyramid several kilometers north of Giza creating speculation that there was a family feud that caused Djedefre to want to be far away from Khufus tomb. A more favorable conclusion was that Djedefre chose to be buried closer to Iunu the center of the cult of Ra. His pyramid also features a statue of his wife Hetepheres II in the form of a sphinx. She was a daughter of Khufu and had been the wife of Kawab. It is sometimes suggested that this was the first true sphinx although there is debate about the sphinx at Giza that was credited to Khafre. She became the longest living royal member of the dynasty living into the reign of Shepseskaf. Khafreedit Khafre son of Khufu succeeded his supposed brother Djedefre after his short reign. He chose to build his pyramid close to his father matching it in style and being almost as large. At the front of the pyramid causeway lies the Great Sphinx that is said to bear his features. There is still debate on whether his Sphinx was erected before Djedefres.5 Khafres sphinx was wellknown and closer to his subjects making it harder to determine which was built first due to biased record keeping. Menkaure and Khamerernebty II his sisterwife Menkaureedit Like many kings in this dynasty the length of Menkaures reign is uncertain being projected for more than 63 years but it can certainly be an exaggeration. Menkaure succeeded his father King Khafre. His pyramid is the third and smallest of those at Giza pyramid complex and is known as NetjererMenkaure which translates into Menkaure is Divine. There was a sarcophagus found within the pyramid that is approximately eight feet in length and three feet in height made of basalt. Like many of the previous pyramids Menkaures was not inscribed the interior having no record keeping of any kind. Shepseskafedit Shepseskaf is generally accepted as the last king of the Fourth Dynasty succeeding Menkaure. There is no conclusive evidence of who his mother is though it is believed that he was the son of a minor queen. Who his wife was also is unknown. Shepseskaf broke the chain of pyramid building by the previous five kings. Instead of a triangular pyramid he chose to construct a rectangular block commonly known as the Mastabat alFiraun Pharaohs Bench.6 In like fashion however little script was found inside his tomb and he was buried in very simple terms. Other notable individualsedit Bakaedit The identification of Baka is unresolved.7 Several ancient lists of kings have survived. They do not agree however and none of them may be considered complete. The Turin King List has a lacuna between Khafre and Menkaure where the author had listed a king who reigned between these two pharaohs. The name of the king and length of the reign are completely lost in the lacuna.8 The Saqqara Tablet also notes a king between Khafre and Menkaure but here too the name is lost.9 Some authorities have equated this king with Bikheris on Manethos list who could correspond to the Egyptian name Baka or Bakare. Khentkaus Iedit Perhaps the most intriguing evidence of the fourth dynasty is the status of Khentkaus I also known as Khentykawes. She was a daughter of Menkaure and her tomb was built along the Menkaure causeway. She may have ruled as king. Her tomb is a large mastaba tomb with another offcenter mastaba placed above it. The second mastaba could not be centered over her primary mastaba because of the free unsupported space in the rooms below. On a granite doorway leading into her tomb Khentkaus I is given titles that may be read either as mother of two kings of upper and lower Egypt as mother of the king of upper and lower Egypt and king of upper and lower Egypt or as one scholar reads it king of upper and lower Egypt and mother of two kings of upper and lower Egypt. Furthermore her depiction on this doorway also gives her the full trappings of kingship including the false beard of the king. This depiction and the title given have led some Egyptologists to suggest that she reigned as king near the end of the fourth dynasty. Her tomb was finished in a characteristic niche style of architecture however the niches were later filled in with a smooth casing of limestone. Age of the Pyramidsedit A replication of an Old Kingdom mummy as reconstructed by Emory University The Age of the Pyramids refers to the fact that the Fourth Dynasty was the time when most of the wellknown pyramids were built which include those at Giza. King Sneferu was the first king to express an interest in funerary rites and tombs which led him to the planning of the largest pyramid at Egypt. His first pyramids were called the Bent Pyramid and Red Pyramid. The Age of the Pyramids was not just about the building of large and easily recognizable structures but also a change in funerary practices and rituals. This includes the burying of elites in large structures and the use of extensive mummification. Religious changesedit The Fourth Dynasty is where we truly see a shift in religious practices where worship of the Sun was commonplace. The Cult of Ra grew in size going back to the fact that Djedefres tomb was built closer to the center of worship in what the Ancient Greeks called Heliopolis.10 It was a delta city near contemporary Cairo that had been occupied since the predynastic times whose ancient Egyptian name was Iwnw or Iunu and meant the pillars. During the era when centralization of the nations material organic and human resources began to develop a relationship of the king to the deities became unchallenged and kings began carving their names into statues and monuments that previously had been reserved for deities. This speaks to a type of god complex on part of the kings. Khafres famous statue where a falcon was incorporated into his headgear equated the king to the god Horus. This fact however caused controversy. It was pitting Khafres allegiance to Horus against the growing Cult of Ra not far away in Helipolis.11 Kings no longer associated pyramids with the afterlife. The afterlife was once believed to be a divine kingdom that was represented as a type of idealistic heaven where only kings and pure hearts could go. Instead the Fourth Dynasty represented a change in this idea formulated the notion that the afterlife was a familiar place taking the semblance of Earth.12 Religious rituals were notoriously conservative from what historians know and there is much to be desired from current known records. Changing customs drove architectural changesedit Relief of Nofer and his Wife detail. From Giza tomb G2110 Dynasty 4 25752465 BC. The Old Kingdom saw a rise in the preservation of the deceased making the preparation of bodies much more complex. The position of embalmer was created and their jobs were solely to prepare a corpse in private. There were three ways to mummify a body 1 Stucco the body would be wrapped in fine linen and then covered in stucco plaster the features of the body including the face were remodeled in the plaster13 2 Linen the body would be wrapped in linen which was sometimes treated with natron a mixture of multiple sodium carbonates14 and the linens would be treated with resin so that the features of the body could be modeled and 3 Defleshing removing all flesh and wrapping the bones in linens.15 Generally organs were removed which were then put into jars that would accompany the body in the tomb and the inside of the body flushed out. Tombs in the Fourth Dynasty changed drastically. Unimpressive graves did not satisfy the elites meaning they would settle for smaller structures if the interior was decorated. Hieroglyphic writings were important to elites because one it was a lavish display of wealth and two it guided their souls to the afterlife. The Fourth Dynasty however did not have these writings. Instead the tomb was deeper and superstructures were larger. After the Giza pyramid complex later generations of tombs were more reasonably sized. After the Middle Kingdom royals abandoned pyramids they preferred graves that were carved into living rock of the Upper Egyptian mountains. Timelineedit Fourth Dynasty timeline See alsoedit Egyptian Fourth Dynasty Family Tree Referencesedit  Shaw Ian ed. 2000. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. p. 480. ISBN 9780198150343. OL 39685
21 M.  Egypt Land and Lives of the Pharaohs Revealed 2005 pp. 8090 Global Book Publishing Australia  Levy Janey 30 December 2005. The Great Pyramid of Giza Measuring Length Area Volume and Angles. Rosen Classroom. p. 4. ISBN 9781404260597.  Tyldesley Joyce. Who was Khufu. cite journal Cite journal requires journal help  Spencer A. J. 1990. The Egyptian Pyramids. A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference. By J.P. Lepre. 233  1
56 mm. Pp. xviii  341 many ills. Jefferson North Carolina McFarland and Company Inc. 1990. ISBN 0899504612. 3750. The Antiquaries Journal. 70 2 479. doi
10.1 0
17 S0003581500070906. S
2 CID 162040068. Retrieved 21 April 2018.  Spencer A. J. 1990. The Egyptian Pyramids. A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference. By J.P. Lepre. 233  1
56 mm. Pp. xviii  341 many ills. Jefferson North Carolina McFarland and Company Inc. 1990. ISBN 0899504612. 3750. The Antiquaries Journal. 70 2 479. doi
10.1 0
17 S0003581500070906. S
2 CID 162040068. Retrieved 21 April 2018.  Peter Jnosi Giza in der 4. Dynastie. Die Baugeschichte und Belegung einer Nekropole des Alten Reiches. vol. I Die Mastabas der Kernfriedhfe und die Felsgrber Verlag der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 2005 ISBN 3700132441 page 6465.  Wolfgang Helck Untersuchungen zu Manetho und den gyptischen Knigslisten  Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und Altertumskunde gyptens Bd. 18 Leipzig Berlin 1956 page 52  Aidan Dodson Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt The American University in Cairo Press London 2004 ISBN 9774248783 page 61  Bolshakov Andrey O 1991. The Old Kingdom Representations of Funeral Procession. Gttinger Miszellen. 121 3154. Retrieved 14 April 2018.  Baines John Lesko Leonard H. Silverman David P. 1991. Religion in Ancient Egypt Gods Myths and Personal Practice. Cornell University Press. p. 97. ISBN 9780801497865.  Roth Ann Macy 1993. Social Change in the Fourth Dynasty The Spatial Organization of Pyramids Tombs and Cemeteries. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt. 30 3355. doi
10.2 30740000226. JSTOR 40000226.  Fragments of stucco from a mummy. Museum of Fine Arts Boston. 12 March 2018.  Gill N.S. 20 August 2018. Natron Ancient Egyptian Chemical Salt and Preservative. ThoughtCo.  BBC  History  Ancient History in depth Mummies Around the World. www.bbc.co.uk. Preceded by Third Dynasty Dynasty of Egypt c. 26132498 BC Succeeded by Fifth Dynasty v t e Rulers of the Ancient Near East Territories dates 12345 Egypt Canaan Ebla Mari Kish Assur Akshak Akkad Uruk Adab Umma Lagash Ur Elam 40003200 BCE Naqada I Naqada II EgyptMesopotamia relations PreDynastic period 40002900 BCE Susa I Uruk period 40003100 BCE Anu Ziggurat 4000 BCE Anonymous Kingpriests Susa II Uruk influence or control 32003100 BCE ProtoDynastic period Naqada III Early or legendary kings Upper Egypt Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Lower Egypt Hedju Hor NyHor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner NatHor Mekh Double Falcon Wash 31002900 BCE Early Dynastic Period First Dynasty of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer Menes Neithhotep regent HorAha Djer Djet Merneith regent Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird Canaanites Jemdet Nasr period 31002900 BCE ProtoElamite period Susa III 31002700 BCE 2900 BCE Second Dynasty of Egypt Hotepsekhemwy NebraRaneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Early Dynastic Period I 29002700 BCE First Eblaite Kingdom First kingdom of Mari Kish I dynasty Jushur Kullassinabel Nangishlishma Entarahana Babum Puannum Kalibum 2800 BCE Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab Mashda Arwium Etana Balih Enmenuna MelemKish Barsalnuna Uruk I dynasty Meshkianggasher Enmerkar conqueror of Aratta 2700 BCE Early Dynastic Period II 27002600 BCE Zamug Tizqar Ilku Iltasadum Lugalbanda Dumuzid the Fisherman Enmebaragesi made the land of Elam submit6 Aga of Kish Gilgamesh Old Elamite period 27001500 BCE IndusMesopotamia relations 2600 BCE Third Dynasty of Egypt Djoser First Egyptian pyramids Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni Early Dynastic Period III 26002340 BCE Sagisu Aburlim Agurlim IbbiDamu BabaDamu Kish II dynasty 5 kings Uhub Mesilim UrNungal Udulkalama Labashum Lagash Enhegal Lugal shaengur Ur AImdugud UrPabilsag Meskalamdug Queen Puabi Akalamdug Enundaraanna Meshe Melamanna Lugalkitun Adab Ninkisalsi Medurba Lugaldalu 2575 BCE Old Kingdom of Egypt Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis Ur I dynasty Mesannepada King of Ur and Kish victorious over Uruk 2500 BCE Phoenicia 2500539 BCE Second kingdom of Mari IkunShamash IkuShamagan Ansud Saumu IshtupIshar IkunMari IblulIl Nizi Kish III dynasty KuBaba Akshak dynasty Unzi Undalulu Uruk II dynasty Ensha kushanna Mugsi Umma I dynasty Pabilgagaltuku Lagash I dynasty UrNanshe Akurgal Aannepada Meskiagnun Elulu Balulu Awan dynasty Peli Tata Ukkutahesh Hishur 2450 BCE Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas EnarDamu IsharMalik Ush Enakalle Elamite invasions 3 kings6 Shushun tarana Napilhush 2425 BCE KunDamu Eannatum King of Lagash Sumer Akkad conqueror of Elam 2400 BCE AdubDamu IgrishHalam IrkabDamu Kish IV dynasty PuzurSuen UrZababa Urur Lugalkinishedudu Lugalkisalsi Eiginimpae Meskigal UrLumma Il Gishakidu Queen Barairnun Enannatum Entemena Enannatum II Enentarzi Ur II dynasty Nanni MeshkiangNanna II Kikusiwetempti 2380 BCE Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Adab dynasty Lugalannemundu King of the four quarters of the world 2370 BCE IsarDamu EnnaDagan IkunIshar IshqiMari Invasion by Mari Anbu Anba Bazi Zizi of Mari Limer Sharrumiter6 Ukush Lugalanda Urukagina Luhishan 2350 BCE PuzurNirah IshuIl ShuSin Uruk III dynasty Lugalzagesi Governor of Umma King of all Sumer 2340 BCE Akkadian Period 23402150 BCE Akkadian Empire Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu Akkadian Governors Eshpum Ilshurabi Epirmupi Iliishmani 2250 BCE NaramSin Lugalushumgal vassal of the Akkadians 2200 BCE First Intermediate Period Seventh Dynasty of Egypt Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Second Eblaite Kingdom Third kingdom of Mari Shakkanakku dynasty Ididish ShuDagan IshmaDagan Vassals of the Akkadians SharKaliSharri Igigi Imi Nanum Ilulu 3 years Dudu Shuturul Uruk IV dynasty Urnigin Urgigir Lagash II dynasty PuzerMama UrNingirsu I Pirigme LuBaba Lugula Kaku HishepRatep Helu Khita PuzurInshushinak 2150 BCE Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Ur III period 21502000 BCE NrMr IshtupIlum IshgumAddu Apilkin Gutian dynasty 21 kings Laerabum Sium Kuda Uruk Puzurili UrUtu Umma II dynasty Lugalannatum vassal of the Gutians UrBaba Gudea UrNingirsu Urgar Nammahani Tirigan 2125 BCE Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Uruk V dynasty Utuhengal 2100 BCE Vassals of UR III Iddiilum IliIshar TuraDagan PuzurIshtar Vassals of Ur III7 Ur III dynasty Kings of Ur Sumer and Akkad UrNammu Shulgi AmarSin ShuSin 20251763 BCE Amorite invasions IbbiSin Elamite invasions Kindattu Shimashki Dynasty Middle Kingdom of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Third Eblaite Kingdom Amorites IbbitLim Immeya Indilimma Amorite Shakkanakkus HitialErra HanunDagan ... Lim Dynasty of Mari Amorites YaggidLim YahdunLim YasmahAdad ZimriLim Queen Shibtu Old Assyria PuzurAshur I Shalimahum Ilushuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I PuzurAshur II NaramSin Erishum II IsinLarsa period Amorites Dynasty of Isin IshbiErra ShuIlishu IddinDagan IshmeDagan LipitEshtar UrNinurta BurSuen LipitEnlil Erraimitti Enlilbani Zambiya Iterpisha Urdukuga Suenmagir Damiqilishu Dynasty of Larsa Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel NurAdad SinIddinam SinEribam SinIqisham SilliAdad WaradSin RimSin I ... RimSin II Uruk VI dynasty Alilahadum Sumubinasa NaramSin of Uruk Snkid Sniribam Sngmil Ilumgamil Anam of Uruk Irdanene RimAnum Nabiiliu Sukkalmah dynasty SiwePalarKhuppak Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu 18001595 BCE Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abraham Biblical Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Yamhad Yamhad dynasty Amorites Old Assyria ShamshiAdad dynasty 18081736 BCE Amorites ShamshiAdad I IshmeDagan I MutAshkur Rimush Asinum Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Nondynastic usurpers 17351701 BCE PuzurSin Ashurdugul Ashuraplaidi NasirSin Sinnamir IpqiIshtar Adadsalulu Adasi Adaside dynasty 1700722 BCE Belbani Libaya SharmaAdad I IptarSin Bazaya Lullaya ShuNinua SharmaAdad II Erishum III ShamshiAdad II IshmeDagan II ShamshiAdad III Ashurnirari I PuzurAshur III Enlilnasir I Nurili Ashurshaduni Ashurrabi I Ashurnadinahhe I EnlilNasir II Ashurnirari II Ashurbelnisheshu Ashurrimnisheshu Ashurnadinahhe II First Babylonian dynasty Old Babylonian Period Amorites Sumuabum SumulaEl SinmuballitSabium ApilSin Sinmuballit Hammurabi Samsuiluna Abieshuh Ammiditana Ammisaduqa SamsuDitana Early Kassite rulers Second Babylonian dynasty Sealand Dynasty Ilummaili Ittiilinibi Damqiilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar mDIUEN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Eagamil Second Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hyksos Pharaoh Ahmose I slaying a Hyksos Semqen AperAnati SakirHar Khyan Apepi Khamudi Mitanni 16001260 BCE Kirta Shuttarna I Parshatatar 15311155 BCE Tutankhamun New Kingdom of Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ahmose I Amenhotep I Third Babylonian dynasty Kassites AgumKakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashmanharbe I Kurigalzu I KadashmanEnlil I Burnaburiash II Karahardash NaziBugash Kurigalzu II NaziMaruttash KadashmanTurgu KadashmanEnlil II KudurEnlil ShagaraktiShuriash Kashtiliashu IV Enlilnadinshumi KadashmanHarbe II Adadshumaiddina Adadshumausur MeliShipak II Mardukaplaiddina I Zababashumaiddin Enlilnadinahi Middle Elamite period 15001100 BCE Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty UntashNapirisha Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb Hittite Empire Ugarit Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret Elamite Empire Shutrukid dynasty ShutrukNakhunte 11551025 BCE Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI Third Intermediate Period Twentyfirst Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II Phoenicia Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Kingdom of Israel Saul Ishbosheth David Solomon SyroHittite states Middle Assyria EribaAdad I Ashuruballit I Enlilnirari Arikdenili Adadnirari I Shalmaneser I TukultiNinurta I Ashurnadinapli Ashurnirari III Enlilkudurriusur NinurtaapalEkur Ashurdan I NinurtatukultiAshur MutakkilNusku Ashurreshishi I TiglathPileser I AsharidapalEkur Ashurbelkala EribaAdad II ShamshiAdad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashurnirari IV Ashurrabi II Ashurreshishi II TiglathPileser II Ashurdan II Fourth Babylonian dynasty Second Dynasty of Isin Mardukkabitahheshu IttiMardukbalatu Ninurtanadinshumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlilnadinapli Marduknadinahhe Mardukshapikzeri Adadaplaiddina Mardukahheeriba MardukzerX Nabushumlibur NeoElamite period 1100540 BCE 1025934 BCE Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Babylonian dynasties Period of Chaos Simbarshipak Eamukinzeri Kashshunadinahi Eulmashshakinshumi Ninurtakudurriusur I Shiriktishuqamuna Marbitiaplausur Nabmukinapli 911745 BCE Twentysecond Dynasty of Egypt Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV Twentythird Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twentyfourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht Bakenranef Kingdom of Samaria Kingdom of Judah NeoAssyrian Empire Adadnirari II TukultiNinurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III ShamshiAdad V Shammuramat regent Adadnirari III Shalmaneser IV AshurDan III Ashurnirari V Ninth Babylonian Dynasty Ninurtakudurriusur II Marbitiahheiddina Shamashmudammiq Nabushumaukin I Nabuaplaiddina Mardukzakirshumi I Mardukbalassuiqbi Babaahaiddina five kings NinurtaaplaX Mardukbelzeri Mardukaplausur EribaMarduk Nabushumaishkun Nabonassar Nabunadinzeri Nabushumaukin II Nabumukinzeri HumbanTahrid dynasty Urtak Teumman Ummanigash Tammaritu I Indabibi Humbanhaltash III 745609 BCE Twentyfifth Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa Black Pharaohs Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun NeoAssyrian Empire Sargonid dynasty TiglathPileser Shalmaneser Mardukaplaiddina II Sargon Sennacherib Mardukzakirshumi II Mardukaplaiddina II Belibni Ashurnadinshumi Nergalushezib MushezibMarduk Esarhaddon Ashurbanipal Ashuretililani Sinsharishkun Sinshumulishir Ashuruballit II Assyrian conquest of Egypt Assyrian conquest of Elam 626539 BCE Late Period Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III NeoBabylonian Empire Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II AmelMarduk Neriglissar LabashiMarduk Nabonidus Median Empire Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages 539331 BCE Twentyseventh Dynasty of Egypt First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Achaemenid Empire Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III Twentyeighth Dynasty of Egypt Twentyninth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtyfirst Dynasty of Egypt 331141 BCE Argead dynasty and Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV Hellenistic Period Seleukos I Nikator Tetradrachm from Babylon Argead dynasty Alexander III Philip III Alexander IV Antigonid dynasty Antigonus I Seleucid Empire Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes 14130 BCE Kingdom of Judea Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Parthian Empire Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I 30 BCE116 CE Roman Empire Roman conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Judea Syria 116117 CE Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan Parthamaspates of Parthia 117224 CE Syria Palaestina Province of Mesopotamia Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV 224270 CE Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Coin of Ardashir I Hamadan mint. Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm 270273 CE Palmyrene Empire Vaballathus Zenobia Antiochus 273395 CE Roman Empire Province of Egypt Syria Palaestina Syria Province of Mesopotamia 395618 CE Byzantine Empire Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 618628 CE Sasanian conquest of Egypt Province of Egypt Shahrbaraz Sahralanyozan Shahrbaraz Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Khosrow II Kavad II 628641 CE Byzantine Empire Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran Shapuri Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 639651 CE Muslim conquest of Egypt Muslim conquest of the Levant Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia Chronology of the Neolithic period Rulers of Ancient Central Asia  Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.  Hallo W. Simpson W. 1971. The Ancient Near East. New York Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 4849.  Rulers of Mesopotamia. cdli.ox.ac.uk. University of Oxford CNRS.  Thomas Ariane Potts Timothy 2020. Mesopotamia Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 9781606066492.  Roux Georges 1992. Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532534 Chronological Tables. ISBN 9780141938257.  a b c Per Sumerian King List  Unger Merrill F. 2014. Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 9781625646064. Authority control databases National Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleFourthDynastyofEgyptoldid1221978336 Categories Fourth Dynasty of Egypt States and territories established in the 
3 rd millennium BC States and territories disestablished in the 
3 rd millennium BC Dynasties of ancient Egypt 
3 rd millennium BC in Egypt 
3 rdmillennium BC establishments in Egypt 
3 rdmillennium BC disestablishments in Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the EasyTimeline extension CS1 errors missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 3 May 2024 at 0352 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width