Huni - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 Name and identity Toggle Name and identity subsection 
2.1 Hunis cartouche name 
2.2 Hunis possible Horus name 
3 Family 
4 Reign 
5 Monuments possibly connected to Huni Toggle Monuments possibly connected to Huni subsection 
5.1 Meidum pyramid 
5.2 Layer Pyramid 
5.3 Lepsius pyramid  I 
5.4 Cultic step pyramids 
5.5 Edfu South Pyramid 
6 Burial 
7 In culture 
8 Notes and references 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Huni 41 languages Afrikaans   Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian king and pharaoh For other uses see Huni disambiguation. Huni NySuteh NisutHu Huennisut Qahedjet Kerpheris Aches Pink granite head possibly depicting Huni Brooklyn Museum1 Pharaoh Reign 24 years2 Predecessor Khaba Successor Sneferu Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Abusir stone bowl Niswtbitj HwenNiswt Elephantine conePalermo stone HwenNiswt Papyrus Prisse Hwj The smiter Saqqara Tablet Hwj The smiter Turin King List King Hw... Consort Djefatnebti Meresankh I Children Hetepheres I Sneferu Monuments Cultic step pyramid and palace at Elephantine Dynasty 
3 rd Dynasty Huni original reading unknown was an ancient Egyptian king the last pharaoh of the Third Dynasty of Egypt during the Old Kingdom period. Following the Turin king list he is commonly credited with a reign of 24 years ending c. 2613 BC. Hunis chronological position as the last king of the third dynasty is fairly certain but there is uncertainty about the succession order of rulers at the end of the 
3 rd dynasty. It is also unclear under which Hellenized name the ancient historian Manetho listed him in his Aegyptiacae mostly likely Aches as Winfried Barta proposes.citation needed Many Egyptologists believe that Huni was the father and direct predecessor of King Sneferu but this is questioned by other scholars. Huni is seen by scholars as a confusing figure in Egyptian history because he was long remembered in Egyptian traditions but very few documents objects or monuments from his reign have survived.3 Attestationsedit Granite cone uncovered on Elephantine and inscribed with Hunis cartouche4 Huni is not a well attested pharaoh most of the attestations only point indirectly to him. There are only two contemporary objects with his name. The first one is a conical stele made of red granite discovered in 1909 on the island of Elephantine. The object is 
62.9 9 inches 1
60.0  cm long 
27.1 6 inches 
69.0  cm thick and 
19.6 9 inches 
50.0  cm broad. Its shape resembles a typical Benben stele as known from mastaba tombs of early dynastic kings. At the front the cone presents a rectangular niche with an incarved inscription inside. The inscription mentions a royal palace named Palace of the headband of Huni and writes Hunis name above inside a royal cartouche. The decorated niche is interpreted by scholars as a socalled apparition window. The lower part of the window frame is flattened and elongated and shows traces of a second inscription apparently the same as inside the window. It is not fully clarified where exactly the object was once on display. Because it was found very close to a stepped pyramid Egyptologists such as Rainer Stadelmann propose a position on the very front of the monument or even visibly embedded in one of the steps. Today Hunis dedication cone is on display in the Cairo Museum as object JE 415
56.4 5 The second finding discovered in 2007 is a polished stone bowl made of magnesite found at SouthAbusir in the mastaba tomb AS54 belonging to a high official whose name is yet unknown to archaeologists. The stone vessel inscription mentions Hunis name without a cartouche but with the NjswtBity title. The orthography of the hieroglyphs that form Hunis name makes a reading as NjswtHw or HwenNiswt plausible.6 Huni is also attested in mastaba L6 at Saqqara attributed to the official Metjen and dating to the end of the 
3 rd dynasty. There an inscription was found with the name of a royal domain Hw.tnjswt.hw Hutnisuthu of Huni.7 Huni is further mentioned on the back of the Palermo stone in the section concerning the reign of the 
5 thdynasty king Neferirkare Kakai who apparently had a mortuary temple built for the cult of Huni. The temple however has not yet been located.3 Finally Huni is attested in the papyrus Prisse in the Instructions of Kagemni probably dating to the 
13 th dynasty. The papyrus gives an important indication about Hunis succession in column II line 7 But then the majesty of king Huni died and the majesty of king Snefru was now raised up as beneficient king in this entire land. And Kagemni was raised as the new mayor of the royal capitol and became vizir of the king.8 Most scholars today think that this extract may strengthen the theory that Huni was the last king of the 
3 rd dynasty and immediate predecessor of king Snefru the first ruler of the 
4 th dynasty.9 Name and identityedit Hunis cartouche nameedit Hunis identity is difficult to establish since his name is passed down mostly as cartouche name and in different variations. The earliest mention of his cartouche name may possibly appearing on the granite cone from Elephantine which might be contemporary. Otherwise the earliest appearances of Hunis cartouche can be found on the Palermo Stone P1 dating to the 
5 th dynasty and on the Prisse Papyrus of the 
13 th dynasty. Hunis cartouche can also be found in the Saqqara kinglist and the Turin Canon both dating back to the 
19 th dynasty. The Abydos kinglist which also dates to the 
19 th dynasty mysteriously omits Hunis name and gives instead a Neferkara I who is unknown to Egyptologists.3 The reading and translation of his cartouche name is also disputed. In general two basic versions of his name exist an old version which is closest to the lost original and a younger version which seems to be based on ramesside interpretations and misreadings. Hunis cartouche on the back of the Palermo stone in Neferirkares register.10 The older version uses the hieroglyphic signs candle wick Gardiner sign V28 juncus sprout Gardiner sign M23 bread loaf Gardiner sign X1 and water line Gardiner sign N35. This writing form can be found on Old Kingdom objects such as the Palermo Stone recto reign of Neferirkare the tomb inscription of Metjen the stone vessel found in Abusir and the granite cone from Elephantine. Whilst the stone vessel from Abusir writes Hunis name without a cartouche but gives the NiswtBitytitle all other Old Kingdom writings place the kings name inside an oval cartouche.10 The ramesside versions use the hieroglyphic signs candle wick Gardiner sign V28 beating man Gardiner sign A25 water line Gardiner sign N35 and arm with a stick Gardiner sign D40. The cartouche No. 15 in the Kinglist of Saqqara writes two vertical strokes between the water line and the beating arm. The Prisse Papyrus omits the candle wick and the beating arm.10 Egyptologist Ludwig Borchardt had already proposed by the beginning of the 
20 th century that the old and ramesside cartouche versions were referring to one and the same king. He proposed that ramesside scribes erroneously took away the juncus sign of the NiswtBity title and placed it before the royal cartouche not realizing that this sign was part of the original birth or thronename of Huni. He also proposed that the candle wick was misinterpreted as the sign for smiting tempting the ramesside scribes to place the hieroglyph of a beating man behind it.11 These conclusions are still shared by scholars today.5 Following his hypothesis Borchardt reads Hunis cartouche name as Niswt Hw king Hu.11 However Hans Gdicke instead reads Ny Swteh He who belongs to the smiters and is convinced that Hunis name was theophoric. In particular he compares Hunis name construction with those of the kings Nynetjer He who belongs to the deified of Horus and Nyuserre He who belongs to those of power of Re.12 Rainer Stadelmann and Wolfgang Helck strongly refute Gdickes reading pointing out that no single Egyptian document mentions a deity person place or even a single colloquial term named Swteh. Thus there is no grammatical source that could have been used to make a royal name Ny Swteh. Helck instead suggests a reading as Hwjnjniswt and translates it as The utterance belongs to the king.510 Hunis possible Horus nameedit The Horus name of Huni is unknown. There are several theories to connect the cartouche name Huni with contemporary Horus names. In the late 19
60 s the Louvre Museum bought a stele showing a king whose Horus name is HorusQahedjet the crown of Horus is raised. For stylistical reasons the stele may be dated to the late Third Dynasty and it seems possible that it refers to Huni whose Horusname it provides.13 However dating and authenticity have been put into question several times and today the stela is believed to be either fake or dedicated to king Thutmose III 
18 th dynasty while imitating the artistic style of Dynasty III.14 Peter Kaplony promotes an ominous name found in the burial shaft of an unfinished pyramid at Zawyet elAryan. The monument is connected with a possible pharaoh named Bikheris. The name in question reads Nebhedjetnwb lord of the golden crown and is thought by Kaplony to be Hunis possible Horus name. However Egyptologists such as Aidon Dodson contradict this theory and argue that Nebhedjetnwb with its gold hieroglyph should rather be the Golden Horus name of Bikheris.1516 Other Egyptologists such as Toby Wilkinson and Rainer Stadelmann identify Huni with the contemporarily wellattested king HorusKhaba the soul of Horus appears. Their identification is based on the circumstance that both kings Horus names appear on incised stone vessels without any further guiding notes. It was a fashion that began with the death of king Khasekhemwy end of 
2 nd dynasty and ended under king Sneferu beginning of the 
4 th dynasty. Thus it was a very typical practice of the 
3 rd dynasty. Additionally Stadelmann points to the Layer Pyramid at Zawyet elAryan. This monument was possibly built by Khaba since a nearby mastaba contained several stone vessels with his Horus name. Since the Turin Canon credits a reign of 24 years to Huni Stadelmann argues that this time span would perfectly fit to finish the Layer Pyramid. Furthermore Stadelmann points to the large amount of discovered mud seal impressions and stone bowls and the widespread finding spots throughout Egypt. In his opinion the archaeological context also speaks for a longerlasting reign. Thus he identifies Khaba with Huni.35 Familyedit Inscription from mastaba L6 mentioning a royal domain of Huni.10 The genealogical position of Huni in the family line of ruling kings during the time when the 
3 rd dynasty ended and the 
4 th started is highly disputed. Contemporary and later documents often mention Huni and his follower Snefru in the same sentence always in direct succession. Therefore Egyptologists and historians believe that Huni might have even been related to Snefru. A key figure in this case is queen Meresankh I the royal mother of Snefru. She definitely bore the title of a queen but no contemporary source connects her name with the title of a daughter or wife of Huni. This circumstance raises doubts in the family relationship between Huni and Snefru. Today most scholars prefer to believe the historian Manetho who claims in his Aegyptiacae that with the enthronement of Snefru a different royal house gained power over Egypt and a new dynasty had begun.17 A possible wife of Huni was instead a queen Djefatnebty whose name appears in black ink inscriptions on beer vases from Elephantine. Her name is guided by the title great one of the hetessceptre making her definitely a queen consort. According to an interpretation by Gnter Dreyer Djefatnebtys death is mentioned alongside several events during the reign of king Huni although no king is mentioned in the inscription by his name. Dreyer is convinced that the notations concern the 
22 nd year of Hunis reign since the Turin canon credits him with a reign of 24 years and no 
3 rd dynasty king is archaeologically proven to have ruled so long. Dreyers interpretation is not commonly accepted though.17 Until today no child or other relative of Huni can be identified and connected to him with certainty. William Stevenson Smith and George Andrew Reisner propose to identify queen Hetepheres I concubine of Sneferu and mother of king Khufu 
4 th dynasty as the daughter of King Huni. Hetepheres bore the female title Satnetjer daughter of a god which led Smith and Reisner to the conclusion that this could be a hint to her family position as the daughter of Huni. In this case Hetepheres would have been an heir princess and by marrying Snefru she secured the blood line of the royal dynasty.1819 But other scholars such as Wolfgang Helck and Wilfried Seipel raise strong doubts against this theory. They argue that the title of Hetepheres does not explicitly reveal to whom she was married in her lifetime.20 Reignedit Next to nothing is known of Hunis time on the throne. Huni is given a reign of 24 years by the Turin canon which is commonly accepted by scholars. Religious or military activities are not known from his reign.4 The only contemporary documents which allow some evaluation of any political and social developments during Hunis time are the tomb inscriptions of high officials such as Metjen Khabausokar Aaakhty and Pehernefer. These are dated to the time span from the end of 
3 rd dynasty unto the beginning of the 
4 th dynasty. They show that the reign of Huni must have been the beginning of the heyday of the Old Kingdom. For the first time inscriptions give explicit insights into the power structure of the state with nomarchs and viziers exercising important powers. The tomb inscriptions of Metjen also mentions for the first time in Egyptian history that titles of highranked officials and priests were only passed down by inheritance from father to son.3 It seems though that Huni undertook some building projects. The Turin Canon which is rather modest about additional informations concerning the listed kings credits Huni with the erection of a certain building for which Huni must have been honoured in later times. Unfortunately the papyrus is damaged at the relevant column and the complete name of the building is lost today. Egyptologists Gnter Dreyer and Werner Kaiser propose a reading as he who built Sekhem.... They believe that it could be possible that the building was part of a building project through the entire land including the erection of several small cultic pyramids.2122 Another hint of possible building projects and city foundations under Huni might be hidden in the name of the historical city of Ehnas today better known as Heracleopolis Magna. Wolfgang Helck points out that the Old Kingdom name of this city was Nenjniswt and that this name was written with exactly the same hieroglyphs as the cartouche name of Huni. Thus he proposes Huni as the founder of Ehnas. Additionally the tomb inscription of Metjen mentions a mortuary domain in the nome of Letopolis. This building hasnt been found by archaeologists yet.2324 After his death Huni seems to have enjoyed a long lasting mortuary cult. The Palermo stone which was made over a hundred years after Hunis death mentions donations made to a funerary complex temple of Huni. Hunis name is also mentioned in the Prisse Papyrus a further evidence that Huni was remembered long after his death since the papyrus was written during the 
12 th dynasty.3 Monuments possibly connected to Huniedit Meidum pyramidedit The Meidum pyramid initially believed to have been started by Huni is now thought to be exclusively the work of Snefru. In the early 
20 th century the Meidum pyramid was often credited to Huni. One longheld theory posited that Huni had started a stepped pyramid similar to that of king Djoser Sekhemkhet and Khaba but architecturally more advanced and with more and smaller steps. When king Snefru ascended the throne he would have simply covered the pyramid with polished limestone slabs making it a true pyramid. The odd appearance of the pyramid was explained in early publications by a possible building catastrophe during which the pyramids covering collapsed and many workmen would have been crushed. The theory seemed to be fostered by the unknown duration of Snefrus reign. At the time egyptologists and historians couldnt believe that Snefru ruled long enough to have three pyramids built for him.2526 Closer examinations of the pyramid surroundings however revealed several tomb inscriptions and pilgrim graffiti praising the beauty of the white pyramid of king Snefru. They further call for prayers to Snefru and his great wife Meresankh I. Additionally the surrounding mastaba tombs date to the reign of King Snefru. Hunis name has yet to be found anywhere near the pyramid. These indices led Egyptologists to the conclusion that the pyramid of Meidum was never Hunis but rather an achievement of Snefru planned and constructed as a cenotaph. Ramesside graffiti reveal that the white limestone covering still existed during the 
19 th dynasty and thus started to collapse slowly after that period. The rest of the limestone covering and the first inner layers were robbed during the New Kingdom period and the Roman period. This practice continued in Christian and Islamic times in particular during the construction works of the Arabs in the 
12 th century AD. Arab writers describe the Meidum pyramid as a mountain with five steps. Finally several regional earthquakes damaged the monument.2526 A third argument against the theory that Snefru completed Hunis project is newer evaluations of Snefrus time on the throne. According to the Turin Canon Snefru ruled for 24 years. However during the Old Kingdom the years of rule were counted biennially when cattle counts and tax collections were performed which would mean that Snefru may have ruled for 48 years. The compiler of the Turin Canon may not have been aware of this longgone circumstance when redacting his document and would consequently have attributed 24 years to Snefru. Today it is estimated that 48 years of rule would have allowed Snefru to build three pyramids during his lifetime.2728 Additionally egyptologists such as Rainer Stadelmann point out that it was uncommon for rulers during the Old Kingdom to usurp or finish the tomb of a predecessor all that a succeeding king did was to bury and seal the tomb of his predecessor.2526 Layer Pyramidedit The Layer Pyramid attributed to Khaba who may be the same person as Huni. As mentioned before Rainer Stadelmann thinks it could be possible that Huni built the socalled Layer Pyramid at Zawyet elAryan. According to Stadelmann and JeanPhillipe Lauer this monument was nearly finished when it was left. It is unknown though if the subterranean complex actually was ever used for the burial of the king. The necropolis of the Layer Pyramid is still incompletely investigated. A nearby mastaba Mastaba Z500 which was integrated into the pyramid complex contained several stone bowls with the Horus name of king Khaba. Thus the Layer Pyramid is commonly equally known as the pyramid of Khaba. Rainer Stadelmann proposes an identification of Khaba with Huni. He argues that the finishing of the pyramid lasted a long period of time and since the Turin Canon credits a 
24 year reign to Huni this time span surely covered the building time needed for the pyramid. Thus both names Huni and Khaba might point to one and the same ruler.529 Lepsius pyramid  Iedit A mysterious mud brick pyramid originally planned to be the size of that of Khafr was uncovered in Abu Rawash and documented by Karl Richard Lepsius who listed it in his list of pyramids as Pyramid I. The pyramid was already a heap of rubble at the time his excavations in the 18
40 s only a 
17 metrehigh 56 ft stump of brick layers was left. Lepsius nonetheless discovered a narrow corridor leading down to a nearly square chamber. In it he found a roughly hewn stone sarcophagus. Lepsius dated the pyramid to the late 
3 rd dynasty and proposed a connection to King Huni.3031 Today this theory is no longer accepted. In 1989 Egyptologist Nabil Swelim examined the pyramid more precisely and found that it was made of small mud bricks with a quarter of its inner core hewn out of a natural bedrock. The rock core itself contained several rockcut tombs dating back to the 
5 th and 
6 th dynasty. Swelim and others Egyptologists such as Toby Wilkinson point out that it would be surprising for a royal pyramid to have been completely destroyed less than 300 years after its construction only to be reused for simple rockcut tombs. Additionally he points to the unusual geographic position of the pyramid Old Kingdom pyramids were commonly built on high grounds while the pyramid Lepsius I lies on a flat plain. Thus the dating of this monument to the late 
3 rd dynasty no longer seems tenable.303233 Cultic step pyramidsedit Several small step pyramids along the Nile river are also credited to Huni. Those small pyramids had a cultic function and marked important royal estates. They contained no internal chambers and were not used for burial purposes. One of them is located at the eastern end of Elephantine island and a granite cone with Hunis name was discovered nearby in 1909. Therefore this little pyramid is the only one that may be credited to Huni with some certainty.34 Some scholars such as Andrzej wiek contest this attribution however pointing out that it might be at least possible that the granite cone of Huni was reused in later times when ramesside priests restored cultic places of the Old Kingdom period.35 The only cultic step pyramid that can be definitively connected to an Old Kingdom ruler is a small step pyramid known as the Seila Pyramid located at the Faiyum Oasis. Two large stela with the name of Snefru were found in front of the pyramid thus indicating the king responsible for its construction.36 Since Snefru was Hunis likely immediate successor this might indicate however that cultic pyramids were indeed constructed at the transition between the 
3 rd and 
4 th dynasties. Edfu South Pyramidedit Edfu South Pyramid Burialedit Hunis burial site remains unknown. Since the Meidum pyramid can be excluded egyptologists and archaeologists propose several alternative burial sites. As already pointed out Rainer Stadelmann and Miroslav Verner propose the Layerpyramid at Zawyet elAryan as Hunis tomb because they identify Huni with Khaba who is in turn well connected with the Layerpyramid since several stone bowls with his Horus name were found in the surrounding necropolis.37 Alternatively Stadelmann proposes a huge mastaba at Meidum as Hunis burial. Mastaba M17 was originally around 100 metres 330 ft large by 200 metres 660 ft wide and was approximately 15 to 20 metres 49 to 66 ft high. The aboveground part was made of unburnt mud bricks and filled with rubble from the second building phase of the Meidum pyramid. The subterranean structure contained a 
3.7  metres 12 ft deep shaft leading into a corridor and several large chapels and niches. The burial chamber was plundered in antiquity every decoration was destroyed andor stolen. The large roughly hewn sarcophagus contained the remains of a violently tattered mummy. Stadelmann and Peter Janosi think that the mastaba was either the tomb of a crownprince who died an heir to the throne of king Snefru or it was the burial of Huni himself.38 Miroslav Brta instead proposes mastaba AS54 in SouthAbusir as the most possible burial site. This is promoted by the finding of a polished magnesite bowl which shows the niswtbity title of Huni. The mastaba itself was once pretty large and contained large niches and chapels. It also contained a quite large amount of polished dishes vases and urns. Contradictorily nearly all the vessels are undecorated no ink inscription or carving were found on the objects. Thus the name of the true owner is yet unknown. Only one vessel clearly shows Hunis name while a few other might show small traces. Brta thus sees two possibilities for the owner of the mastaba it was either a very high ranked official such as a prince of Hunis time or king Huni himself.39 In cultureedit The transition from Hunis to Sneferus reigns is referenced to set the fictional time setting of the Instructions of Kagemni an ancient Egyptian instructional text of wisdom literature.40 Notes and referencesedit  Head of a King. Brooklyn Museum  according to Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 page 99.  a b c d e f Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge London New York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 8589.  a b c Winfried Barta Zum altgyptischen Namen des Knigs Aches. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo. MDAIK vol. 29. von Zabern Mainz 1973 pages 14.  a b c d e Rainer Stadelmann King Huni His Monuments and His Place in the History of the Old Kingdom. In Zahi A. Hawass Janet Richards Hrsg. The Archaeology and Art of Ancient Egypt. Essays in Honor of David B. OConnor. Band II Conceil Suprme des Antiquits de lgypte Kairo 2007 p. 425431.  M. Barta An Abusir Mastaba from the Reign of Huni in Vivienne Gae Callender et al. editors Times Signs and Pyramids Studies in Honour of Miroslav Verner on the Occasion of his Seventieth Birthday Prague Charles University Faculty in Art 2011 ISBN 9788073082574 p. 4151 inscription depicted as fig. 6 on p. 48  Wolfgang Helck Der Name des letzten Knigs der 3. Dynastie und die Stadt Ehnas in Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur SAK 4 1976 pp. 125128.  Hellmut Brunner Altgyptische Erziehung. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1991 ISBN 3447031883 p. 154.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt pp. 6567.  a b c d e Wolfgang Helck Der Name des letzten Knigs der 3. Dynastie und die Stadt Ehnas. In Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur. SAK 
4 th Edition 1976 p. 125128.  a b Ludwig Borchardt Knig Hu. In Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde ZS 
46 th edition BerlinCairo 1909 p. 12.  Hans Gdicke Der Name des Huni. In Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde ZS 
81 st edition BerlinCairo 1956 p. 18.  Toby Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 page 104105.  JeanPierre Ptznik Jacques Vandier LHorus Qahedjet Souverain de la IIIe dynastie. page 14551472  Aidan Dodson On the date of the unfinished pyramid of Zawyet elAryan. In Discussion in Egyptology. University Press Oxford UK 1985 p. 22.  Peter Kaplony Die Rollsiegel des Alten Reichs Katalog der Rollsiegel  Monumenta aegyptiaca vol. 3. Fondation Egypt. Reine Elisabeth Cairo 1981 p. 146155.  a b Silke Roth Die Knigsmtter des Alten gypten von der Frhzeit bis zum Ende der 12. Dynastie. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2001 ISBN 3447043687 page 6869  385.  William Stevenson Smith Inscriptional Evidence for the History of the Fourth Dynasty. In Journal of Near Eastern Studies vol. 11 1952 p. 113128.  George Andrew Reisner A History of the Giza Necropolis  Volume II. The tomb of HetepHeres the mother of Cheops. A Study of Egyptian Civilization in the Old Kingdom. Oxford University Press Oxford 1955 p. 5961.  Wilfried Seipel Hetepheres I. In Wolfgang Helck Eberhard Otto Lexikon der gyptologie. p. 11721173.  Rainer Stadelmann King Huni His Monuments and His Place in the History of the Old Kingdom. In Zahi A. Hawass Janet Richards Hrsg. The Archaeology and Art of Ancient Egypt. Essays in Honor of David B. OConnor vol. II. Conceil Suprme des Antiquits de lgypte Kairo 2007 p. 425.  Gnter Dreyer Werner Kaiser Zu den kleinen Stufenpyramiden Ober und Mittelgyptens. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo vol. 36. Philipp von Zabern Mainz 1980 p. 55.  Wolfgang Helck Der Name des letzten Knigs der 3. Dynastie und die Stadt Ehnas. In Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur SAK vol. 4 1976 p. 127.  Eduard Meyer Geschichte des Altertums Band 1. Erweiterte Ausgabe Jazzybee Verlag Altenmnster 2012 Neuauflage ISBN 3849625168 p. 128.  a b c Miroslav Verner Die Pyramiden. Rowohlt Verlag Wiesbaden 1999 ISBN 3499608901 p. 185195.  a b c Rainer Stadelmann Snofru und die Pyramiden von Meidum und Dahschur. in Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Kairo MDAIK vol 36. Zabern Mainz 1980 p. 437449.  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 p. 278.  Rainer Stadelmann Die groen Pyramiden von Giza. Akad. Druck u. Verlagsanstalt Graz 1990 ISBN 3201014
80 X p. 260.  Miroslav Verner Die Pyramiden. Rowohlt Wiesbaden 1999 ISBN 3499608901 p. 174.  a b Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge LondonNew York 1999 ISBN 0415186331 p. 103105.  Karl Richard Lepsius Denkmler aus gypten und thiopien. p. 
21 ff.  Miroslav Verner Die Pyramiden. Rowohlt Wiesbaden 1999 ISBN 3499608901 p. 177.  Nabil M. Swelim The brick pyramid at Abu Rawash Number I by Lepsius. Publications of the Archeological Society of Alexandria Kairo 1987 p. 113.  Gnter Dreyer Werner Kaiser Zu den kleinen Stufenpyramiden Ober und Mittelgyptens. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo MDAIK vol. 36 1980 p. 57.  Andrzej wiek Date and Function of the socalled Minor Step Pyramids. In Gttinger Miszellen 162. Edition 1998. p. 4244.  Rainer Stadelmann Snofru  Builder and Unique Creator of the Pyramids of Seila and Meidum. In Ola ElAguizy Mohamed Sherif Ali Echoes of Eternity. Studies presented to Gaballa Aly Gaballa. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2010 ISBN 9783447062152 p. 32.  Miroslav Verner Die Pyramiden. Rowohlt Wiesbaden 1999 ISBN 3499608901 p.177.  Peter Jnosi Die Grberwelt der Pyramidenzeit. von Zabern Mainz 2009 ISBN 3805336225 p. 3738.  Miroslav Brta An Abusir Mastaba from the Reign of Huni. In Vivienne Gae Callender Times Signs and Pyramids Studies in Honour of Miroslav Verner on the Occasion of his Seventieth Birthday. Charles University  Faculty in Art Praha 2011 ISBN 9788073082574 p. 48.  THE INSTRUCTION OF PTAHHOTEP AND THE INSTRUCTION OF KEGEMNI THE OLDEST BOOKS IN THE WORLD. Project Gutenberg. External linksedit Meidum Site of the Broken Pyramid  Remnants of the First True Pyramid VirtualEgypt On pharaoh Huni v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Instructions of Kagemni Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleHunioldid1211247591 Categories 
27 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Third Dynasty of Egypt 
27 thcentury BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 1 March 2024 at 1554 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width