Khufu - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Khufus name 
2 Family Toggle Family subsection 
2.1 Khufus origin 
2.2 Family tree 
3 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
3.1 Length of reign 
3.2 Political activities 

3.2.1 Wadi Maghareh 

3.2.2 Wadi alJarf 
4 Monuments and statues Toggle Monuments and statues subsection 
4.1 Statues 
4.2 Reliefs 
4.3 Pyramid complex 
5 Khufu in later Egyptian traditions Toggle Khufu in later Egyptian traditions subsection 
5.1 Old Kingdom 
5.2 Middle Kingdom 
5.3 New Kingdom 
5.4 Late Period 
6 Khufu in ancient Greek traditions Toggle Khufu in ancient Greek traditions subsection 
6.1 Manetho 
6.2 Herodotus 
6.3 Diodorus of Sicily 
7 Khufu in Arabic traditions 
8 Modern egyptological evaluations 
9 Khufu in popular culture 
10 See also 
11 References 
12 External links Toggle the table of contents Khufu 74 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca      Brezhoneg Catal  etina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Kapampangan  Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar   Bahasa Melayu   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Ozbekcha   Polski Portugus Romn  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina lnski   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog     Trke Trkmene   Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Khufu pharaoh This is the latest accepted revision reviewed on 9 May 2024. Fourth Dynasty ancient Egyptian pharaoh This article is about the Egyptian pharaoh. For the encryption algorithm see Khufu and Khafre. Cheops redirects here. For other uses see Cheops disambiguation. Khufu Cheops Suphis Chnoubos1 Sofe2 The Statue of Khufu in the Cairo Museum Pharaoh Reign c. 2589  c. 2566 BC34 2829 years5 Predecessor Sneferu Successor Djedefre Royal titulary Horus name Medjedu Md.w6 He who crushes the enemies for Horus Alternative form Nebty name Nebtyrmedjed MdrNnb.tj6 He who crushes the enemies of the two Ladies Golden Horus Bikwynub Bjk.wjnb.w6 The twice golden falcon Abydos King List Khufu wj.f wj He protects me Saqqara Tablet Khufu wj.f wj He protects me Turin King List Name lost in a lacuna Relief with the titulary of Khufu from the Wadi Maghareh7 Nomen Khufu Khuifwi wj.f wj I am protectedHe protects me8 Alternative form Khnum Khufu nmw wjf wj Khnum protects me Consort Meritites I Henutsen3 Children Kawab Djedefhor Hetepheres II Meritites II Meresankh II Baufra Djedefre Minkhaf I Khafre Khufukhaf I Babaef Horbaef Nefertiabet Khamerernebty I9 Father Pharaoh Sneferu Mother Queen Hetepheres I Died c. 2566 BC Burial Great Pyramid of Giza Monuments Great Pyramid of Giza Khufu ship Dynasty 
4 th Dynasty Khufu or Cheops was an ancient Egyptian monarch who was the second pharaoh of the Fourth Dynasty in the first half of the Old Kingdom period 
26 th century BC. Khufu succeeded his father Sneferu as king. He is generally accepted as having commissioned the Great Pyramid of Giza one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World but many other aspects of his reign are poorly documented.1011 The only completely preserved portrait of the king is a threeinchhigh ivory figurine found in a temple ruin of a later period at Abydos in 1903. All other reliefs and statues were found in fragments and many buildings of Khufu are lost. Everything known about Khufu comes from inscriptions in his necropolis at Giza and later documents.citation needed For example Khufu is the main character noted in the Westcar Papyrus from the 
13 th dynasty.1011 Most documents that mention king Khufu were written by ancient Egyptian and Greek historians around 300 BC.citation needed Khufus obituary is presented there in a conflicting way while the king enjoyed a longlasting cultural heritage preservation during the period of the Old Kingdom and the New Kingdom the ancient historians Manetho Diodorus and Herodotus hand down a very negative depiction of Khufus character. Thanks to these documents an obscure and critical picture of Khufus personality persists.1011 Khufus nameedit Khufus name was dedicated to the god Khnum which might point to an increase of Khnums popularity and religious importance. In fact several royal and religious titles introduced at this time may point out that Egyptian pharaohs sought to accentuate their divine origin and status by dedicating their cartouche names official royal names to certain deities. Khufu may have viewed himself as a divine creator a role that was already given to Khnum the god of creation and growth. As a consequence the king connected Khnums name with his own. Khufus full name Khnumkhufu means Khnum protect me.1213 While modern Egyptological pronunciation renders his name as Khufu at the time of his reign his name was probably pronounced as Khawyafwiy and during the Hellenized era Khewafw.14 The pharaoh officially used two versions of his birth name Khnumkhuf and Khufu. The first complete version clearly exhibits Khufus religious loyalty to Khnum the second shorter version does not. It is unknown as to why the king would use a shortened name version since it hides the name of Khnum and the kings name connection to this god. It might be possible though that the short name was not meant to be connected to any god at all.1011 Khufu is well known under his Hellenized name  Khops or Cheops kips KEEops by Diodorus and Herodotus and less well known under another Hellenized name  Sphis sufs SOOfis by Manetho.1011 A rare version of the name of Khufu used by Josephus is  Sofe sfi SOFee.2 The pronunciations given here are for English the pronunciations in Ancient Greek were different. Arab historians who wrote mystic stories about Khufu and the Giza pyramids called him Saurid Arabic  or Salhuk .15 Familyedit See also Fourth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Khufus originedit Portrait of Sneferu Khufus father or stepfather The royal family of Khufu was quite large. It is uncertain if Khufu was actually the biological son of Sneferu. Egyptologists believe Sneferu was Khufus father but only because it was handed down by later historians that the eldest son or a selected descendant would inherit the throne.9 In 1925 the tomb of queen Hetepheres I G 70
00 x was found east of Khufus pyramid. It contained many precious grave goods and several inscriptions give her the title Mutnesut meaning mother of a king together with the name of king Sneferu. Therefore it seemed clear at first that Hetepheres was the wife of Sneferu and that they were Khufus parents. More recently however some have doubted this theory because Hetepheres is not known to have borne the title Hemetnesut meaning kings wife a title indispensable to confirm a queens royal status.916 Instead of the spouses title Hetepheres bore only the title Satnetjerkhetef verbatim daughter of his divine body symbolically kings bodily daughter a title mentioned for the first time.16 As a result researchers now think Khufu may not have been Sneferus biological son but that Sneferu legitimised Khufus rank and familial position by marriage. By apotheosizing his mother as the daughter of a living god Khufus new rank was secured. This theory may be supported by the circumstance that Khufus mother was buried close to her son and not in the necropolis of her husband as it was to be expected.91617 Family treeedit The following list presents family members which can be assigned to Khufu with certainty. Parents91617 Sneferu Most possibly his father maybe just stepfather. Famous pharaoh and builder of three pyramids. Hetepheres I Most possibly his mother. Wife of king Sneferu and well known for her precious grave goods found at Giza. Portrait of Prince Rahotep Slab stela of princess Nefertiabet Spouses91617 Meritites I First wife of Khufu Henutsen Second wife of Khufu. She is mentioned on the famous Inventory Stela. Brothers and Sisters91617 Hetepheres Wife of Ankhhaf Ankhhaf The eldest brother. His nephew would later become pharaoh Khafra. Nefermaat Halfbrother buried at Meidum and owner of the famous mastaba of the geese Rahotep Elder brother or halfbrother. Owner of a lifesize double statue portraying him and his wife Nofret displayed in the Egyptian Museum of Cairo. Sons of Khufu91617 Kawab Most possibly the eldest son and crown prince he died before Khufus own end of reign and thus did not follow Khufu on the throne. Djedefra Also known as Radjedef and Ratoises. Became the first throne successor. Khafre Most possibly second throne successor Djedefhor Also known as Hordjedef mentioned in Papyrus Westcar Baufra Possibly a son of Khufu but neither archaeologically nor contemporarily attested. Only known from two much later documents. Babaef I Also known as Khnumbaef I Khufukhaf I Also known as Kaefkhufu I Minkhaf I Horbaef Daughters9161718 Nefertiabet Known for her beautiful slab stelae Hetepheres II Wife of prince Kawab later married to pharaoh Djedefra Meresankh II Meritites II Married to Akhethotep Khamerernebty I Wife of king Khafra and mother of Menkaura Grandchildren91617 Duaenhor Son of Kawab and possibly eldest grandchild Kaemsekhem Second son of Kawab Mindjedef Also known as Djedefmin Djaty Son of Horbaef Iunmin I Son of Khafre Nephews and nieces91617 Hemiunu Director of the building of Khufus great pyramid Nefertkau III Daughter of Meresankh II Djedi Son of Rahotep and Nofret Itu Son of Rahotep and Nofret Neferkau Son of Rahotep and Nofret Mereret Daughter of Rahotep and Nofret Nedjemib Daughter of Rahotep and Nofret Sethtet Daughter of Rahotep and Nofret Reignedit A granite fragment with Khufus horus name Medjedu on it. Length of reignedit It is still unclear how long exactly Khufu ruled over Egypt. Dates from Khufus final years suggest that he was approaching his 
30 year jubilee but may have just missed it.19 One of them was found at the Dakhla Oasis in the Libyan Desert. Khufus serekh name is carved in a rock inscription reporting the Mefattravelling in the year after the 
13 th biennial cattle count under HorMedjedu reignal year 
27.2 0 Several papyrus fragments known as the Diary of Merer were found at Khufus harbor at Wadi alJarf. They log the transport of limestone blocks from Tura to the Great Pyramid of Giza in the year after the 
13 th cattle count under HorMedjedw.2122 The highest known date from Khufus reign is related to his funeral. Four instances of graffiti from the western of two rockcut pits along the south side of the Great Pyramid attest to a date from the 
28 th or 
29 th reignal year of Khufu the 
14 th census month 1 of the season Shemu our springearly summer.19 The Royal Canon of Turin from the 
19 th Dynasty gives 23 years of rulership for Khufu.1023 The ancient historian Herodotus gives 50 years and the ancient historian Manetho even credits him 63 years of reign. These figures are now considered an exaggeration or a misinterpretation of antiquated sources.10 Political activitiesedit There are only a few hints about Khufus political activities within and outside Egypt. Within Egypt Khufu is documented in several building inscriptions and statues. Khufus name appears in inscriptions at Elkab and Elephantine and in local quarries at Hatnub and Wadi Hammamat. At Saqqara two terracotta figures of the goddess Bastet were found on which at their bases the horus name of Khufu is incised. They were deposited at Saqqara during the Middle Kingdom but their creation can be dated back to Khufus reign.24 Wadi Magharehedit Drawing of the relief of Khufu from Wadi Maghareh7 At Wadi Maghareh in the Sinai a rock inscription depicts Khufu with the double crown. Khufu sent several expeditions in an attempt to find turquoise and copper mines. Like other kings such as Sekhemkhet Sneferu and Sahure who are also depicted in impressive reliefs there he was looking for those two precious materials.25 Khufu also entertained contacts with Byblos. He sent several expeditions to Byblos in an attempt to trade copper tools and weapons for precious Lebanon cedar wood. This kind of wood was essential for building large and stable funerary boats and indeed the boats discovered at the Great Pyramid were made of it.26 Wadi alJarfedit New evidence regarding political activities under Khufus reign has recently been found at the site of the ancient port of Wadi alJarf on the Red Sea coast in the east of Egypt. The first traces of such a harbour were excavated in 1823 by John Gardner Wilkinson and James Burton but the site was quickly abandoned and then forgotten over time. In 1954 French scholars Franois Bissey and Ren ChabotMorisseau reexcavated the harbour but their works were brought to an end by the Suez Crisis in 1956. In June 2011 an archaeological team led by French Egyptologists Pierre Tallet and Gregory Marouard organized by the French Institute of Oriental Archeology IFAO restarted work at the site. Among other material a collection of hundreds of papyrus fragments were found in 2013 dating back 4500 years.2122 The papyrus is currently exhibited at the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. The Egyptian archaeologist Zahi Hawass called this ancient papyrus the greatest discovery in Egypt in the 
21 st century.2728293031 Ten of these papyri are very well preserved. The majority of these documents date to the 
27 th year of Khufus reign and describe how the central administration sent food and supplies to the sailors and wharf workers. The dating of these important documents is secured by phrases typical for the Old Kingdom period as well as the fact that the letters are addressed to the king himself using his Horus name. This was typical when the king in question was still alive when the ruler was dead he was addressed by his cartouche name or birth name. One document is of special interest the diary of Merer an official involved in the building of the Great Pyramid. Using the diary researchers were able to reconstruct three months of his life providing new insight into the everyday lives of people of the Fourth Dynasty. These papyri are the earliest examples of imprinted papyri ever found in Egypt. Another inscription found on the limestone walls of the harbor mentions the head of the royal scribes controlling the exchange of goods Idu.2122 Khufus cartouche name is also inscribed on some of the heavy limestone blocks at the site. The harbor was of strategic and economic importance to Khufu because ships brought precious materials such as turquoise copper and ore from the southern tip of the Sinai peninsula. The papyri fragments show several storage lists naming the delivered goods. The papyri also mention a certain harbour at the opposite coast of Wadi alJarf on the western shore of the Sinai Peninsula where the ancient fortress Tell Ras Budran was excavated in 1960 by Gregory Mumford. The papyri and the fortress together reveal an explicit sailing route across the Red Sea for the very first time in history. It is the oldest archaeologically detected sailing route of Ancient Egypt. According to Tallet the harbor could also have been one of the legendary high sea harbours of Ancient Egypt from where expeditions to the infamous gold land Punt had started.2122 Monuments and statuesedit Ivory idol of Khufu in detail Statuesedit Head of Khufu. Old Kingdom 
4 th Dynasty c. 2500 BC. State Museum of Egyptian Art Munich The only threedimensional depiction of Khufu that has survived time nearly completely is a small and well restored ivory figurine known as the Khufu Statuette. It shows the king with the Red Crown of Lower Egypt.32 The king is seated on a throne with a short backrest at the left side of his knees the Horusname Medjedu is preserved and at the right side a fragment of the lower part of the cartouche name KhnumKhuf is visible. Khufu holds a flail in his left hand and his right hand rests together with his lower arm on his right upper leg. The artifact was found in 1903 by Flinders Petrie at Kom elSultan near Abydos. The figurine was found headless according to Petrie it was caused by an accident while digging. When Petrie recognized the importance of the find he stopped all other work and offered a reward to any workman who could find the head. Three weeks later the head was found after intense sifting in a deeper level of the room rubble.33 Today the little statue is restored and on display in the Egyptian Museum of Cairo in room 32 under its inventory number JE 361
43.3 4 Most Egyptologists believe the statuette is contemporary but some scholars such as Zahi Hawass think that it was an artistic reproduction of the 
26 th dynasty. He argueswhere that no building that clearly dates to the Fourth Dynasty was ever excavated at Kom elSultan or Abydos. Furthermore he points out that the face of Khufu is unusually squat and chubby and shows no emotional expression. Hawass compared the facial stylistics with statues of contemporary kings such as Sneferu Khaefra and Menkaura. The faces of these three kings are of even beauty slender and with a kindly expressionthe clear result of idealistic motivations they are not based on reality. The appearance of Khufu on the ivory statue instead looks like the artist did not care very much about professionalism or diligence.3234 He believes Khufu himself would never have allowed the display of such a comparatively sloppy work. And finally Hawass also argues that the sort of throne the figurine sits on does not match the artistic styles of any Old Kingdom artifact. Old Kingdom thrones had a backrest that reached up to the neck of the king. But the ultimate proof that convinces Hawass about the statue being a reproduction of much later time is the Nehenekh flail in Khufus left hand. Depictions of a king with such a flail as a ceremonial insignia appear no earlier than the Middle Kingdom. Zahi Hawass therefore concludes that the figurine was possibly made as an amulet or lucky charm to sell to pious citizens.3234 Deitrich Wildung has examined the representation of Nubian features in Egyptian iconography since the predynastic era and has argued that Khufu had these specific Nubian features and this was represented in his statues.35 Head of Khufu in ivory displayed in Altes Museum Excavations at Saqqara in 2001 and 2003 revealed a pair of terracotta statues depicting a lion goddess possibly Bastet or Sekhmet. On her feet two figures of childlike kings are preserved. While the right figurine can be identified as king Khufu by his Horus name the left one depicts king Pepy I of 
6 th dynasty called by his birth name. The figurines of Pepy were added to the statue groups in later times because they were placed separately and at a distance from the deity.36 This is inconsistent with a typical statue group of the Old Kingdomnormally all statue groups were built as an artistic unit. The two statue groups are similar to each other in size and scale but differ in that one lion goddess holds a scepter. The excavators point out that the statues were restored during the Middle Kingdom after they were broken apart. However it seems that the reason for the restoration lay more in an interest in the goddess than in a royal cult around the king figures their names were covered with gypsum.37 The Palermo Stone reports on its fragment C2 the creation of two oversize standing statues for the king one is said to have been made of copper the other of pure gold.1032 Furthermore several alabaster and travertine fragments of seated statues which were found by George Reisner during his excavations at Giza were once inscribed with Khufus full royal titulary. Today the complete or partially preserved cartouches with the name Khufu or KhnumKhuf remain. One of the fragments that of a small seated statue shows the legs and feet of a sitting king from the knuckles downward. To the right of them the name ...fu in a cartouche is visible and it can easily be reconstructed as the cartouche name Khufu.3238 Two further objects are on display at the Roemer und PelizaeusMuseum Hildesheim. These are also made of alabaster. One of them shows the head of a cat goddess most probably Bastet or Sekhmet. The position of her right arm suggests that the bust once belonged to a statue group similar to the wellknown triad of Mycerinus.39 Several statue heads might have belonged to Khufu. One of them is the socalled Brooklyn head of the Brooklyn Museum in New York City. It is 
54.3  cm large and made of pink granite. Because of its chubby cheeks the head is assigned to Khufu as well as to king Huni.40 A similar object is on display at the State Collection of Egyptian Art in Munich. The head is made of limestone and is comparatively small at only 
5.7  cm.41 A relief fragment depicting Khufu with the Red Crown Reliefsedit Khufu is depicted in several relief fragments found scattered in his necropolis and elsewhere. All reliefs were made of finely polished limestone. Some of them originate from the ruined pyramid temple and the destroyed causeway where they once covered the walls completely. Others were found reused in the pyramid necropolis of king Amenemhet I at Lisht and at Tanis and Bubastis.1032 One of the relief fragments shows the cartouche of Khufu with the phrase Building of the sanctuaries of the gods. Another one shows a row of fat oxen decorated with flowersthey were prepared as sacrifices during an offering procession. The guiding inscription calls them the surroundings of Tefef serve Khufu beautiful bulls of Khufu and bawling for Khufu.42 A third one shows the earliest known depiction of royal warfare the scene is called archers prepare since it shows archers drawing their bows. And a fourth example shows the king with the double crown impaling a hippopotamus.4344 At the Wadi Maghareh in Sinai a rock inscription contains Khufus names and titles and reports HorMedjedu KhnumKhuf BikujNebu the great god and smiter of the troglodytes all protection and life are with him. The workoff of the relief is similar to that of king Snefru. In one scene king Khufu wears the doublecrown nearby the depiction of the god Thoth is visible. In another scene close by Khufu wears the Atefcrown while smiting an enemy. In this scene the god Wepwawet is present.2545 None of the numerous relief fragments shows king Khufu offering to a god. This is remarkable since reliefs of Sneferu and those of all kings from Menkaura onward show the king offering to a deity. It is possible that the lack of this special depiction influenced later ancient Greek historians in their assumptions that Khufu could have actually closed all temples and prohibited any sacrifice.3246 Pyramid complexedit A map of Khufus necropolis The Great Pyramid. Seal impression of Khufu with the name of his pyramid AkhetKhufu. The great sphinx Main article Great Pyramid of Giza The pyramid complex of Khufu was erected in the northeastern section of the plateau of Giza. It is possible that the lack of building space the lack of local limestone quarries and the loosened ground at Dahshur forced Khufu to move north away from the pyramid of his predecessor Sneferu. Khufu chose the high end of a natural plateau so that his future pyramid would be widely visible. Khufu decided to call his pyramid AkhetKhufu meaning horizon of Khufu.47484950 The Great Pyramid has a base measurement of ca. 750 x 750 ft  2
30.4  x 2
30.4  m and today a height of 4
55.2  ft 1
38.7  m. Once it had been 481 ft 147 m high but the pyramidion and the limestone casing are completely lost due to stone robbery. The lack of the casing allows a full view of the inner core of the pyramid. It was erected in small steps by more or less roughly hewn blocks of dark limestone. The casing was made of nearly white limestone. The outer surface of the casing stones were finely polished so the pyramid shimmered in bright natural limewhite when new. The pyramidion might have been covered in electrum but there is no archaeological proof of that. The inner corridors and chambers have walls and ceilings made of polished granite one of the hardest stones known in Khufus time. The mortar used was a mixture of gypsum sand pulverized limestone and water.474849 The original entrance to the pyramid is on the northern side. Inside the pyramid are three chambers at the top is the burial chamber of the king the kings chamber in the middle is the statue chamber erroneously called the queens chamber and under the foundation is an unfinished subterranean chamber underworld chamber. Whilst the burial chamber is identified by its large sarcophagus made of granite the use of the queens chamber is still disputedit might have been the serdab of the Ka statue of Khufu. The subterranean chamber remains mysterious as it was left unfinished.474849 A tight corridor heading south at the western end of the chamber and an unfinished shaft at the eastern middle might indicate that the subterranean chamber was the oldest of the three chambers and that the original building plan contained a simple chamber complex with several rooms and corridors. But for unknown reasons the works were stopped and two further chambers were built inside the pyramid. Remarkable is the socalled Grand Gallery leading to the kings chamber It has a corbelled arch ceiling and measures 
28.7  ft 
8.7  m in height and 1
51.3  ft 
46.1  m in length. The gallery has an important static function it diverts the weight of the stone mass above the kings chamber into the surrounding pyramid core.474849 Khufus pyramid was surrounded by an enclosure wall with each segment 33 ft 10 m in distance from the pyramid. On the eastern side directly in front of the pyramid Khufus mortuary temple was built. Its foundation was made of black basalt a great part of which is still preserved. Pillars and portals were made of red granite and the ceiling stones were of white limestone. Today nothing remains but the foundation. From the mortuary temple a causeway 
0.4 3 miles long once connected to the valley temple. The valley temple was possibly made of the same stones as the mortuary temple but since even the foundation is not preserved the original form and size of the valley temple remain unknown.47484950 On the eastern side of the pyramid lies the East Cemetery of the Khufu necropolis containing the mastabas of princes and princesses. Three small satellite pyramids belonging to the queens Hetepheres G
1 a Meritites I G
1 b and possibly Henutsen G
1 c were erected at the southeast corner of Khufus pyramid. Close behind the queens pyramids G
1 b and G
1 c the cult pyramid of Khufu was found in 2005. On the southern side of the Great Pyramid lie some further mastabas and the pits of the funerary boats of Khufu. On the western side lies the West Cemetery where the highest officials and priests were interred.47484950 A possible part of Khufus funerary complex is the famous Great Sphinx of Giza. It is a 241 ft  
66.6  ft 
73.5  m  
20.3  m large limestone statue in the shape of a recumbent lion with the head of a human decorated with a royal Nemes headdress. The Sphinx was directly hewn out of the plateau of Giza and originally painted with red ochre green and black. To this day it is passionately disputed as to who exactly gave the order to build it the most probable candidates are Khufu his elder son Djedefra and his younger son Khaefra. One of the difficulties of a correct attribution lies in the lack of any perfectly preserved portrait of Khufu. The faces of Djedefre and Khaefra are both similar to that of the Sphinx but they do not match perfectly. Another riddle is the original cultic and symbolic function of the Sphinx. Much later it was called HeruimAkhet Hrmachs Horus at the horizon by the Egyptians and Abu elHl father of terror by the Arabians. It might be that the Sphinx as an allegoric and mystified representation of the king simply guarded the sacred cemetery of Giza.47484950 Khufu in later Egyptian traditionsedit Cartouche name Chefu in the Abydos King List Old Kingdomedit Khufu possessed an extensive mortuary cult during the Old Kingdom. At the end of 
6 th dynasty at least 67 mortuary priests and 6 independent high officials serving at the necropolis are archaeologically attested. Ten of them were already serving during the late 
4 th dynasty seven of them were royal family members 28 were serving during the 
5 th dynasty and 29 during the 
6 th dynasty. This is remarkable Khufus famous stepfather Sneferu enjoyed only 18 mortuary priesthoods during the same period of time even Djedefra enjoyed only 8 and Khaefra enjoyed 28. Such mortuary cults were very important for the states economy because for the oblations special domains had to be established. A huge number of domains names are attested for the time of Khufus reign. However by the end of the 
6 th dynasty the number of domains abated quickly. With the beginning of the 
7 th dynasty no domains name was handed down any more.101151 Middle Kingdomedit At Wadi Hammamat a rock inscription dates back to the 
12 th dynasty. It lists five cartouche names Khufu Djedefra Khafra Baufra and Djedefhor. Because all royal names are written inside cartouches it was often believed that Baufra and Djedefhor once had ruled for short time but contemporary sources entitle them as mere princes. Khufus attendance roll call in this list might indicate that he and his followers were worshipped as patron saints. This theory is promoted by findings such as alabaster vessels with Khufus name found at Koptos the pilgrimage destination of Wadi Hammamat travellers.91617 A literary masterpiece from the 
13 th dynasty talking about Khufu is the famous Papyrus Westcar where king Khufu witnesses a magical wonder and receives a prophecy from a magician named Dedi. Within the story Khufu is characterised in a difficulttoassess way. On one hand he is depicted as ruthless when deciding to have a condemned prisoner decapitated to test the alleged magical powers of Dedi. On the other hand Khufu is depicted as inquisitive reasonable and generous He accepts Dedis outrage and his subsequent alternative offer for the prisoner questions the circumstances and contents of Dedis prophecy and rewards the magician generously after all. The contradictory depiction of Khufu is the subject of great dispute between Egyptologists and historians to this day. Especially earlier Egyptologists and historians such as Adolf Erman Kurt Heinrich Sethe and Wolfgang Helck evaluated Khufus character as heartless and sacrilegious. They leaned on the ancient Greek traditions of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus who described an exaggerated negative character image of Khufu ignoring the paradoxical because positive traditions the Egyptians themselves had always taught.5152535455 Closeup of the dream stele But other Egyptologists such as Dietrich Wildung see Khufus order as an act of mercy the prisoner would have received his life back if Dedi had actually performed his magical trick. Wildung thinks that Dedis refusal was an allusion to the respect Egyptians showed to human life. The ancient Egyptians were of the opinion that human life should not be misused for dark magic or similar evil things. Verena Lepper and Miriam Lichtheim suspect that a difficulttoassess depiction of Khufu was exactly what the author had planned. He wanted to create a mysterious character.5152535455 New Kingdomedit During the New Kingdom the necropolis of Khufu and the local mortuary cults were reorganized and Giza became an important economic and cultic destination again. During the Eighteenth Dynasty king Amenhotep II erected a memorial temple and a royal fame stele close to the Great Sphinx. His son and throne follower Thutmose IV freed the Sphinx from sand and placed a memorial steleknown as the Dream Stelebetween its front paws. The two steles inscriptions are similar in their narrative contents but neither of them gives specific information about the true builder of the Great Sphinx.101151 Golden seal ring with the cartouche name of Khufu Twentysixth Dynasty. At the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty a temple for the goddess Isis was built at the satellite pyramid G
1 c that of queen Henutsen at Khufus necropolis. During the Twentyfirst Dynasty the temple got extended and during the Twentysixth Dynasty the extensions continued. From this period of time several priests of Isis HemnetjerIset who were also priests of Khufu HemnetjerKhufu worked there. From the same dynasty a golden seal ring with the name of a priest Neferibr was found at Giza.101151 Late Periodedit During the Late Period huge numbers of scarabs with the name of Khufu were sold to the citizens possibly as some kind of lucky charms. More than 30 scarabs are preserved. At Isis temple a family tree of the Isis priests is on display which lists the names of priests from 670 to 488 BC. From the same period comes the famous Inventory Stela which names Khufu and his wife Henutsen. However modern Egyptologists question whether Khufu was still personally adored as a royal ancestor at this time they think it more likely that Khufu was already seen as a mere symbolic foundation figure for the history of the Isis temple.10115156 Khufu in ancient Greek traditionsedit A bust of Herodotus Manethoedit The later Egyptian historian Manetho called Khufu Sphis and credited him with a rulership of 63 years. He also mentions that Khufu built the Great Pyramid then he claims that his contemporary Herodotus says that the pyramid was built by a king Khops. Manetho thought Khops and Sphis to be two different kings. Manetho also says that Khufu received a contempt against the gods and that he had written a sacred book about that and that he Manetho received that book during his travel through Egypt. The story about the alleged Sacred Book is questioned by modern Egyptologists for it would be highly unusual that a pharaoh wrote books and that such a precious document could be sold away so easily.575859 Herodotusedit The Greek historian Herodotus instead depicts Khufu as a heretic and cruel tyrant. In his literary work Historiae Book II chapter 124126 he writes As long as Rhmpsintos was king as they told me there was nothing but orderly rule in Egypt and the land prospered greatly. But after him Khops became king over them and brought them to every kind of suffering He closed all the temples after this he kept the priests from sacrificing there and then he forced all the Egyptians to work for him. So some were ordered to draw stones from the stone quarries in the Arabian mountains to the Nile and others he forced to receive the stones after they had been carried over the river in boats and to draw them to those called the Libyan mountains. And they worked by 100000 men at a time for each three months continually. Of this oppression there passed ten years while the causeway was made by which they drew the stones which causeway they built and it is a work not much less as it appears to me than the pyramid. For the length of it is 5 furlongs and the breadth 10 fathoms and the height where it is highest 8 fathoms and it is made of polished stone and with figures carved upon it. For this they said 10 years were spent and for the underground chambers on the hill upon which the pyramids stand which he caused to be made as sepulchral chambers for himself in an island having conducted thither a channel from the Nile. For the making of the pyramid itself there passed a period of 20 years and the pyramid is square each side measuring 800 feet and the height of it is the same. It is built of stone smoothed and fitted together in the most perfect manner not one of the stones being less than 30 feet in length. This pyramid was made after the manner of steps which some call rows and others bases When they had first made it thus they raised the remaining stones with devices made of short pieces of timber lifting them first from the ground to the first stage of the steps and when the stone got up to this it was placed upon another machine standing on the first stage and so from this it was drawn to the second upon another machine for as many as were the courses of the steps so many machines there were also or perhaps they transferred one and the same machine made so as easily to be carried to each stage successively in order that they might take up the stones for let it be told in both ways according as it is reported. However that may be the highest parts of it were finished first and afterwards they proceeded to finish that which came next to them and lastly they finished the parts of it near the ground and the lowest ranges. On the pyramid it is declared in Egyptian writing how much was spent on radishes and onions and leeks for the workmen and if I remember correctly what the interpreter said while reading this inscription for me a sum of 1600 silver talents was spent. Kheops moreover came to such a pitch of evilness that being in want of money he sent his own daughter to a brothel and ordered her to obtain from those who came a certain amount of money how much it was they did not tell me. But she not only obtained the sum that was appointed by her father but she also formed a design for herself privately to leave behind her a memorial She requested each man who came in to her to give her one stone for her building project. And of these stones they told me the pyramid was built which stands in front of the great pyramid in the middle of the three each side being 150 feet in length.515859 The same goes for the story about king Khafre. He is depicted as the direct follower of Khufu and as likewise evil and that he ruled for 56 years. In chapter 127128 Herodotus writes After Khops was dead his brother Khphrn succeeded to the royal throne. This king followed the same manner as the other ... and ruled for 56 years. Here they reckon altogether 106 years during which they say that there was nothing but evil for the Egyptians and the temples were kept closed and not opened during all that time.515859 Herodotus closes the story of the evil kings in chapter 128 with the words These kings the Egyptians because of their hate against them are not very willing to say their names. Whats more they even call the pyramids after the name of Philts the shepherd who at that time pastured flocks in those regions.515859 Diodorus of Sicilyedit The ancient historian Diodorus claims that Khufu was so much abhorred by his own people in later times that the mortuary priests secretly brought the royal sarcophagus together with the corpse of Khufu to another hidden grave. With this narration he strengthens and confirms the view of the Greek scholars that Khufus pyramid and the other two as well must have been the result of slavery. However at the same time Diodorus distances himself from Herodotus and argues that Herodotus only tells fairy tales and entertaining fiction. Diodorus claims that the Egyptians of his lifetime were unable to tell him with certainty who actually built the pyramids. He also states that he did not really trust the interpreters and that the true builder might have been someone different the Khufu pyramid was according to him built by a king named Harmais the Khafre pyramid was thought to be built by king Amasis II and the Menkaura pyramid was allegedly the work of king Inaros I.23 Diodorus states that the Khufu pyramid was beautifully covered in white but the top was said to be capped. The pyramid therefore already had no pyramidion anymore. He also thinks that the pyramid was built with ramps which were removed during the finishing of the limestone shell. Diodorus estimates that the total number of workers was 300000 and that the building works lasted for 20 years.23 Khufu in Arabic traditionsedit In AD 642 the Arabs conquered Egypt. Upon arriving at the Giza pyramids they searched for explanations as to who could have built these monuments. By this time no inhabitant of Egypt was able to tell and no one could translate the Egyptian hieroglyphs anymore. As a consequence the Arab historians wrote down their own theories and stories.60 The best known story about Khufu and his pyramid can be found in the book Hitat completely alMawi walitibr f ikr alia walr written in 1430 by Muhammad alMaqrizi 13641442. This book contains several collected theories and myths about Khufu especially about the Great Pyramid. Though King Khufu himself is seldom mentioned many Arab writers were convinced that the Great Pyramid and the others too were built by the god Hermes named Idris by the Arabs.60 AlMaqrizi notes that Khufu was named Saurid Salhuk andor Sarjak by the biblical Amalekites. Then he writes that Khufu built the pyramids after repeated nightmares in which the earth turned upsidedown the stars fell down and people were screaming in terror. Another nightmare showed the stars falling down from heaven and kidnapping humans then putting them beneath two large mountains. King Khufu then received a warning from his prophets about a devastating deluge that would come and destroy Egypt. To protect his treasures and books of wisdom Khufu built the three pyramids of Giza.60 Modern egyptological evaluationsedit Over time Egyptologists examined possible motives and reasons as to how Khufus reputation changed over time. Closer examinations of and comparisons between contemporary documents later documents and Greek and Coptic readings reveal that Khufus reputation changed slowly and that the positive views about the king still prevailed during the Greek and Ptolemaic era.61 Alan B. Lloyd for example points to documents and inscriptions from the 
6 th dynasty listing an important town called MenatKhufu meaning nurse of Khufu. This town was still held in high esteem during the Middle Kingdom period. Lloyd is convinced that such a heartwarming name wouldnt have been chosen to honour a king with a bad or at least questionable reputation. Furthermore he points to the overwhelming number of places where mortuary cults for Khufu were practiced even outside Giza. These mortuary cults were still practiced even in Saitic and Persian periods.61 The famous Lamentation Texts from the First Intermediate Period reveal some interesting views about the monumental tombs from the past they were at that time seen as proof of vanity. However they give no hint of a negative reputation of the kings themselves and thus they do not judge Khufu in a negative way.61 Modern Egyptologists evaluate Herodotuss and Diodoruss stories as some sort of defamation based on both authors contemporary philosophy. They call for caution against the credibility of the ancient traditions. They argue that the classical authors lived around 2000 years after Khufu and their sources that were available in their lifetimes surely were antiquated.5158 Additionally some Egyptologists point out that the philosophies of the ancient Egyptians had changed since the Old Kingdom. Oversized tombs such as the Giza pyramids must have appalled the Greeks and even the later priests of the New Kingdom because they remembered the heretic pharaoh Akhenaten and his megalomaniac building projects.5859 This negative picture was presumably projected onto Khufu and his pyramid. The view was possibly promoted by the fact that during Khufus lifetime permission for the creation of oversized statues made of precious stone and their displaying in public was limited to the king.1151 In their era the Greek authors mortuary priests and temple priests could only explain the impressive monuments and statues of Khufu as the result of a megalomaniac. These negative evaluations were applied to Khufu.5859 Furthermore several Egyptologists point out that Roman historians such as Pliny the Elder and Frontinus both around AD 70 equally do not hesitate to ridicule the pyramids of Giza Frontinus calls them idle pyramids containing the indispensable structures likewise to some of our abandoned aqueducts at Rome and Pliny describes them as the idle and foolish ostentation of royal wealth. Egyptologists clearly see politically and socially motivated intentions in these criticisms and it seems paradoxical that the use of these monuments was forgotten but the names of their builders remained immortalized.62 Another hint to Khufus bad reputation within the Greek and Roman folk might be hidden in the Coptic reading of Khufus name. The Egyptian hieroglyphs forming the name Khufu are read in Coptic as Shfet which actually would mean bad luck or sinful in their language. The Coptic reading derives from a later pronunciation of Khufu as Shufu which in turn led to the Greek reading Suphis. Possibly the bad meaning of the Coptic reading of Khufu was unconsciously copied by the Greek and Roman authors.61 On the other hand some Egyptologists think that the ancient historians received their material for their stories not only from priests but from the citizens living close to the time of the building of the necropolis.63 Among the simple folk also negative or critical views about the pyramids might have been handed down and the mortuary cult of the priests was surely part of tradition. Additionally a longstanding literary tradition does not prove popularity. Even if Khufus name survived within the literary traditions for so long different cultural circles surely fostered different views about Khufus character and historical deeds.5863 The narrations of Diodorus for example are credited with more trust than those of Herodotus because Diodorus collected the tales with much more scepsis. The fact that Diodorus credits the Giza pyramid to Greek kings might be reasoned in legends of his lifetimes and that the pyramids were demonstrably reused in late periods by Greek and Roman kings and noblemen.23 Modern Egyptologists and historians also call for caution about the credibility of the Arabian stories. They point out that medieval Arabs were guided by the strict Islamic belief that only one god exists and therefore no other gods were allowed to be mentioned. As a consequence they transferred Egyptian kings and gods into biblical prophets and kings. The Egyptian god Thoth named Hermes by the Greeks for example was named after the prophet Henoch. King Khufu as already mentioned was named Saurid Salhuk andor Sarjak and often replaced in other stories by a prophet named addd bn d. Furthermore scholars point to several contradictions which can be found in AlMaqrizis book. For example in the first chapter of the Hitat the Copts are said to have denied any intrusion of the Amalekites in Egypt and the pyramids were erected as the tomb of addd bn d. But some chapters later AlMaqrizi claims that the Copts call Saurid the builder of the pyramids.60 Khufu in popular cultureedit Because of his fame Khufu is the subject of several modern references similar to kings and queens such as Akhenaten Nefertiti and Tutankhamen. His historical figure appears in movies novels and documentaries. In 1827 Jane C. Loudon wrote the novel The Mummy A Tale of the 
22 nd Century. The story describes the citizens of the 
22 nd century which became highly advanced technologically but totally immoral. Only the mummy of Khufu can save them.64 In 1939 Nagib Mahfuz wrote the novel Khufus Wisdom which is based on the stories of Papyrus Westcar.65 In 1997 French author Guy Rachet published the novel series Le roman des pyramides including five volumes of which the first two Le temple soleil and Rve de pierre use Khufu and his tomb as a theme.66 In 2004 spiritualist Page Bryant published the novel The Second Coming of the Star Gods which deals with Khufus alleged celestial origin.67 The novel The Legend of The Vampire Khufu published by Raymond Mayotte in 2010 deals with king Khufu awakening in his pyramid as a vampire.68 Films which deal with Khufu or have the Great Pyramid as a subject include Howard Hawks Land of the Pharaohs from 1955 a fictional account of the building of the Great Pyramid of Khufu69 and Roland Emmerichs Stargate from 1994 in which an extraterrestrial device is found near the pyramids. Khufu and his pyramid are the subject of pseudoscientific theories purporting that Khufus pyramid was built with the help of extraterrestrials and that Khufu simply seized and reused the monument70 ignoring archaeological evidence or even falsifying it.71 A nearEarth asteroid bears Khufus name 3362 Khufu.7273 Khufu and his pyramid are referenced in several computer games such as Tomb Raider  The Last Revelation in which the player must enter Khufus pyramid and face the god Seth as the final boss.74 Another example is Duck Tales 2 for the Game Boy the player here must guide Uncle Scrooge through a traploaded Khufus pyramid.75 In the classic action role playing game Titan Quest the Giza Plateau is a large desert region in Egypt where the tomb of Khufu and the Great Sphinx can be found. He is also mentioned in Assassins Creed Origins where the player can find his tomb.76 See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal Monarchy portal Biography portal Egyptian pyramid construction techniques Fourth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Khufu ship Referencesedit  Alan B. Lloyd Herodotus book II. p. 62.  a b Flavius Josephus Folker Siegert ber Die Ursprnglichkeit des Judentums Contra Apionem Volume 1 Flavius Josephus. From Schriften Des Institutum Judaicum Delitzschianum Westfalen Institutum Iudaicum Delitzschianum Mnster. Vandenhoeck  Ruprecht Gttingen 2008 ISBN 3525542062 page 85.  a b Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs. p42. Thames and Hudson London 2006. ISBN 9780500286289  Malek Jaromir The Old Kingdom in The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt ed. Ian Shaw Oxford University Press 2000 ISBN 9780192804587 p.88  Khufus 
30 Year Jubilee Newly Discovered Pieces of a Puzzle.  a b c von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Deutscher Kunstverlag 1984 ISBN 3422008322  a b Karl Richard Lepsius Denkmaler Abtheilung II Band III Available online see p. 2 p. 39  Rainer Hannig Die Sprache der Pharaonen. Groes Handwrterbuch gyptischDeutsch.  Kulturgeschichte der antiken Welt. Vol. 64 
4 th Edition von Zabern Mainz 2006 p. 111 ISBN 3805317719.  a b c d e f g h i j k l Aidan Dodson  Dyan Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson 2004 ISBN 0500051283 pp. 5253  a b c d e f g h i j k l m Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 page 100104.  a b c d e f g h i j Aidan Dodson Monarchs of the Nile. American Univ in Cairo Press 2000 ISBN 9774246004 page 2934.  BBC  History  Khufu. Retrieved 10 March 2018.  Rosalie F. Baker Charles F. Baker Ancient Egyptians People of the Pyramids  Oxford Profiles Series. Oxford University Press 2001 ISBN 0195122216 page 33.  Gundacker Roman 2015 The Chronology of the Third and Fourth Dynasties according to Manethos Aegyptiaca in Towards a New History for the Egyptian Old Kingdom page 114115 provides the final vowel but disagrees with Loprieno in some details of the words subsequent development where Loprieno considers the semivowels preceding the tonic a to have ultimately reduced to glottal stops Gundacker posits that j assimilated to the preceding w which was preserved.  Gerald Massey The natural genesis or second part of A book of the beginnings containing an attempt to recover and reconstitute the lost origins of the myths and mysteries types and symbols religion and language with Egypt for the mouthpiece and Africa as the birthplace vol. 1. Black Classic Press 1998 ISBN 1574780107 p.224228.  a b c d e f g h i j k Silke Roth Die Knigsmtter des Alten gypten von der Frhzeit bis zum Ende der 12. Dynastie  gypten und Altes Testament 46. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2001 ISBN 3447043687 pp. 354358 388.  a b c d e f g h i Porter Bertha and Moss Rosalind Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Statues Reliefs and Paintings Volume III Memphis Part I Abu Rawash to Abusir. 
2 nd edition  Grajetzki Ancient Egyptian Queens A Hieroglyphic Dictionary. Golden House Publications London 2005 ISBN 9780954721893  a b Khufus 
30 Year Jubilee Newly Discovered Pieces of a Puzzle.  R. Kuper and F. Forster Khufus mefat expeditions into the Libyan Desert. In Egyptian Archaeology vol. 23 Autumn 2003 page 2528 Photo of the Dachlainscription  a b c d Pierre Tallet Gregory Marouard Wadi alJarf  An early pharaonic harbour on the Red Sea coast. In Egyptian Archaeology vol. 40 Cairo 2012 p. 4043.  a b c d Rossella Lorenzi 12 April 2013. Most Ancient Port Hieroglyphic Papyri Found. Discovery News. Retrieved 21 April 2013.  a b c d Michael Haase Eine Sttte fr die Ewigkeit der Pyramidenkomplex des Cheops aus baulicher architektonischer und kulturgeschichtlicher Sicht. von Zabern Mainz 2004 ISBN 3805331053 p. 1213.  Sakuji Yoshimura Sakuji Yoshimuras Excavating in Egypt for 40 Years Waseda University Expedition 19662006  Project in celebration of the 1
25 th Anniversary of Waseda University. Waseda University Tokyo 2006 page 134137 223.  a b James Henry Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt The first through the seventeenth dynasties. University of Illinois Press New York 2001 ISBN 0252069900 page 8384.  Toby A. H. Wilkinson Early Dynastic Egypt Strategies Society and Security. Routledge London 2001 ISBN 0415260116 pages 160161.  45
00 yearold harbor structures and papyrus texts unearthed in Egypt. NBC News. Retrieved 30 July 2019.  Story of the Pyramid builders revealed in 45
00 yrold papyri. CatchNews.com. Retrieved 30 July 2019.  A 4500 Year Old Papyrus Holds the Answer to How the Great Pyramid Was Built. interestingengineering.com. 25 September 2017. Retrieved 30 July 2019.  Revealed 45
00 yearold Papyrus that details the construction of the Great Pyramid  Mysterious Earth. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2019.  Revealed 45
00 yearold Papyrus that details the construction of the Great Pyramid. Ancient Code. 5 August 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2019.  a b c d e f g Zahi Hawass The Khufu Statuette Is it an Old Kingdom Sculpture In Paule PosenerKriger Hrsg. Mlanges Gamal Eddin Mokhtar  Bibliothque dtude vol. 97 chapter 1 Institut franais darchologie orientale du Caire Kairo 1985 ISBN 2724700201 page 379394.  W.M. Flinders Petrie Abydos II. Egypt Exploration Fund London 1903 page 3  table XIII obj. XIV.  a b c Abeer ElShahawy Farid S. Atiya The Egyptian Museum in Cairo A Walk Through the Alleys of Ancient Egypt. American Univ in Cairo Press New YorkCairo 2005 ISBN 9771721836 page 
49 ff.  Wildung D. Honegger M. ed.. About the autonomy of the arts of ancient Sudan Nubian archaeology in the XXIst Century. Peeters Publishers. pp. 105112.  Sakuji Yoshimura Nozomu Kawai Hiroyuki Kashiwagi A Sacred Hillside at Northwest Saqqara. A Preliminary Report on the Excavations 20012003. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo MDAIK. Volume 61 2005 page 392394 see online version with photographs.  Sakuji Yoshimura Nozomu Kawai Hiroyuki Kashiwagi A Sacred Hillside at Northwest Saqqara. A Preliminary Report on the Excavations 20012003. In Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo MDAIK. Volume 61 2005 page 392394 see online version with photographs.  Dagmar Stockfisch Untersuchungen zum Totenkult des gyptischen Knigs im Alten Reich. Die Dekoration der kniglichen Totenkultanlagen  Antiquitates vol. 25.. Kova Hamburg 1994 ISBN 3830008570.  Matthias Seidel Die kniglichen Statuengruppen volume 1 Die Denkmler vom Alten Reich bis zum Ende der 18. Dynastie  Hildesheimer gyptologische Beitrge vol. 42.. Gerstenberg Hildesheim 1996 ISBN 3806781362 page 914.  Richard A. Fazzini Robert S. Bianchi James F. Romano Donald B. Spanel Ancient Egyptian Art in the Brooklyn Museum. Brooklyn Museum Brooklyn NY 1989 ISBN 0872731189.  Sylvia Schoske Dietrich Wildung Hrsg. Staatliche Sammlung gyptischer Kunst Mnchen.  Zaberns Bildbnde zur Archologie. vol. 31  Antike Welt. vol. 26 1995. von Zabern Mainz 1995 ISBN 3805318375 page 43.  Metropolitan Museum of Art Royal Ontario Museum Egyptian Art in the Age of the Pyramids. Metropolitan Museum of Art New York US 1999 ISBN 0870999079 p.223.  John Romer The Great Pyramid Ancient Egypt Revisited. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2007 ISBN 0521871662 page 414416.  William James Hamblin Warfare in the Ancient Near East to 1600 BC Holy Warriors at the Dawn of History. Routledge LondonNew York 2006 ISBN 0415255899 page 332.  Kathryn A. Bard Steven Blake Shubert Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. Routledge London 1999 ISBN 0415185890 page 1071.  Jean Leclant Sesto Congresso internazionale di egittologia atti vol. 2. International Association of Egyptologists 1993 page 186188.  a b c d e f g Michael Haase Eine Sttte fr die Ewigkeit. Der Pyramidenkomplex des Cheops aus baulicher architektonischer und kulturhistorischer Sicht. von Zabern Mainz 2004 ISBN 3805331053.  a b c d e f g Rainer Stadelmann Die gyptischen Pyramiden Vom Ziegelbau zum Weltwunder. 2. berarteitete und erweiterte Auflage. von Zabern Mainz 1991 ISBN 3805311427.  a b c d e f g Zahi Hawass The Programs of the Royal Funerary Complexes of the Fourth Dynasty. In David OConnor David P. Silverman Ancient Egyptian Kingship. BRILL Leiden 1994 ISBN 9004100415.  a b c d Peter Jnosi Die Pyramiden Mythos und Archologie. Beck Frankfurt 2004 ISBN 3406508316 page 7072.  a b c d e f g h i j k Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewutsein ihrer Nachwelt Band 1 Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien  Mnchener gyptologische Studien Bd. 17. Hessling Berlin 1969 S. 105205.  a b Adolf Erman Die Mrchen des Papyrus Westcar I. Einleitung und Commentar. In Mitteilungen aus den Orientalischen Sammlungen. Heft V Staatliche Museen zu Berlin Berlin 1890.  a b Verena M. Lepper Untersuchungen zu pWestcar. Eine philologische und literaturwissenschaftliche NeuAnalyse. In gyptologische Abhandlungen Band 70. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 2008 ISBN 3447056517.  a b Miriam Lichtheim Ancient Egyptian literature a book of readings. The Old and Middle Kingdoms Band 1. University of California Press 2000 2. Auflage ISBN 0520028996  a b Friedrich Lange Die Geschichten des Herodot Band 1. S. 188190.  Gunnar Sperveslage Cheops als Heilsbringer in der Sptzeit. In Sokar vol. 19 2009 page 1521.  Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewutsein ihrer Nachwelt. Band 1 Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien  Mnchener gyptologische Studien. Bd. 17. Hessling Berlin 1969 page 152192.  a b c d e f g h Siegfried Morenz Traditionen um Cheops. In Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde vol. 97 Berlin 1971 ISSN 00442
16 X page 111118.  a b c d e f Wolfgang Helck Geschichte des Alten gypten  Handbuch der Orientalistik vol. 1. Chapter 1 Der Nahe und der Mittlere Osten vol 1.. BRILL Leiden 1968 ISBN 9004064974 page 2325  5462.  a b c d Stefan Eggers Das Pyramidenkapitel in AlMakrizis Hitat. BoD 2003 ISBN 3833011289 p. 1320.  a b c d Alan B. Lloyd Herodotus Book II Commentary 198 volume 43 of tudes prliminaires aux religions orientales dans lEmpire romain. BRILL Leiden 1993 ISBN 9004077375 page 62  63.  William Gillian Waddell Manetho  The Loeb classical Library. Bd. 350. Harvard University Press u. a. Cambridge MA u. a. 1997 ISBN 0674993853 page 46  47.  a b Erhart Graefe Die gute Reputation des Knigs Snofru. In Studies in Egyptology Presented to Miriam Lichtheim vol. 1. page 257263.  Jane C. Loudon The Mummy A Tale of the 
22 nd Century. Henry Colburn London 1827.  Najb Maf Author Raymond T. Stock Translator Khufus Wisdom 2003.  Guy Rachet Le roman des pyramides. d. du Rocher Paris 1997.  The Second Coming of the Star Gods. GoodReads.com. Retrieved 11 May 2020.  Raymond Mayotte The Legend of The Vampire Khufu. CreateSpace Massachusetts 2010 ISBN 1451519346.  Philip C. DiMare Movies in American History. p. 891  cf. Erich von Dniken Erinnerungen an die Zukunft memories to the future. page 118.  Ingo Kugenbuch Warum sich der Lffel biegt und die Madonna weint. page 139142.  3362 Khufu in the internetdatabase of Jet Propulsion Laboratory JPL English.  Lutz D. Schmadel Dictionary of minor planet names. Springer BerlinHeidelberg 2003 
5 th edition ISBN 3540002383 page 280.  Information about Khufus pyramid in Tomb Raider IV English.  Information about Khufus pyramid in Duck Tales 2 English.  Tomb of Khufu. IGN. 11 November 2017. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Khufu. Travertine fragment of a small seated statue of Khufu on display in the Boston museum of fine arts. Zahi Hawass Khufu  Builder of the Great Pyramid. Information about Khufu and his pyramid. An early pharaonic harbour on the Red Sea coast. The Harbor of Khufu on the Red Sea Coast at Wadi alJarf. La dcouverte des papyrus de Chops sur le port antique du ouadi elJarf. Preceded by Sneferu Pharaoh of Egypt Succeeded by Djedefre v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Poland People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKhufuoldid1223041253 Categories Khufu 
26 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
26 thcentury BC deaths Pharaohs of the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Sneferu Khnum Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from May 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from February 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 1429 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width