Khafre - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign 
3 Pyramid complex Toggle Pyramid complex subsection 
3.1 Valley Temple 
3.2 Mortuary Temple 
3.3 Great Sphinx and Sphinx temple 
4 Khafre in ancient Greek traditions 
5 References 
6 Further reading 
7 External links Toggle the table of contents Khafre 57 languages Afrikaans     Brezhoneg Catal  etina Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Shqip Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Winaray  Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian pharaoh of 
4 th dynasty This article is about the Egyptian pharaoh. For the encryption algorithm see Khufu and Khafre. You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German. September 2021 Click show for important translation instructions. View a machinetranslated version of the German article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate rather than simply copypasting machinetranslated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template there are already 9132 articles in the main category and specifyingtopic will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or lowquality. If possible verify the text with references provided in the foreignlanguage article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at deChephren see its history for attribution. You may also add the template TranslateddeChephren to the talk page. For more guidance see WikipediaTranslation. Khafre Khefren Suphis II Saophis Khafre Enthroned a funerary statue of Khafre in diorite. Egyptian Museum in Cairo Pharaoh Reign About 26 years ca. 2570 BC1 Predecessor Djedefre Successor Bikheris  Menkaure Royal titulary Horus name HorUserib Wsrjb Strong heart of Horus Nebty name Userimnebti Wsrmnb.tj Strong for the Two Ladies Golden Horus Netjernubsekhem Nrnb.wsm Powerful golden falcon Abydos King List Khafre .fR He appears like Ra Saqqara Tablet Khafre w.fR He appears like Ra Nomen Khafre ZR .fR Son of Ra he appears like Ra Consort Meresankh III Khamerernebty I Persenet Hekenuhedjet Children Nebemakhet Duaenre Niuserre Khentetka Shepsetkau Menkaure Khamerernebty II Sekhemkare Nikaure Ankhmare Akhre Iunmin Iunre Rekhetre and Hemetre Father Khufu Mother Meritites I or Henutsen Burial Pyramid of Khafre Monuments Pyramid of Khafre Great Sphinx of Giza Dynasty 
4 th Dynasty Khafre kfre kfre KAHFray or Khafra Ancient Egyptian .fr lit.He appears as Ra also known as Khephren or Chephren kfrn KEFrn Ancient Greek  romanized Chephrn was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the Fourth Dynasty during the Old Kingdom. He was the son of Khufu and the successor of Djedefre. According to the ancient historian Manetho Khafre was followed by king Bikheris but according to archaeological evidence he was instead followed by king Menkaure. Khafre was the builder who made the second largest pyramid at Giza. The view held by modern Egyptology at large continues to be that the Great Sphinx of Giza was built in approximately 2500 BC for Khafre.2 Not much is known about Khafre except from the reports of Herodotus writing 2000 years after his life. Familyedit See also Fourth Dynasty of Egypt family tree Cartouche name Khaafre in the Abydos King List Khafre was a son of king Khufu and the brother and successor of Djedefre.3 Khafre is thought by some to be the son of Queen Meritites I due to an inscription where he is said to honor her memory. Kingswife his beloved devoted to Horus Mertitytes. Kingswife his beloved Mertitytes beloved of the Favorite of the Two Goddesses she who says anything whatsoever and it is done for her. Great in the favor of Snefru great in the favor of Khufu devoted to Horus honored under Khafre. Mertitytes. Breasted Ancient Records Others argue that the inscription just suggests that this queen died during the reign of Khafre.4 Khafre may be a son of Queen Henutsen instead.5 Khafre had several wives and he had at least 12 sons and 3 or 4 daughters. Queen Meresankh III was the daughter of Kawab and Hetepheres II and thus a niece of Khafre. She was the mother of Khafres sons Nebemakhet Duaenre Niuserre and Khentetka and a daughter named Shepsetkau. Queen Khamerernebty I was the mother of Menkaure and his principal queen Khamerernebty II. Hekenuhedjet was a wife of Khafre. She is mentioned in the tomb of her son Sekhemkare. Persenet may have been a wife of Khafre based on the location of her tomb. She was the mother of Nikaure.3 Other children of Khafre are known but no mothers have been identified. Further sons include Ankhmare Akhre Iunmin and Iunre. Two more daughters named Rekhetre and Hemetre are known as well.3 Reignedit King Khafre. In gyptisches Museum Georg Steindorff Leipzig There is no agreement on the date of his reign. Some authors say it was between 2558 BC and 2532 BC. While the Turin King List length for his reign is blank and Manetho exaggerates his reign as 66 years most scholars believe it was between 24 and 26 years based upon the date of the Will of Prince Nekure which was carved on the walls of this Princes mastaba tomb. The will is dated anonymously to the Year of the 
12 th Count and is assumed to belong to Khafre since Nekure was his son. Khafres highest year date is the Year of the 
13 th occurrence which is a painted date on the back of a casing stone belonging to mastaba G 76
50.6  This would imply a reign of 2425 years for this king if the cattle count was biannual during the Fourth Dynasty. Pyramid complexedit Drawing of Khafres pyramid complex. A causeway connected the Valley Temple bottomright to the Pyramid Temple topleft. Photo taken in 1910. Khafres Pyramid and the Great Sphinx Main article Pyramid of Khafre Khafre built the secondlargest pyramid at Giza. The Egyptian name of the pyramid was WerenKhafre which means Khafre is Great.7 The pyramid has a subsidiary pyramid labeled G
2 a. It is not clear who was buried there. Sealings have been found of a Kings eldest son of his body etc. and the Horus name of Khafre.7 Valley Templeedit The valley temple of Khafre was located closer to the Nile and would have stood right next to the Sphinx temple. Inscriptions from the entrance way have been found which mention Hathor and Bubastis. Blocks have been found showing the partial remains of an inscription with the Horus name of Khafre Weserib. Mariette discovered statues of Khafre in 1860. Several were found in a well in the floor and were headless. But other complete statues were found as well.7 Mortuary Templeedit The mortuary temple was located very close to the pyramid. From the mortuary temple come fragments of maceheads inscribed with Khafres name as well as some stone vessels.7 Great Sphinx and Sphinx templeedit The sphinx is said to date to the time of Khafre. This is supported by the proximity of the sphinx to Khafres pyramid temple complex and a certain resemblance despite damage to the facial structure seen in his statues. The Great Sphinx of Giza may have been carved out as a guardian of Khafres pyramid and as a symbol of royal power. It became deified during the time of the New Kingdom.8 Khafre in ancient Greek traditionsedit The ancient Egyptian historian Manetho called Khafre Sphis II. and credited him with a rulership of 66 years but didnt make any further comments about him.9101112 Contrary to modern Egyptologists and archaeological findings Greek historians Diodorus and Herodotus writing more than 2000 years after King Khafre depicted him as a tyrant who had followed his father Khops on the throne. Herodotus and Diodorus say that Khafre ruled for 56 years.91011 They describe a king Menkaure whom they call Mykerns as the follower of Khafre and that this king was the counterpart of his two predecessors Herodotus describes Menkaure as bringing peace and piety back to Egypt.91011 Of all the rulers of the Old Kingdom Khafre is evidenced by the greatest number of statues. Almost all of them come from Giza partly from the official necropolis there but mainly from the area around the temple complexes of the Khafre pyramid. In a large hall of the valley temple 23 depressions have been made in the ground in which originally lifesize statues stood. One of these depressions is wider than the others there may have been two statues here. It has been suggested that these 24 statues are related to the hours of the day. All of these statues were removed from their location at some point after the reign of Khafre. Auguste Mariette found nine of them during excavations in 1860 Inv.No. CG 9 to CG 1721 and fragments of a tenth CG 378 22 in a pit within the valley temple. These statues are now in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. Referencesedit  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 page 102.  Sphinx Project Why Sequence is Important. 2007. Archived from the original on July 26 2010. Retrieved February 27 2015.  a b c Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2004. ISBN 0500051283  Grajetzki Ancient Egyptian Queens A Hieroglyphic Dictionary Golden House Publications London 2005 ISBN 9780954721893  Tyldesley Joyce. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. Thames  Hudson. 2006. ISBN 0500051453  Anthony Spalinger Dated Texts of the Old Kingdom SAK 21 1994 p.287  a b c d Porter Bertha and Moss Rosalind Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Statues Reliefs and Paintings Volume III Memphis Part I Abu Rawash to Abusir. 
2 nd edition revised and augmented by Dr Jaromir Malek 1974. Retrieved from gizapyramids.org Archived 20081011 at the Wayback Machine  Markowitz Haynes Freed 2002. Egypt in the Age of the Pyramids.cite book CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  a b c Siegfried Morenz Traditionen um Cheops. In Zeitschrift fr gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde vol. 97 Berlin 1971 ISSN 00442
16 X page 111118.  a b c Dietrich Wildung Die Rolle gyptischer Knige im Bewutsein ihrer Nachwelt. Band 1 Posthume Quellen ber die Knige der ersten vier Dynastien  Mnchener gyptologische Studien. Bd. 17. Hessling Berlin 1969 page 152192.  a b c Wolfgang Helck Geschichte des Alten gypten  Handbuch der Orientalistik vol. 1. Chapter 1 Der Nahe und der Mittlere Osten vol 1.. BRILL Leiden 1968 ISBN 9004064974 page 2325  5462.  Aidan Dodson Monarchs of the Nile. American Univ in Cairo Press 2000 ISBN 9774246004 page 2934. Further readingedit James H. Breasted Ancient Records of Egypt Part I  192 1906 on The Will of Nekure. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Khafra. Khefren Khafre Read more and view photos and video of the Pyramid of Khafre at Talking Pyramids v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Czech Republic People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKhafreoldid1223042479 Categories Khafre 
26 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Fourth Dynasty of Egypt 
3 rdmillennium BC births 
3 rdmillennium BC deaths Children of Khufu Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown Place of birth unknown This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 1439 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width