Thamphthis - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Background 
2 Name sources and contradictions 
3 Literature 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Thamphthis 27 languages Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Occitan Polski Romn  Slovenina Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian ruler of the 
4 th dynasty Thamphthis in hieroglyphs Length of reign Predecessor Shepseskaf Successor Userkaf Saqqara table 1 Turin canon Column III line 16 Thamphthis is the hellenized name of an ancient Egyptian ruler pharaoh of the 
4 th Dynasty in the Old Kingdom who may have ruled around 2500 BC under the name Djedefptah for between two and nine years. His original Egyptian name is lost but it may have been Djedefptah or Ptahdjedef he endures like Ptah according to William C. Hayes.2 Thamphthis is one of the shadowy rulers of the Old Kingdom since he is completely unattested in contemporary sources. For this reason his historical figure is discussed intensely by historians and Egyptologists. Backgroundedit Since Thamphthis name was found in the historical works of Manetho the Aegyptiacae3 Egyptologists are trying to connect this ruler with contemporary kings to build up a continuous chronology which resulted in controversies and debates. As early as 1887 Eduard Meyer viewed Thamphthis as a mere usurper who was not allowed to be mentioned in royal annals or have his own mortuary cult because he gained the throne illegitimately.4 Peter Jnosi goes further and says that Thamphthis is a fiction due to the lack of archaeological support. He claims that Thamphthis should be erased from modern kinglists.5 Winfried Seipel and Hermann Alexander Schlgl instead postulate that the historical figure behind Thamphthis could have been queen Khentkaus I.6 This theory is supported by Khentkaus being depicted in her mortuary temple as a ruling pharaoh with nemesheaddress kings beard and uraeusdiadem on her forehead. But this theory is problematic since Khentkaus name never appears inside a serekh or royal cartouche.7 Wolfgang Helck points out that Khentkaus I could have been the mother of Thamphthis so Thamphthis would have been the son of king Shepseskaf. As a possible wife of Thamphthis he proposes a princess named Bunefer who may have been the daughter of Shepseskaf. She was a priestess of Shepseskaf.89 Name sources and contradictionsedit In the Manethonian tradition of the historian Sextus Julius Africanus who translated Manetho Thamphthis is described as the last ruler of the 
4 th dynasty with a reign of nine years. In the tradition of the historians Eusebius and Eratosthenes his name is missed. Eusebius gives the reason that Thamphthis was not meant to be named for he didnt do something worth to be mentioned.310 A further source for the chronology of rulers of the Old Kingdom is the Royal Canon of Turin composed during the 
19 th dynasty around 1300 BC. It names kings which are omitted in many other kinglists. But the Turin Canon is damaged at several spots so many royal names are fragmentary or completely lost in lacunae today. For this reason it cannot be excluded that Thamphthis name was originally present in this document too since the Aegyptiacae of Manetho are mostly consistent with the Turin Canon. In column III line 12 king Khafre is mentioned after him in line 13 a lacuna appears. After king Shepseskaf mentioned in line 15 a second lacuna appears. Whilst line 13 may possibly be assigned to a king Baka the missing line 16 could have originally held Thamphthis name. These lacunae cover two years during which a king could have reigned.11 The Royal kinglist of Saqqara from the tomb of Tjuneroy 
19 th dynasty lists nine kings for the 
4 th dynasty whilst the Abydos King List gives only six names. Curiously the SaqqaraTable has after Shepseskaf two cartouches before Userkaf but both are heavily damaged so the original names are no longer legible. Whilst one of these two cartouches once may have held Thamphthis name the other cartouche remains a mystery.12 A rock inscription in the Wadi Hammamat made in the Middle Kingdom presents a list of the cartouchenames of Khufu Djedefre Baufra and prince Djedefhor also recorded as Hordjedef. Curiously Djedefhors name is written in a cartouche too. This leads to the possibility that he could have been a king for a very short while himself. If this was true this fact would close the chronological gaps. But contemporary sources dont show Djedefhor and Baufra as kings they give to these two only the titles of princes and call them both son of the king.13 The tomb inscriptions of several high officials princes and priests do not preserve any evidence that some kind of internal political conflict had arisen or that a usurper had seized the throne of Egypt. Prince Sekhemkare reports about his career under the kings Khafre Menkaura Shepseskaf Userkaf and even Sahure but makes no mention of Thamphthis. The same goes for the high official Netjerpunesut who was honoured under the kings Djedefre Khafre Menkaura Shepseskaf Userkaf and Sahure. Again no Thamphthis is mentioned. The 
5 th dynasty high priest and official Ptahshepses who served under king Niuserre and took care of the mortuary cults of king Menkaura and Shepseskaf also made no reference to Thamphthis.14 The late Patrick F. OMara in a GM 158 paper notes that no royal monument private tomb in the cemeteries of Gizeh and Saqqara record names of any other except the aforementioned kings for the fourth dynasty. No names of estates of the period compounded with royal names make mention of any other fourth dynasty kings than these nor do the names of the royal grandchildren who often bore the name of a royal ancestor as a component of their own names.15 The lack of contemporary attestations for Thamphthis does not by itself prove that he was a faux king or phantom king since he may well have been a shortlived ruler of the 
4 th Dynasty. The stela of the 
5 th Dynasty official KhauPtah is informative while this official lists his career in an uninterrupted sequence of Sahure Neferirkare Raneferef and Niuserre he completely omits Shepseskare.16 Shepseskare or Sisires likely did not rule Egypt for the seven years assigned to him by both Manetho and the Turin Canon judging by the paucity of contemporary records for his rule but he certainly ruled Egypt for a brief period of time.17 This is established by the existence of two cylinder seals identifying him18 and four or five fragments of clay sealings bearing his name.19 In more recent years several new sealings of Shepseskare which were found in Abusir also show that Shepseskare did exist.20 Verner argues that the archaeological context of the sealings show that Shepseskare succeeded Raneferef rather than the reverse as Manetho and the Turin Canon states and that a dynastic struggle ensued in which Shepseskare was soon overthrown by Niuserre Raneferefs brother after a very brief reign. This would explain the surprising omission of Shepseskare by Khauptah since the former was a usurper who briefly seized the throne after Raneferefs death. But there is no evidence for any dynastic difficulties in the late 
4 th Dynasty and the complete lack of contemporary attestations for Thamphthis is strong evidence for regarding him as a phantom king. In this situation the two year figure assigned to him by later Egyptian records could possibly be added to Shepseskafs existing 
4 year reign. Literatureedit Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen von Zabern Mainz 1999 ISBN 3422008322 Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des pharaonischen gypten von Zabern Mainz 1997 ISBN 3805323107 Iowerth Eiddon Stephen Edwards The Cambridge ancient history Band 3. Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2000 ISBN 9780521077910 William C. Hayes The Scepter of Egypt Band 1 From the Earliest Times to the End of the Middle Kingdom. Yale University Press New York 1990 Neuauflage ISBN 9780300091595 Wolfgang Helck Geschichte des Alten gypten. BRILL Leiden 1981 ISBN 9004064974 Peter Jnosi Giza in der 4. Dynastie. Die Baugeschichte und Belegung einer Nekropole des Alten Reiches. Band I Die Mastabas der Kernfriedhfe und die Felsgrber. Verlag der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 2005 ISBN 3700132441 Alan B. Lloyd Herodotus book II commentary 99182. BRILL Leiden 1988 ISBN 9789004041790 Eduard Meyer Johannes Duemichen Geschichte des alten Aegyptens. Band 1 von Allgemeine Geschichte in Einzeldarstellungen. Grote Hamburg 1887 Kim Ryholt Adam BlowJacobsen The political situation in Egypt during the second Intermediate Period. Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 ISBN 9788772894218 Wilfried Seipel Untersuchungen zu den gyptischen Kniginnen der Frhzeit und des Alten Reiches. University of California 1980 Ian Shaw The Oxford history of ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press Oxford UK 2002 ISBN 9780192802934 William Gillian Waddell Manetho  The Loeb classical library 350 . Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 Reprint ISBN 0674993853 Referencesedit  Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin. Griffith Institute Oxford UK 1997 ISBN 0900416483 p. 16 table II.  William C. Hayes The Scepter of Egypt Band 1. p. 66 cifer Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen pp. 5354 180.  a b William Gillian Waddell Manetho The Loeb classical library 350. pp. 4749  Eduard Meyer Johannes Dmichen Geschichte des alten Aegyptens. page 114.  Peter Jnosi Die Grberwelt der Pyramidenzeit. p. 151.  Wilfried Seipel Untersuchungen zu den gyptischen Kniginnen der Frhzeit und des Alten Reiches. pp. 189190.  Hermann Alexander Schlgl Das Alte gypten. pp. 99100.  Wolfgang Helck Geschichte des Alten gypten. pp. 57  61.  Jnosi Peter. G 4712  Ein Datierungsproblem. Gttinger Miszellen 133 1993 pp. 56 6062.  Alan B. Lloyd Herodotus book II.. pp. 
77 ff.  Kim Ryholt Adam BlowJacobsen Inclusion of Fictitious Kings. In The political situation in Egypt during the second Intermediate Period. p. 17.  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des pharaonischen gypten. page 24  216.  Peter Jnosi Giza in der 4. Dynastie. pp. 64  65.  I. E. S. Edwards The Cambridge ancient history Band 3. page 176.  Patrick F. OMara Manetho and the Turin Canon A Comparison of Regnal Years GM 158 1997 p .51 OMara notes that his records are based on an examination of Ld. II Urk I and A. Mariette Mastabas de lancien empire.  A. Mariette Mastabas de lancien empire 295  Miroslav Verner Archaeological Remarks on the 
4 th and 
5 th Dynasty Chronology Archiv Orientln Volume 69 2001 pp.395400  G. Daressy ASAE 15 1915 
94 f  P. Kaplony Die Rollsiegel des Altes Reiches. Katalog der Rollsiegel Bruxelles 1981 A. Text 289294 and B. Talfen 
81 f  Miroslav Verner Who was Shepseskare and when did he reign in Abusir and Saqqara in the Year 2000 ArOr Suppl.9 2000 pp. 581602 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleThamphthisoldid1124549019 Categories 
3 rdmillennium BC births 
3 rdmillennium BC deaths 
25 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
26 thcentury BC Pharaohs People whose existence is disputed Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 November 2022 at 0753 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width