File:Userkaf.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileUserkaf.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 449  599 pixels. Other resolutions 180  240 pixels  500  667 pixels. Original file 500  667 pixels file size 49 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. DescriptionUserkaf.jpg Head of a Statue of Userkaf. Egyptian Museum Cairo Main floor  gallery 47. Greywacke height 45 cm width 25 cm depth 26 cm. JE 90220. Source httpwww.egyptarchive.co.ukhtmlcairomuseum18.html Author Jon Bodsworth Permission Reusing this file This file was transferred from Egypt Archive website under the license Copyrighted free use see permission here. In short you are free to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. This is Mr. Jon Bodsworths statement about his pictures from Egypt Archive All the photographs on this site are from my own originals and are copyright free. They can be reproduced in any medium. If you use any on the web I would appreciate an email. This site was designed to put as many photographs on the web as possible in an easy to use format. I have deliberately kept captions to a minimum but if you would like more information on any of the photographs let me know. The photographs on this website are only a small proportion of over 3500 that I have covering many areas of Egypt. If there is a specific photograph that you are looking for please let me know. If you use any of the pictures on the web the author Jon Bodsworth would appreciate an email jonegyptarchive.co.uk As of March 2011 Egypt Archive website was closed so if a file is uploaded after that time we need further proof of permission. The copyright holder of this work allows anyone to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. Please check the source to verify that this is correct. In particular note that publication on the Internet like publication by any other means does not in itself imply permission to redistribute. Files without valid permission should be tagged with substnpd. Usage notes If the work requires attribution use Attribution instead. If this is your own work please use Cczero instead. Copyrighted free useCopyrighted free usefalsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic    Items portrayed in this file depicts copyright status copyrighted copyright license copyrighted free use File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2215 26 May 2008 500  667 49 KB Einsamer Schtze Information DescriptionHead of a Statue of Userkaf Sourcehttpwww.egyptarchive.co.ukhtmlcairomuseum18.html Date AuthorJon Bodsworth PermissionAll photographs on www.egyptarchive.co.uk are copyright free and can be reproduced in any mediu File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Oeserkaf Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on arz.wikipedia.org      Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Userkaf Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Veserkaf Usage on cv.wikipedia.org  Usage on de.wikipedia.org Geschichte des Alten gypten Userkaf PortalgyptologieUnsere Besten Sonnenheiligtum des Userkaf Usage on el.wikipedia.org  Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Userkaf Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Userkaf Usage on fa.wikipedia.org   Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Userkaf Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Ouserkaf Temple solaire dOuserkaf Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hr.wikipedia.org Popis faraona Userkaf Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Uszerkaf naptemploma Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Userkaf Usage on it.wikipedia.org Museo egizio Il Cairo Tombe dei faraoni dEgitto Miti di nascite divine nelle dinastie egizie Userkaf in grovacca JE 90220 Usage on ja.wikipedia.org   Usage on ko.wikipedia.org    Chapter I  The Gods Of Egypt 3241 Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Userkafas Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Zonnetempel van Oeserkaf Oeserkaf Usage on no.wikipedia.org Meskhenet Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Userkaf Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikibooks.org Civilizao EgpciaAntigo imprioDinastias do Antigo Imprio 5 e 6 Civilizao EgpciaImprimir Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Userkaf View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. error 0 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileUserkaf.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width