Pyramid of Userkaf - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Discovery and excavations 
2 Morturary complex Toggle Morturary complex subsection 
2.1 Layout 
2.2 Mortuary temple 
2.3 Offering chapel 
2.4 Cult pyramid 
3 Main pyramid Toggle Main pyramid subsection 
3.1 Construction 
3.2 Substructures 
4 Pyramid complex of Queen Neferhetepes Toggle Pyramid complex of Queen Neferhetepes subsection 
4.1 Discovery 
4.2 Pyramid 
4.3 Mortuary temple 
5 Later alterations 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 Further reading 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Pyramid of Userkaf 22 languages   Catal Cebuano Deutsch Espaol  Franais Magyar   Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina Svenska  Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 2952
25 N 3113
08 E  
29.8 73
61 N 
31.2 18
89 E  
29.8 7361 
31.2 1889 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pyramid Pyramid of Userkaf North side of the pyramid with the entrance to the subterranean structures Userkaf 
5 th Dynasty Coordinates 2952
25 N 3113
08 E  
29.8 73
61 N 
31.2 18
89 E  
29.8 7361 
31.2 1889 Ancient name Wbswtwsrk
3 f WabsutUserkaf The pure sites of Userkaf Constructed c. 2490 BC Type True now ruined Material Limestone Height 49 metres 161 ft Base 
73.5  metres 241 ft Volume 87906 m3 114977 cu yd Slope 530748 The pyramid complex of Userkaf was built c. 2490 BC1 for the pharaoh Userkaf reigned 24942487 BC founder of the 
5 th Dynasty of Egypt c. 24942345 BC. It is located in the pyramid field at Saqqara on the northeast of the step pyramid of Djoser reigned c. 2670 BC. Constructed in dressed stone with a core of rubble the pyramid is now ruined and resembles a conical hill in the sands of Saqqara.1 For this reason it is known locally as ElHaram elMaharbish the Heap of Stone2 and was recognized as a royal pyramid by western archaeologists in the 
19 th century. Userkafs pyramid is part of a larger mortuary complex comprising a mortuary temple an offering chapel and a cult pyramid as well as separate pyramid and mortuary temple for Userkafs wife queen Neferhetepes.3 Userkafs mortuary temple and cult pyramid are today completely ruined and difficult to recognize. The pyramid of the queen is no more than a mound of rubble with its funerary chamber exposed by stone robbers.4 The complex is markedly different from those built during the 
4 th Dynasty c. 26132494 BC in its size architecture and location being at Saqqara rather than the Giza Plateau. As such Userkafs pyramid complex could be a manifestation of the profound changes in the ideology of kingship that took place between the 
4 th and 
5 th dynasties1 changes that may have started during the reign of Userkafs likely immediate predecessor Shepseskaf.5 More than 1200 years after its construction the pyramid complex was restored under Ramses II. During the much later Saite period 664525 BC it was used as a cemetery. Discovery and excavationsedit The entrance of the pyramid was discovered in 1831 by the Italian Egyptologist Orazio Marucchi6 but was not entered until 8 years later in 1839 by John Shae Perring who took advantage of an existing tunnel dug into the pyramid by tomb robbers. Perring did not know for sure who the owner of the pyramid was and attributed it to Djedkare Isesi reign 24142375 BC a late 
5 th dynasty pharaoh. After his investigations Perring buried the robbers tunnel which remains inaccessible to this day. The pyramid of Userkaf entered the official records a few years later in 1842 when Karl Richard Lepsius catalogued it in his list of pyramids under number XXXI. Since Perring had already buried the robbers tunnel by that time K. R. Lepsius did not investigate the pyramid any further.6 The pyramid was then neglected until October 1927 when Cecil Mallaby Firth and the architect JeanPhilippe Lauer started excavating there. During the first season of excavation Firth and Lauer cleared the south side of the pyramid area discovering Userkafs mortuary temple and tombs of the much later Saite period.7 The following year Firth and Lauer uncovered a limestone relief slab and a colossal red granite head of Userkaf thus determining that he was the pyramid owner.267 After Firths death in 1931 no excavations took place on site until they were resumed by Lauer in 1948. Lauer worked there until 1955 reclearing and replanning the mortuary temple and investigating the eastern side of the pyramid. Research on the north and west sides of the mortuary complex was conducted starting in 1976 by Ahmed elKhouli1489 who excavated and restored the pyramid entrance. The entrance was however buried under rubble in an earthquake in 1991. More recent work on the pyramid was undertaken by Audran Labrousse in 20
00.3  Morturary complexedit Layoutedit Userkafs mortuary complex 1 Main pyramid 2 offering hall 3 cult pyramid the mortuary temple comprises 4 courtyard 5 chapel 6 entrance corridors and 7 causeway. The mortuary complex of Userkaf comprises the same structures as those of Userkafs 
4 th dynasty predecessors a high wall surrounded the complex with its pyramid and high temple and there was certainly a valley temple located closer to the Nile yet to be uncovered. The valley temple was connected to the pyramid by a causeway whose exact trajectory is unknown even though its first few meters are still visible today.1 The layout of the complex however differs significantly from that of earlier complexes. Indeed it is organized on a northsouth axis rather than an eastwest one the high temple is located south of the main pyramid and its structures are turned away from it.1 Furthermore a small offering chapel is adjoining the eastern base of the pyramid a configuration otherwise unattested since offering chapels usually occupy the inner sanctum of the mortuary temple. Finally immediately to the south of Userkafs funerary enclosure is a second smaller pyramid complex attributed to his wife queen Neferhetepes.3 The reason for these changes is unclear and several hypotheses have been proposed to explain them The first hypothesis is that this is due to a change of ideology. The advent of the 
5 th dynasty marks the growing importance of the cult of the sun as hinted by the Westcar Papyrus. This is also directly evidenced by the large sun temples built at Abusir throughout the dynasty a tradition initiated by Userkaf. Finally the Abusir Papyri demonstrate the strong connection between the cult of the sun and the mortuary cult of the pharaohs of this dynasty offerings for a deceased ruler were first consecrated in a sun temple before being dispatched to his mortuary temple. Thus Userkaf located his mortuary temple to the south of the main pyramid so that the sun would shine directly into it all year round.1 The second hypothesis holds that Userkaf chose to return to 
3 rd Dynasty c. 26702610 BC traditions not only did he choose to construct his mortuary complex on the northeast corner of Djosers complex but its layout is similar to that of Djoser. Indeed both are organized on a northsouth axis and both have their entrances located at the southend of the eastern side.1 The third hypothesis proposes that Userkafs choice is due to practical considerations. Nabil Swelim discovered a large moat completely surrounding Djosers enclosure some places as deep as 25 metres 82 ft.10 This moat might be a stone quarry for material used during the construction of Djosers step pyramid. If for some reason it was important for Userkaf to locate his mortuary complex on the northeast corner of Djosers i.e. between the enclosure and the moat then there was not enough space available for the mortuary temple to be located on the east side.1 Thus the local topography would explain the peculiar layout of Userkafs complex.2 Mortuary templeedit Fragment of a relief representing Userkaf from his funerary temple. Userkafs mortuary temple layout and architecture is difficult to establish with certainty. Not only was it extensively quarried for stone throughout the millennia but a large Saite period shaft tomb was also dug in its midst7 damaging it. Modern reconstructions of the temple nonetheless show that it shared the same elements as all mortuary temples since the time of Khafre reigned c. 2570 BC. However just as with the complex the layout of the temple seem to differ significantly from those of Userkafs predecessors. The causeway entered the pyramid enclosure at the southern end of the east wall. There the entrance corridor branched south to five magazine rooms11 as well as a stairway to a roof terrace. To the north a doorway led to a vestibule and then to an entrance hall.1 That in turn led to an open blackbasalt floored courtyard bordered on all sides but the south one by monolithic red granite pillars bearing the titles of the king. A colossal head of Userkaf was found there the second oldest monumental statue of an Egyptian ruler after the Great Sphinx now in the Egyptian Museum. The head which must have belonged to a 
5 metrehigh 16 ft statue represents Userkaf wearing the Nemes and Uraeus.12 The walls of the courtyard were adorned with fine reliefs of high workmanship depicting scenes of life in a papyrus thicket a boat with its crew and names of Upper and Lower Egyptian estates connected to the cult of the king. Two doors at the southeast and southwest corners of the courtyard led to a small hypostyle hall with four pairs of red granite pillars. Beyond were storage chambers and the inner sanctum with three Ricke or five Lauer statue niches where statues of the king would have been placed facing the pyramid to the north. Contrary to other mortuary temples the inner sanctum was thus separated from the pyramid by the courtyard. The only remains of the mortuary temple that are visible today are its basalt paving and the large granite blocks framing the outer door.9 Offering chapeledit A small offering chapel is adjoining the eastern side of the main pyramid and is barely visible today. It consisted of a central two pillared room with a large quartzite false door and two narrow chambers on the sides. Like the mortuary temple the chapel was floored with black basalt. Its walls however were made of Tura limestone and granite and were adorned with fine reliefs of offering scenes.1 Blackbasalt flooring in the courtyard of the temple Userkafs mortuary temple. Userkafs temple with the ruins of the pyramid of Neferhetepes in the background. Cult pyramidedit In the southwest corner of Userkafs mortuary complex is a small cult pyramid. This pyramid was destined to receive the Ka of the deceased pharaoh and thus might have housed a statue of Userkafs Ka.1314 It stood 15 metres 49 ft high with a base 21 metres 69 ft long1 and its slope is identical to that of the main pyramid at 53. The position of the cult pyramid within the complex is unusual the cult pyramid being normally located in the southeastern corner. This difference is certainly linked with the peculiar overall northsouth layout of Userkafs complex with the southeastern corner hosting the entrance to the mortuary temple.149 The core of the pyramid is made of roughly hewn limestone blocks similar to those of the main pyramid. These were disposed in two layers and finally clad with fine Tura limestone which fell victim to stone robbers. Consequently the poor quality pyramid core was exposed and degradated rapidly with only the two lowest layers of the pyramid still visible today.1 The pyramid has a Tshaped substructure with a descending corridor leading to a chamber with a gabled roof.1 Similarly to the main pyramid the substructure was constructed in a shallow open pit dug into the ground before the pyramid construction started and is therefore located just below groundlevel.9 Main pyramidedit Constructionedit 1858 photography of the north side. In the background the Pyramid of Djoser. Userkafs pyramid is located on the northeast corner of Djosers step pyramid complex. The pyramid was originally around 49 metres 161 ft high and 73 metres 240 ft large with an inclination of 53 identical to that of Khufus great pyramid for a total volume of 87906 m3 114977 cu yd. The core of the pyramid is built of small roughlyhewn blocks of local limestone disposed in horizontal layers. This meant a considerable saving of labor as compared to the large and more accuratelyhewn stone cores of 
4 th Dynasty pyramids. However as the outer casing of Userkafs pyramid fell victim to stone robbers throughout the millennia the loosely assembled core material was progressively exposed and fared much worse over time than that of the older pyramids. This explains the current ruined state of the pyramid.14 The pyramid core was constructed in a steplike structure a construction technique similar to that of the 
4 th dynasty although the building material was of a significantly lower quality. The outer casing of the pyramid was made of fine Tura limestone which certainly ensured Userkafs construction an appearance similar to that of the glorious 
4 th Dynasty pyramids. There was however no red granite paneling over the lower part of the pyramid as in the case of the Pyramid of Menkaure.1 Substructuresedit Substructure1 of the pyramid Userkaf A  descending passage B  granite portcullis C  magazine chamber D  antechamber E  Userkafs burial chamber F  gabled ceiling. The pyramid does not have internal chambers the chambers being located underground. These were constructed in a deep open ditch dug before the pyramid construction started and only later covered by the pyramid. The entrance to the underground chambers is located north of the pyramid from a pavement in the court in front of the pyramid face. This is different from the 
4 th dynasty pyramids for which the entrance to the internal chambers is located on the pyramid side itself. The entrance was hewn into the bedrock and floored and roofed with large slabs of white limestone most of which have been removed in modern times.6 From the entrance a 
18.5  metres 61 ft long southward descending passage leads to a horizontal tunnel some 8 metres 26 ft below the pyramid base.1 The first few meters of this tunnel were roofed and floored with red granite. The tunnel was blocked by two large portcullis of red granite the first one still having traces of the gypsum plaster used to seal the portcullis.6 Behind the granite barrier the corridor branches eastward to a Tshaped magazine chamber which probably contained Userkafs funerary equipment. The presence of such a magazine chamber located under the base of a pyramid is unique of all the 
5 th and 
6 th dynasty pyramids.1 At the south end of corridor lies an antechamber which is located directly under the tip of the pyramid. The antechamber is oriented on the eastwest axis and leads west to the kings burial chamber. The burial chamber has the same height and width as the antechamber but is longer. At the western end of the burial chamber Perring discovered some fragments of an empty and undecorated black basalt sarcophagus which had been originally placed in a slight depression as well as a canopic chest. The chambers are protected from the pyramid weight by a gabled ceiling made of two large Tura limestone blocks an architecture common to all pyramids of the 
5 th and 
6 th dynasties. The chambers are lined with the same material while the floor pavement was lost to stone robbers.49 Pyramid complex of Queen Neferhetepesedit It was common for Old Kingdom pharaohs to prepare the burials of their family close to theirs and Userkaf followed this tradition. Thus 10 metres 33 ft to the south of his funerary enclosure Userkaf had a small separate pyramid complex built for his queen on an eastwest axis. The pyramid is completely ruined and only a small mound of rubble can be seen today. Discoveryedit The pyramid of the queen was first recognized in 1928 by C. M. Firth following his first excavations to the south of Userkafs main pyramid. One year later in 1929 he proposed that the pyramid be assigned to Queen Neferhetepes Userkafs wife and the mother of Sahure. It was not before 1943 that Bernard Grdseloff15 discovered the tomb of Persen a priest at the court of Userkaf and Neferhetepes. His tomb is located in the immediate vicinity of Userkafs complex and yielded an inscribed stone giving the name and rank of the queen.16 This stone is now on display at the Egyptian Museum of Berlin.3 Further evidence confirming the assignment of the pyramid to Neferhetepes was discovered by Audran Labrousse in 1979 when he excavated the ruins of the temple.2 Consequently the small pyramid complex has been attributed to her.3 The funerary chamber of the queens pyramid exposed by stone robbers. Pyramidedit The queens pyramid originally stood 
16.8  metres 55 ft high with a slope of 523 similar to that of Userkafs with a base 
26.2 5 metres 
86.1  ft long. The core of the pyramid was built with the same technique as the main pyramid and the cult pyramid consisting of three horizontal layers of roughly hewn local limestone blocks and gypsum mortar. The core was undoubtedly covered with a fine Tura limestone outer casing now removed. In fact the pyramid was so extensively used as a stone quarry in later times that it is now barely distinguishable from the surroundings and its internal chambers are exposed.149 The entrance to the substructure is located on the pyramids northern side and consists of a descending passage leading to a Tshaped chamber. This chamber was located under the tip of the pyramid and is oriented on an eastwest axis like the rest of the queens pyramid complex. It has a pented roof made of large limestone blocks a construction technique common to all pyramid chambers of the 
5 th dynasty. The substructure is thus a scaleddown version of Userkafs without the magazines.1 Mortuary templeedit The queens pyramid complex had its own separate mortuary temple which was located on the east of the pyramid in contrast to Userkafs complex. This difference may be explained by the small dimensions of the temple which allowed it to be oriented to the east in the usual fashion. Access to the temple was located in the southeast corner of the enclosure wall. The entrance led to an open courtyard that stretched from east to west. The ritual cleaning and preparation of the offerings took place here. Because of the extensive degradation suffered by the temple reconstruction attempts are somewhat speculative. From the ruins archaeologists propose that the temple comprised an open colonnade possibly made of granite3 a sacrificial chapel adjoining the pyramid side three statue niches and a few magazine chambers. No traces of a cult pyramid were found onsite.4 In the halls of the temple were depictions of animal processions and offerings carriers moving towards the Shrine of the Queen.3 Later alterationsedit The pyramid of Userkaf was apparently the object of restoration work in antiquity under the impulse of Khaemweset 12801225 BC fourth son of Ramses II. This is attested by inscriptions on stone cladding showing Khaemweset with offering bearers.17 During the 
26 th Dynasty c. 685525 BC Userkafs temple had become a burial ground a large shaft tomb was dug in its midst thus rendering modern reconstruction of its layout difficult. This indicates that by the time of the Saite period Userkafs temple was already in ruins.9 See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal Egyptian pyramids Egyptian pyramid construction techniques List of Egyptian pyramids Lepsius list of pyramids Referencesedit  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Mark Lehner The Complete Pyramids Thames  Hudson ISBN 9780500285473 p. 140  a b c d JeanPhillipe Lauer in French Saqqarah Une vie Entretiens avec Phillipe Flandrin Petite Bibliotheque Payot 107 1988 ISBN 2869301367  a b c d e f g h Audran Labrousse and JeanPhilippe Lauer in French Les complexes funraires dOuserkaf et de Nferhteps Vol. 1 and 2 IFAO 2000 ISBN 2724702611  a b c d e f g Miroslav Verner Steven Rendall The Pyramids The Mystery Culture and Science of Egypts Great Monuments p. 306 Grove Press 2002 ISBN 0802139353  Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt Oxford University Press ISBN 0192802933  a b c d e Aly ElKhouly Excavation at the pyramid of Userkaf 1976 preliminary report The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology vol. 64 1978 pp. 3543  a b c Cecil Mallaby Firth Excavation of the Department of Antiquities at Saqqara Annales du service des antiquits de lgypte ASAE Nr. 29 1929.  Ahmed ElKhouli Excavation at the pyramid of Userkaf Journal of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities. JSSEA Nr. 15 1985  a b c d e f g Rainer Stadelmann in German Die agyptischen Pyramiden Vom Ziegelbau zum Weltwunder Kulturgeschichte der antiken Welt p. 159 P. von Zabern 1991 ISBN 3805311427  Nabil Swelim The Dry Moat the South Rock Wall Of the Inner South Channel Timelines Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak Volume 1 Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta p. 149 2006. See also The Dry Moat of the Netjerykhet Complex in Pyramid Studies and Other Essays Presented to I. E. S. Edwards by Nabil Swelim London 1988 and on Nabil Swelims website The dry moat  A magazine room is a storage room.  Picture of the head The Global Egyptian Museum Bibliotheca Alexandrina Center for Documentation of Cultural and Natural Heritage directed by Dirk van der Plas  Mohamed Saleh.  Mark Lehner in German Geheimnis der Pyramiden. p. 18 Der StandardPyramidenkomplex. ECONVerlag Dsseldorf 1997 ISBN 3572010
39 X  Miroslav Verner in German Die Pyramiden. p. 72 Der Weg zur Ewigkeit Ritual und Kult. Rowohlt Hamburg 1999 ISBN 3499608901  The British Museum website Bernard Grdseloff 19151950 Polish Egyptologist.  Tarek El Awady The royal family of sahure. New evidence in M. Barta F. Coppens J. Krjci editors Abusir and Saqqara in the Year 2005 Prague 2006 ISBN 8073081164 pp. 19298  Kenneth Kitchen Ramesside Inscriptions Translated  Annotated Translations Volume II Blackwell Publishers ISBN 0631184
35 X 1996 Further readingedit Zahi Hawass Pyramids Treasures Mysteries and New Discoveries in Egypt. White Star Publishers ISBN 8854400858 JeanPhilippe Lauer Saqqara the royal cemetery of Memphis  excavations and discoveries since 1850 Thames  Hudson ISBN 0500050244 Metropolitan Museum of Art Egyptian Art in the Age of the Pyramids Metropolitan Museum of Art Ed. ISBN 0870999060 Mark Lehner The Complete Pyramids Thames  Hudson ISBN 9780500285473 Rainer Stadelmann Die gyptischen Pyramiden Vom Ziegelbau zum Weltwunder von Zabern Mainz 1991 ISBN 3805311427. Miroslav Verner  Steven Rendall The Pyramids The Mystery Culture and Science of Egypts Great Monuments Grove Press ISBN 0802139353 External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pyramid of Userkaf. Userkafs pyramid complex The Ancient Egypt Website The Pyramid Complex of Userkaf Touregypt The Pyramid Complex of Userkaf Pictures of Userkafs pyramid complex Reliefs from Userkafs mortuary temple v t e Egyptian pyramids List of Egyptian pyramids Lepsius Commons Period Dynasty Pyramids Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Buried Layer Lepsius I Athribis Elephantine Edfu South elKula Naqada Saujet elMeitin de Sinki de IV Seila Meidum Bent Red Khufu Djedefre Unfinished Northern Pyramid of Zawyet elAryan Khafre Menkaure Khentkaus I Mastabet elFaraun G
1 a G
1 b G
1 c G
1 d G
2 a G
3 a G
3 b G
3 c Lepsius L V Userkaf Neferhetepes de Sahure Neferirkare Khentkaus II Neferefre Unfinished Nyuserre Lepsius XXIV Double Headless DjedkareIsesi Unas VI Teti Pepi I Merenre Pepi II Sesheshet 
1 st Intermediate Period 21812040 BC VIII Ity Neferkare Neby Ibi Khui X Merikare Middle Kingdom 20401650 BC XI Reherishefnakht XII Amenemhat I Senusret I White Senusret II Senusret III Black Hawara Neferuptah de Central Dahshur de South Mazghuna North Mazghuna XIII Ameny Qemau Khendjer Southern South Saqqara SAK S 3 SAK S 7 de South Dahshur A de South Dahshur B de DAS 46 DAS 49 DAS 50 DAS 51 DAS 53 de S 9 S 10 Merneferre Ay Second Intermediate 16501570 BC XVII Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom 15701070 BC XVIII Ahmose Step pyramid Construction techniques Seked Texts Pyramidion Pyramidology Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePyramidofUserkafoldid1163355252 Categories Saqqara Pyramids of the Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Good articles Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 July 2023 at 1144 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width