File:Raneferef.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileRaneferef.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. Raneferef.jpg 500  462 pixels file size 69 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. DescriptionRaneferef.jpg English Statue of Neferefre Raneferef. Abusir. JE 98171 34 cm. Cairo Egyptian Museum. Date 27 April 2009 0008 UTC Source Neferefre.jpg Author Neferefre.jpg Jon Bodsworth derivative work GDK talk Permission Reusing this file This file was transferred from Egypt Archive website under the license Copyrighted free use see permission here. In short you are free to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. This is Mr. Jon Bodsworths statement about his pictures from Egypt Archive All the photographs on this site are from my own originals and are copyright free. They can be reproduced in any medium. If you use any on the web I would appreciate an email. This site was designed to put as many photographs on the web as possible in an easy to use format. I have deliberately kept captions to a minimum but if you would like more information on any of the photographs let me know. The photographs on this website are only a small proportion of over 3500 that I have covering many areas of Egypt. If there is a specific photograph that you are looking for please let me know. If you use any of the pictures on the web the author Jon Bodsworth would appreciate an email jonegyptarchive.co.uk As of March 2011 Egypt Archive website was closed so if a file is uploaded after that time we need further proof of permission. This is a retouched picture which means that it has been digitally altered from its original version. Modifications Cropped. The original can be viewed here Neferefre.jpg . Modifications made by GDK. I the copyright holder of this work hereby publish it under the following license The copyright holder of this work allows anyone to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution commercial use and modification. Please check the source to verify that this is correct. In particular note that publication on the Internet like publication by any other means does not in itself imply permission to redistribute. Files without valid permission should be tagged with substnpd. Usage notes If the work requires attribution use Attribution instead. If this is your own work please use Cczero instead. Copyrighted free useCopyrighted free usefalsefalse Original upload log This image is a derivative work of the following images FileNeferefre.jpg licensed with Copyrighted free use 200803
28 T0619
36 Z Jeff Dahl 5
00 x667 41571 Bytes Information DescriptionNeferefre Sourcehttpwww.egyptarchive.co.ukhtmlcairomuseum19.html Date2337 10 December 2007 UTC AuthorJon Bodsworth PermissionAll photographs on www.egyptarchive.co.uk are copyrigh Uploaded with derivativeFX Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts copyright status copyrighted copyright license copyrighted free use media type imagejpeg File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2309 26 April 2009 500  462 69 KB GDK Information DescriptionRaneferef Neferefre SourceFileNeferefre.jpg Date20090427 0008 UTC AuthorFileNeferefre.jpg Jon Bodsworth derivative work  Permissionsee below otherversions  RetouchedPictureCroppeded File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Pyramid of Neferefre UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org        Usage on arz.wikipedia.org          Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Neferefre Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on de.wikipedia.org Raneferef RaneferefPyramide BenutzerGDKNeue Bilder PortalgyptologieUnsere Besten PortalgyptologieArtikel des Monats201304 Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Neferefra Usage on eu.wikipedia.org NeferefraIsi Usage on fa.wikipedia.org    Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Raneferef Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Ve dynastie gyptienne Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hr.wikipedia.org Popis faraona Neferefra Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Neferefr Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Neferefre Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Peta egipanska dinastija Neferefrejeva piramida Usage on th.wikipedia.org  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q269271 UserIvan A. KrestininPortraitsXXIV   . . TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Neferefre Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. error 0 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileRaneferef.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width