File:Shepseskare Cylinder Seal.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileShepseskare Cylinder Seal.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. ShepseskareCylinderSeal.png 439  249 pixels file size 37 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionShepseskare Cylinder Seal.png English Drawing by G. Daressy of a bronze cylinder seal of Shepseskare Isi of the 
5 th dynasty. Date 11 January 2015 Source Georges mile Jules Daressy 1915 Cylindre en bronze de lancien empire Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte ASAE 15 available online see p. 94. Author Georges mile Jules Daressy 1915 Cylindre en bronze de lancien empire Annales du Service des Antiquits de lgypte ASAE 15 available online see p. 94. Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 11 January 2015 media type imagepng File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2113 28 January 2016 439  249 37 KB JMK white background 1424 11 January 2015 439  249 200 KB IryHor User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Fifth Dynasty of Egypt List of pharaohs Neferefre Shepseskare UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org    ASammour  Usage on arz.wikipedia.org    Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org Shepseskara Usage on fa.wikipedia.org  Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chepseskar Usage on gl.wikipedia.org V dinasta exipcia Lista de farans Usage on hr.wikipedia.org Popis faraona Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Sepszeszkar Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Shepseskare Usage on it.wikipedia.org Tombe dei faraoni dEgitto Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  Usage on mk.wikipedia.org     Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Dinasti Kelima Mesir Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Peta egipanska dinastija Neferefre epseskare Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Neferefre Danh sch pharaon Shepseskare Usage on www.wikidata.org Q268601 Usage on zh.wikipedia.org   Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileShepseskareCylinderSeal.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width