File:Menkauhor CG 40.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileMenkauhor CG 40.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. MenkauhorCG40.jpg 360  595 pixels file size 121 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionMenkauhor CG 40.jpg English Statue of Menkauhor probably from Memphis now in the Egyptian Museum Cairo CG 40 Deutsch Statue des Menkauhor wahrscheinlich aus Memphis heute im gyptischen Museum Kairo CG 40 Date 1911 Source Catalogue Gnral des Antiquits gyptiennes du Muse du Caire. Statuen und Statuetten von Knigen und Privatleuten. Teil 1 archived link 29 January 2013 Author Ludwig Borchardt 18631938 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Statue of Menkauhor wearing the dress of the Sed festival from Memphis Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1911 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1750 26 April 2016 360  595 121 KB David Levy cropped 1606 9 February 2011 418  635 155 KB Einsamer Schtze Information Description en
1 Statue of Menkauhor probably from Memphis now in the Egyptian Museum Cairo CG 40 de
1 Statue des Menkauhor wahrscheinlich aus Memphis heute im gyptischen Museum Kairo CG 40 Source Catalogue File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Fifth Dynasty of Egypt List of pharaohs Menkauhor Kaiu Neferefre UserImDefAHumansandbox WikipediaMain Page history2016 April 27 WikipediaTodays featured articleApril 2016 WikipediaTodays featured articleApril 27 2016 DraftList of burial places and mummies of Egyptian Pharaohs Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on ar.wikipedia.org    Usage on arz.wikipedia.org        Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on de.wikipedia.org Menkauhor PortalgyptologieUnsere Besten Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Usage on fa.wikipedia.org    Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Menkaouhor Usage on gl.wikipedia.org V dinasta exipcia Lista de farans Usage on hr.wikipedia.org Popis faraona Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Menkauhr Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Lista dei faraoni Tombe dei faraoni dEgitto Usage on ja.wikipedia.org  Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on mk.wikipedia.org      Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Dinasti Kelima Mesir Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Menkauhor Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org    Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Peta egipanska dinastija Neferefre Menkauhor Usage on ta.wikipedia.org   Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org   Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Neferefre Danh sch pharaon Menkauhor Kaiu WikipediaBi vit chn lc2019 WikipediaBi vit chn lc201903 WikipediaBi vit chn lc20
19 Tun 13 View more global usage of this file. Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. JPEG file comment LEAD Technologies Inc. V
1.0 1 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileMenkauhorCG40.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width