Egyptian sun temple - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Mythology and factual basis 
2 Discovery 
3 Function 
4 Importance and different temples 
5 Structure 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Egyptian sun temple 11 languages  Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano Magyar Shqip   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian temples to the sun god Ra The sun temple of Nyuserre Ini at Abusir Egyptian sun temples were ancient Egyptian temples to the sun god Ra. The term has come to mostly designate the temples built by six or seven pharaohs of the Fifth Dynasty during the Old Kingdom period.1 However sun temples would make a reappearance a thousand years later under Akhenaten in the New Kingdom with his building of the Karnak Temple in Thebes.2 Fifth Dynasty sun temples were built in two localities Abu Gorab and Abusir within 1 km 
0.6 2 mi of each other and around 15 km 
9.3  mi south of modernday Cairo. They may have been modeled after an earlier sun temple in Heliopolis.2 Six or seven temples are thought to have been built but only two have been uncovered that of Userkaf and that of Nyuserre.3 The six kings associated with having built sun temples are Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Reneferef or Neferefre Nyuserre and Menkauhor.4 Djedkare Isesi the eighth king of the 
5 th Dynasty seems to have abruptly stopped the building of sun temples.4 The uncovered temple of Nyuserre near the village of Abu Gorab still holds impressive remains in particular the central altarpiece which includes a wellpreserved sacrificial altar composed of a number of alabaster parts.1 The two found sun temples thus far are so destroyed that excavators rely mostly on the hieroglyphic signs in the temples names in order to reconstruct the shape of a characteristic Egyptian sun temple features like the obelisk.4 However ruins suggest that these were open air worship structured instead of enclosed.2 Mythology and factual basisedit According to a tale from Middle Kingdom period Tale of Djedi and the Magicians the first few kings of the Fifth Dynasty were triplets and the actual progeny of the sun god Ra. There appears to be some truth behind this myth not only were the second and third kings of the fifth dynasty brothers5 but these rulers also started an unusually strong devotion to Ra that lasted throughout the V and VI Dynasties.4 Discoveryedit The sun temples meaning and evolution are ingrained into both the architectural and religious history of the Old Kingdom specifically the Fifth Dynasty of Egypt and Sixth Dynasty of Egypt.5 The first sun temple was discovered at the end of the nineteenth century.6 The first of these temples discovered was Niuserres. The second excavated was Userkafs. Study of this type of temple did not really start until the 19
50 s.5 Functionedit Debate exists as to what exactly the functions of these temples were since they seem to have been for more than just royal funerary purposes unlike Egyptian pyramids but nevertheless seem to have been part of the cultic worship of kingship since it was essential for each king to have a personal temple.5 According to the scholar Massimiliano Nuzzolo during the V and VI Dynasties The Pharaoh appears to have acquired a new socioreligious meaning as sunking and sun god.5 This correlates well with the fact that these sun temples are the first found instances of Egyptian monarchs dedicating large structures made from stone entirely separate from funerary pyramids.4 Importance and different templesedit Due to the fact that there are six to seven different names of sun temples mentioned in primary sources from this period it is suggested there are at least six different temples.5 However there is no specific term for sun temple in ancient Egyptian.4 The temples were also a source of great wealth and importance in ancient Egypt.4 The founder of the Fifth Dynasty Userkaf built the first temple to Ra in Abusir a few kilometres north of the necropolis of Saqqara where he had built his pyramid.2 In total the following temples were built Nekhenre NekhenRa The fortress of Re built by Userkaf Sekhetre The field of Re built by Sahure Setibre The favourite place of Re built by Neferirkare Kakai Hetepre The offering place of Re built by Neferefre Conjectural Hotepibre Satisfied is the heart of Re started by Shepseskare Shesepibre Joy of the heart of Re built by Nyuserre Ini Akhetre The horizon of Re built by Menkauhor Kaiu. Only the solar temples of Userkaf and Nyuserre have been discovered to date. Nyuserres temple contains a large catalogue of inscriptions and reliefs from this kings reign. Structureedit The sun temples were built on the west bank of the Nile and like pyramids had one way in and one way out.2 Each sun temple seems to have had three main sections first there appears to have been a small valley temple near a canal or cultivation site second a short causeway led up to the desert from the small valley temple on the desert plateau stood the third and most important part the sun temple proper.4 Referencesedit  a b Haase Michael January 1999. Abu Gurob gypten German. Antike Welt. 30 306307.  a b c d e Remler Pat 2010. Egyptian Mythology A to Z. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 9781438131801.  Robert G Morkot The Egyptians An Introduction. pp. 223  a b c d e f g h Bard Kathryn 1999. Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. Routledge. pp. 8587. ISBN 0415185890.  a b c d e f Nuzzolo Massimiliano 2007. The Sun Temples of the Vth Dynasty A Reassessment. Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur. 36 217247. JSTOR 25157803.  Nuzzolo Massimiliano 2010. The V Dynasty Sun Temples Personnel. An overview of titles and cult practise through the epigraphic evidence. Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur. 39 289312. JSTOR 41060769. v t e Sun temples Surya temples Indian subcontinent Adithyapuram Arasavalli Balaji Biranchinarayan Temple Buguda Biranchinarayan Temple Palia Deo Surya Mandir Gollala Mamidada Gop Temple Katarmal Konark Martand Sun Temple Modhera Multan Sun Temple Navlakha Temple Ghumli Suryanar Kovil China Beijings Temple of the Sun Japan Amanawa Shinmei Shrine Amanoiwatojinja Ise Grand Shrine Americas Mesa Verdes Sun Temple Qurikancha Temple of the Cross Complex Others Egyptian sun temple Romes Temple of the Sun Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleEgyptiansuntempleoldid1164304577 Categories Memphis Egypt Sun temples Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2023 at 1817 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width