File:Statue of Teti Quibell Saqqara 1.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStatue of Teti Quibell Saqqara 1.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview 217  598 pixels. Other resolution 306  843 pixels. Original file 306  843 pixels file size 168 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStatue of Teti Quibell Saqqara 1.jpg English Statue of King Teti found near his pyramid at Saqqara Egyptian Museum Cairo JE 39103 Deutsch Statue des Knigs Teti gefunden in der Nhe seiner Pyramide in Sakkara gyptisches Museum Kairo JE 39103 Date 1908 Source James Edward Quibell Excavations at Saqqara 19061907 Pl. XXXI Author James Edward Quibell 18671835 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. You must also include a United States public domain tag to indicate why this work is in the public domain in the United States. Note that a few countries have copyright terms longer than 70 years Mexico has 100 years Jamaica has 95 years Colombia has 80 years and Guatemala and Samoa have 75 years. This image may not be in the public domain in these countries which moreover do not implement the rule of the shorter term. Honduras has a general copyright term of 75 years but it does implement the rule of the shorter term. Copyright may extend on works created by French who died for France in World War II more information Russians who served in the Eastern Front of World War II known as the Great Patriotic War in Russia and posthumously rehabilitated victims of Soviet repressions more information. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1908 media type imagejpeg File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2334 1 December 2011 306  843 168 KB Einsamer Schtze Information Description en
1 Statue of King Teti found near his pyramid at Saqqara Egyptian Museum Cairo JE 39103 de
1 Statue des Knigs Teti gefunden in der Nhe seiner Pyramide in Sakkara gyptisches Museum Kairo JE 39103 Sou File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Conspiracies in ancient Egypt List of pharaohs Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org  Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on az.wikipedia.org Teti Usage on bg.wikipedia.org  Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Teti II Seixeixet Usage on de.wikipedia.org 24. Jahrhundert v. Chr. Teti II. Usage on fa.wikipedia.org     Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Teti Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Tti Conspirations dans lgypte antique Usage on gl.wikipedia.org VI dinasta exipcia Usage on hr.wikipedia.org Teti Usage on incubator.wikimedia.org Wpcop Usage on it.wikipedia.org Teti faraone Lista dei faraoni Iput I Sesheshet Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   6 Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Tetis Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Teti farao 
6 e dynastie van Egypte Usage on no.wikipedia.org Teti Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Teti faraon Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Teti fara Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Secolul al XXIVlea .Hr. Teti Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  VI  Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Teti Usage on sr.wikipedia.org  Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Teti Usage on uk.wikipedia.org     Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q269285 Q269979 UserIvan A. KrestininPortraitsXXIII   . . TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Teti Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. JPEG file comment Created with GIMP Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileStatueofTetiQuibellSaqqara1.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width