Teti - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Biography 
2 Reign and possible assassination 
3 Third subsidiary pyramid to Tetis tomb 
4 Funerary temple of Queen Neith 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Bibliography 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Teti 43 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca  Catal etina Deutsch Eesti Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian Pharaoh of 
6 th dynasty For other uses see Teti disambiguation. Teti Statue of King Teti found near his pyramid at Saqqara held at the Egyptian Museum of Cairo JE 39103 Pharaoh Reign 23232291 BC Predecessor Unas Successor Userkare Royal titulary Horus name Hr Sehetep Tawy Horus who satisfies pacifies the two lands Nebty name Sehetep Nebty Who satisfies the two ladies Golden Horus Hr nebu sema The golden Horus who unites Nomen Teti Consort Iput I Khuit Khentkaus IV Naert Children Pepi I Tetiankhkem Sesheshet Watetkhethor Sesheshet Idut Sesheshet Nubkhetnebty Sathor Seshit Seshti Seshseshet Merout Seshseshet wife of Remni Seshseshet wife of Pepyankh Queen of the West Pyramid Inti disputed Mother Sesheshet Burial Pyramid of Teti Dynasty 
6 th Dynasty Teti less commonly known as Othoes sometimes also Tata Atat or Athath in outdated sources was the first king of the Sixth Dynasty of Egypt. He was buried at Saqqara. The exact length of his reign has been destroyed on the Turin King List but is believed to have been about 12 years. Biographyedit Teti had several wives Iput the daughter of Unas the last king of the Fifth dynasty. Iput was the mother of Pepi I. Khuit who may have been the mother of Userkare according to Jonosi and Callender1 Khentkaus IV1 Naert2 Teti is known to have had several children. He was the father of at least three sons and probably ten daughters.3 Of the sons two are well attested a third one is likely Pepi I Tetiankhkem4 Nebkauhor with the name of Idu kings eldest son of his body buried in the mastaba of Vizier AkhethetepHemi buried in a fallen Viziers tomb within the funerary complex of his maternal grandfather5 Piriform mace head inscribed with the cartouche of Teti Imhotep Museum. According to N. Kanawati Teti had at least nine daughters by a number of wives and the fact that they were named after his mother Sesheshet allows researchers to trace his family. At least three princesses bearing the name Seshseshet are designated as kings eldest daughter meaning that there were at least three different queens. It seems that there was a tenth one born of a fourth queen as she is also designated as kings eldest daughter Seshseshet whose name was Waatetkhthor married to Vizier Mereruka in whose mastaba she has a chapel. She is designated as kings eldest daughter of his body. She may have been the eldest daughter of Iput.6 Seshseshet with the name of Idut kings daughter of his body who died very young at the beginning of her fathers reign and was buried in the mastaba of Vizier Ihy.6 Seshseshet Nubkhetnebty kings daughter of his body wife of Vizier Kagemni represented in her husbands mastaba. She was maybe also born of Iput.7 Seshseshet also called Sathor married to Isi resident governor at Edfu and also titled vizier. She also would have been born of Iput I.8 Lantern Slide Collection Views Objects Egypt. Chapel Tomb of NeferSeshemPtah. Sakkara. 
6 th Dynasty. n.d. Brooklyn Museum Archives Seshseshet with the name of Sheshit kings eldest daughter of his body and wife of the overseer of the great court Neferseshemptah and is depicted in her husbands mastaba. As she is an eldest daughter of the king she cannot be born of the same mother as Waatkhetethor and therefore may have been a daughter of Queen Khuit.9 Seshseshet also called Sheshti kings daughter of his body married to the keeper of the head ornaments Shepsipuptah and depicted in her husbands mastaba.10 Seshseshet with the beautiful name of Merout entitled kings eldest daughter but without the addition of his body and therefore born of a third maybe a minor queen and married to Ptahemhat.11 Seshseshet wife of Remni sole companion and overseer of the department of the palace guards12 Seshseshet married to Pepyankh Senior of Meir13 The socalled Queen of the West Pyramid in King Pepy I cemetery. She is called kings eldest daughter of his body and kings wife of Meryre the name of Pepy I. Therefore she is a wife of Pepi and most certainly his halfsister.14 As she is also an eldest daughter of the king her mother must be a fourth queen of Teti. Another possible daughter is princess Inti.15 Reign and possible assassinationedit Sistrum inscribed with the name of Teti. Tetis Horus name Sehoteptaoui He who pacifies the Two Lands probably indicates that he must have led military pacification operations near the start of his reign. During Tetis reign high officials were beginning to build funerary monuments that rivaled that of the pharaoh. His vizier Mereruka built a mastaba tomb at Saqqara which consisted of 33 richly carved rooms the biggest known tomb for an Egyptian nobleman.16 This is considered to be a sign that Egypts wealth was being transferred from the central court to the officials a slow process that culminated in the end to the Old Kingdom.citation needed The Egyptian priest and chronicler Manetho states that Teti was murdered by his palace bodyguards in a harem plot and he appears to have been briefly succeeded by a shortlived usurper Userkare. Teti was buried in the royal necropolis at Saqqara. His pyramid complex is associated with the mastabas of officials from his reign. Tetis highest date is his Year after the 
6 th Count 
3 rd Month of Summer day lost Year 12 if the count was biannual from Hatnub Graffito No.
1.1 7 This information is confirmed by the South Saqqara Stone Annal document from Pepi IIs reign which gives him a reign of around 12 years. Third subsidiary pyramid to Tetis tombedit Tetis mother was the Queen Sesheshet who was instrumental in her sons accession to the throne and a reconciling of two warring factions of the royal family.18 Sesheshet lived between 2323 BC to 2291 BC. Egypts chief archaeologist Zahi Hawass secretary general of the Supreme Council of Antiquities announced on 11 November 2008 that she was entombed in a 43
00 yearold 
5 metre 
16 foot tall pyramid at Saqqara. This is the 1
18 th pyramid discovered thus far in Egypt the largest portion of its 
2 metrewide casing was built with a superstructure 5 metres high. It originally reached 14 metres with sides 22 metres long.1920 Once 5 stories tall it lay beneath 7 meters 23 feet of sand a small shrine and mudbrick walls from later periods. The third known subsidiary pyramid to Tetis tomb was originally 46 feet 14 meters tall and 72 feet 22 meters square at its base due to its walls having stood at a 
51 degree angle. Buried next to the Saqqara Step Pyramid its base lies 65 feet underground and is believed to have been 50 feet tall when it was built.19 Limestone wall block fragment showing the cartouche of king Teti and funerary pyramid texts. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London The ruins of Tetis pyramid Saqqara Pyramid texts from Teti Is pyramid at Saqqara Funerary temple of Queen Neithedit In January 2021 the Egyptian Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities announced the discovery of more than 50 wooden sarcophagi in 52 burial shafts dating back to the New Kingdom period as well as a 13 ftlong papyrus containing texts from the Book of the Dead. Archaeologists led by Zahi Hawass at Saqqara also found the funerary temple of queen Neith and warehouses made of bricks.212223 Previously unknown to researchers she was a wife of Teti.2 See alsoedit List of Egyptian pyramids List of megalithic sites Referencesedit  a b Miroslav Verner The Pyramids1994  a b DavisMarks Isis Archaeologists Unearth Egyptian Queens Tomb 
13 Foot Book of the Dead Scroll Smithsonian 21 January 2021  N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007.  N. Kanawati Conspiracies in the Egyptian Palace. Unis to Pepy I. 2003 p. 139  N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007 p. 14 et 50  a b N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007 p. 14 20 et 50  N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007 p. 20 32 et 50  N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007 p. 2122 et 50  N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007 p. 20 32 et 35  N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007 p. 20 32 et 36  N. Kanawati Mereruka and King Teti. The Power behind the Throne 2007 p. 2021  N. Kanawati The Teti Cemetery at Saqqara Volume 9 The Tomb of Remni 2009  Ali ElKhouli  Naguib Kanawati Quseir ElAmarna The Tombs of Pepyankh and KhewenWekh 1989  C. Berger A la qute de nouvelles versions des textes des pyramides in Hommages  Jean Leclant 1994 p 7374  Dodson and Hilton The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt 2004  Christine Hobson Exploring the World of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd. 1997. p.85  Anthony Spalinger Dated Texts of the Old Kingdom SAK 21 1994 p.303  Egypt 43
00 yearold pyramid discovered. CNN. 11 November 2008. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 11 November 2008.  a b Bossone Andrew 11 November 2008. New Pyramid Found in Egypt 43
00 YearOld Queens Tomb. National Geographic News. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008.  Rasmussen Will Boulton Ralph 11 November 2008. Egypt says has found pyramid built for ancient queen. Reuters.  Queens temple 50 coffins Book of Dead Ancient Egypt trove remakes history  The Times of Israel. www.timesofisrael.com. Retrieved 20 January 2021.  Sunday 17 January 2021 0754 AM MYT 17 January 2021. Egypt makes major discoveries at Saqqara archaeological site  Malay Mail. www.malaymail.com. Retrieved 20 January 2021.cite web CS1 maint numeric names authors list link  Egypt makes major discoveries at Saqqara archaeological site. www.msn.com. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Bibliographyedit Naguib Kanawati Conspiracies in the Egyptian Palace Unis to Pepy I Routledge 2002 ISBN 0415271
07 X. Osburn William Jr. 1854. From the visit of Abram to the exodus. Trbner  Co. External linksedit The South Saqqara Stone Sixth Dynasty Annals BBC In pictures New pyramid found v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Germany Israel United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTetioldid1219311051 Categories 
23 rdcentury BC Pharaohs Teti 
24 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
24 thcentury BC murdered monarchs Pharaohs of the Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient murdered monarchs Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint numeric names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 17 April 2024 at 0011 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width