Nitocris - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Greek tradition 
2 Egyptian records 
3 In modern fiction 
4 Further reading 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nitocris 38 languages  Asturianu  Brezhoneg Catal  etina Dansk Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais   Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian queen of dubious existence For other uses see Nitocris disambiguation. Nitocris Nitocret Pharaoh Predecessor Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Successor Menkare if she is to be identified with Neitiqerty Siptah Royal titulary Nomen If she is to be identified with Neitiqerty Siptah then Neitiqerty Consort Merenre Nemtyemsaf II according to legend1 Father Pepi II Mother Neith Dynasty Sixth Dynasty Nitocris2 in hieroglyphs Era Old Kingdom 26862181 BC Nitocris Greek  possibly was the last queen of the Sixth Dynasty of Ancient Egypt. Her name is found in writings long considered as relatively accurate resources a major chronological documentation of the reigns of the kings of ancient Egypt that was composed in the thirdcentury BC by Manetho an Ancient Egyptian priest and by the ancient Greek historian Herodotus in his Histories 430 BC. She is thought to be the daughter of Pepi II and Neith and to be the sister of Merenre Nemtyemsaf II.2 Her historicity has been questioned by some with speculation that if she was a historical ruler she may have been a regent. Another view by the Egyptologist Kim Ryholt argues that Nitocris is legendary and derives from the historical king Neitiqerty Siptah who succeeded Nitocriss brother Merenre Nemtyemsaf II at the transition between the Old Kingdom and First Intermediate Period. Manetho claimed she built the third pyramid at Giza. Modern historians and archaeologists attribute that pyramid to a king of the Fourth Dynasty Menkaure. Greek traditionedit According to Herodotus Histories ii100 Nitocris invited the murderers of her brother the king of Egypt to a banquet then killed them by flooding the sealed room with the waters of the Nile. ... Nitocris succeeded her brother. He had been the king of Egypt and he had been put to death by his subjects who then placed her upon the throne. Determined to avenge his death she devised a cunning scheme by which she destroyed a vast number of Egyptians. She constructed a spacious underground chamber and on pretense of inaugurating it threw a banquet inviting all those whom she knew to have been responsible for the murder of her brother. Suddenly as they were feasting she let the river in upon them by means of a large secret duct. Herodotus2 Herodotus also indicated that to avoid the other conspirators she committed suicide possibly by running into a burning room. Egyptian recordsedit The name Nitocris is not mentioned in any known native Egyptian inscriptions in stone and it was long thought that this king appears under her Egyptian name of Nitiqreti ntqrt on a fragment of the Turin King List dated to the Nineteenth Dynasty. The fragment where this name appears was thought to belong to the Sixth Dynasty portion of a king list thus appearing to confirm the records of both Manetho and Herodotus. Microscopic analysis of the Turin King List suggests the fragment might have been misplaced in reassembling the fragmentary text and that the name Nitiqreti is a faulty transcription of the prenomen of king Netjerkare Siptah I234 who is named on the Nineteenth Dynasty Abydos King List as the successor of the Sixth Dynasty king Nemtyemsaf II. On the Abydos King List Netjerkare Siptah is placed in the equivalent spot that Neitiqerty Siptah holds on the Turin King List. Several kings listed by Manetho Herodotus and the Turin list now are proven to have existed but they were omitted from the Abydos list and their removal is suspected to be suppression of historical details not favored by the rulers when the Abydos list was created. In modern fictionedit Two letters in the name are transposed in Bolesaw Prus 1895 historical novel Pharaoh where Nikotris appears as the mother of the protagonist Pharaoh Ramses XIII there were only eleven pharaohs of that name. The Queens Enemies a play by Lord Dunsany is based upon the account by Herodotus of the murderous activities of Nitocris. Nitocris is mentioned in two stories by H. P. Lovecraft The Outsider and Imprisoned with the Pharaohs. She is mentioned only in passing and portrayed as evil and reigning over ghouls and other horrors. Tennessee Williams first published work is the 1928 short story The Vengeance of Nitocris detailing her careful plan for revenge. She makes the people who slew her brother die in a fitting way. Le Basalte Bleu a book by John Knittel has a sort of timetravel plot in which the main character falls in love with the ancient ruler. Knittel speculates that the origin of the Cinderella fairy tale lies in the marriage of Nitocris who lost her golden sandal only to have it later found by the pharaoh. Nitocris La Dame de Memphis is a book by Pierre Montlaur. The Mirror of Nitocris a short story by Brian Lumley features a mirror that once belonged to Nitocris that unleashes evil forces upon its owners. Nitocris is royal wife of Merenra II in the novel Rhodopis of Nubia by Nobel laureate Naguib Mahfouz which tells the fateful love story of Pharaoh Merenra II successor to Pepi II Six Dynasty and the courtesan Rhodopis. Karl Sanders has a song called Slavery Unto Nitokris on his second solo album Saurian Exorcisms. By Scarab and Scorpion a short story featuring the Green Hornet by Mark Ellis features a plot involving an Egyptian museum exhibition featuring Nitocris.5 The title song from Celtic Frosts 1985 album Morbid Tales is based on the legend of Nitocris. Nitocris appears in The Mummy and Miss Nitocris by George Griffith where she is the namesake of an Egyptologists daughter in whose person she is reincarnated. Nitocris appears in FateGrand Order as a Casterclass an Assassinclass and later an Avengerclass Servant with ties to Horus Medjed and Anubis. As Servants are influenced by fictional interpretations of their legends Nitocris powers are mostly based on Lovecraft and Lumleys stories about her and she wields the titular mirror from the latter as her weapon.6 A character named Nitocris appears in the Assassins Creed Origins tie in novel Desert Oath. 7 She is the Gods Wife of Amun in Karnak temple and mother of Isidora. Her death between the novel and the events of the Curse of the Pharaohs DLC give Isidora motivation to use an Apple of Eden to bring about the wrath of the undead on Thebes. Further readingedit Newberry Percy Edward. 1943. Queen Nitocris of the Sixth Dynasty. Journal of Egyptian Archology 295154. ZivieCoche Christiane M. 1972. Nitocris Rhodopis et la troisime pyramide de Giza. Bulletin de lInstitut franais darchologie orientale 72115138. PDF Referencesedit  Tyldesley Joyce 2006. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. United Kingdom Thames  Hudson. p. 63. ISBN 0500051453.  a b c d J. Tyldesley Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt 2006 Thames  Hudson p. 63  Ryholt Kim. The Late Old Kingdom in the Turin Kinglist and the Identity of Nitocris Zeitschrift fr gyptische 127 2000. p.91  Lloyd Alan B. 2010. A Companion to Ancient Egypt. WileyBlackwell. ISBN 9781444320060.  Ellis Mark. The Green Hornet Chronicles Moonstone Entertainment Inc. 2010 p. 15160.  Griffith George 1976. The Mummy and Miss Nitocris. Arno Press. Retrieved 20160723.  Bowden Oliver 2017. Assassins Creed Origins Desert Oath. Penguin. Retrieved 20210201. External linksedit Herodotus on Nitocris v t e Queens of Ancient Egypt Protodynastic Period to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Neithhotep Benerib Khenthap Herneith Nakhtneith Penebui Merneith Seshemetka Semat Serethor Betrest II Menka Nimaathap Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Hetephernebti Djeseretnebti Djefatnebti Meresankh I IV Hetepheres I Meritites I Henutsen Khentetka Meresankh II Hetepheres II Meresankh III Khamerernebty I Persenet Hekenuhedjet Khamerernebty II Rekhetre Bunefer V Khentkaus I Neferhetepes Meretnebty Khentkaus II Khentkaus III Reptynub Khuit I Meresankh IV Setibhor Nebet Khenut Nimaethap II VI Iput I Khuit II Ankhesenpepi I Ankhesenpepi II Nubwenet Meritites IV InenekInti Nedjeftet Neith Iput II Udjebten Ankhesenpepi III Ankhesenpepi IV Nitocris Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Neferu I Neferukayet Iah Tem Neferu II Ashayet Henhenet Sadeh Kawit Kemsit XII Neferitatjenen Neferu III Keminub Senet Khenemetneferhedjet I Nofret II Khenmet Khenemetneferhedjet II Neferthenut Meretseger Aat Khenemetneferhedjet III Sobekneferu 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Nofret Nubhetepti Senebhenas Neni Senebsen Tjan Ineni Nubkhaes Aya Abetni Satsobek XIV Tati XVI Mentuhotep XVII Nubemhat Sobekemsaf Haankhes Tetisheri Ahhotep I Ahmose Inhapy Sitdjehuti Ahhotep II New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII AhmoseNefertari AhmoseSitkamose AhmoseHenuttamehu AhmoseMeritamun Ahmose Mutnofret Hatshepsut Iset Satiah MerytreHatshepsut Nebtu Menhet Menwi and Merti Nebsemi Tiaa Nefertari Iaret Mutemwiya Tiye Gilukhipa Sitamun Iset Tadukhipa  Kiya Nefertiti Meritaten Neferneferuaten Ankhesenamun Tey Mutnedjmet Nebetnehat XIX Sitre Tuya Tanedjemet Nefertari Isetnofret Henutmire Maathorneferure Meritamen Bintanath Nebettawy Merytre Isetnofret II Takhat Twosret Tiaa Anuketemheb XX TiyMerenese Iset TaHemdjert Tyti Tiye Duatentopet Henutwati Tawerettenru Nubkhesbed Baketwernel Tentamun 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Tentamun Mutnedjmet Karimala XXII Karomama Penreshnes Maatkare Tashedkhonsu Nesitaudjatakhet Nesitanebetashru Kapes Karomama I Tadibast III XXIII Karomama II XXV Pebatjma Tabiry Abar Khensa Peksater Arty Qalhata Tabekenamun Takahatenamun Naparaye Atakhebasken Malaqaye Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaoh uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Mehytenweskhet Khedebneithirbinet I Takhuit Tentkheta Nakhtubasterau Ladice XXVII Atossa Artystone Parmys Amestris Damaspia Parysatis XXXI Stateira I Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Roxana Stateira II Parysatis II Eurydice II of Macedon Ptolemaic Eurydice Berenice I Arsinoe I Arsinoe II Berenice II Arsinoe III Cleopatra I Syra Cleopatra II Cleopatra III Cleopatra IV Cleopatra Selene Berenice III Cleopatra V Cleopatra VI Berenice IV Cleopatra VII Arsinoe IV Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Ptolemaic Authority control databases International FAST VIAF National United States Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNitocrisoldid1213365346 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs 
22 ndcentury BC women Female pharaohs Fictional pharaohs Kings of Egypt in Herodotus People whose existence is disputed Pharaohs of the Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greeklanguage text Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers This page was last edited on 12 March 2024 at 1631 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width