Qakare Ibi - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 Pyramid complex Toggle Pyramid complex subsection 
2.1 The pyramid 
2.2 Internal structures 
2.3 Chapel 
3 See also 
4 References 
5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Qakare Ibi 28 languages  Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Not to be confused with Qakare Ini. Qakare Ibi Aba Iby Kakare Kakaure Qaikare Qakaure Qakare Ibis cartouche on the Abydos king list. Pharaoh Reign 2 years 1 month and 1 day12 c. 2170 BC Predecessor Neferkamin Anu Successor Neferkaure II Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Qakare Q
3 jk
3 R Mighty is the soul of Re Nomen Ibi jbj Abydos King List QaikauRe Q
3 jk
3 wR Mighty is the soul of Re Turin King List Ibi jbj Burial Pyramid of Ibi 2950
30 N 311
34 E  
29.8 41
67 N 
31.2 17
78 E  
29.8 4167 
31.2 1778 Dynasty Eighth Dynasty Qakare Ibi was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh during the early First Intermediate Period 21812055 BC and the 
14 th ruler of the Eighth Dynasty.123 As such Qakare Ibis seat of power was Memphis4 and he probably did not hold power over all of Egypt. Qakare Ibi is one of the best attested pharaohs of the Eighth Dynasty due to the discovery of his small pyramid in South Saqqara. Attestationsedit Qakare Ibi is attested on the 
53 rd entry of the Abydos King List a king list which was redacted some 900 years after the First Intermediate Period during the reign of Seti I.25 According to Kim Ryholts latest reconstruction of the Turin canon another king list compiled in the Ramesside era Qakare Ibi is also attested there on column 5 line 10 Gardiner 
4.1 1 von Beckerath 
4.1 0. The Turin canon further indicates that he reigned for 2 years 1 month and 1 day.12 The only other attestion for Qakare Ibi is his pyramid in South Saqqara. Pyramid complexedit Qakare Ibi was buried in a small pyramid at SaqqaraSouth. It was discovered by Karl Richard Lepsius in the 
19 th century who listed it as the number XL in his pioneering list of pyramids.6 The pyramid was excavated from 1929 until 1931 by Gustave Jquier.7 Ibis pyramid is the last built in Saqqara located to the northeast of Shepseskafs tomb and near the causeway of the Pyramid of Pepi II.8 It is very similar in plan dimensions and decorations to the pyramids of the queens of Pepi II the last great pharaoh of the Old Kingdom. Consequently it was proposed that the pyramid was originally that of Ankhnespepi IV nns ppj Pepi lives for her a wife of Pepi II and was only later appropriated by Ibi.9 Adjacent to the pyramid is a small chapel where the funerary cult took place. No trace of a causeway nor of a valley temple has been found to this day and it is likely that there never was any. Pyramid complex of Qakare Ibi Saqqara. The pyramidedit Ibis pyramid is not oriented to any cardinal point being rather on a northwestsoutheast axis. The edifice would have been around 
31.5  m 103 ft large and 21 m 69 ft high with a slope of 537 at the time of its construction.2 The core of the pyramid was built with limestone blocks of local origin most of which are now gone probably reused in later constructions. As a result the monument appears today as a 3 m 
9.8  ft high heap of mud and limestone chips in the sands of Saqqara. On some of the remaining blocks inscriptions in red ink were found mentioning a chief of the Libyans the meaning of which is unclear. It seems that even though the foundations for the outer casing of the pyramid were laid the casing itself was never mounted. Internal structuresedit On the north side of the edifice Jquier found an 8 m 26 ft long limestoneclad corridor leading down with an inclination of 25 to a large granite portcullis.27 Behind this portcullis lay the kings burial chamber. Both the corridor and the walls of the burial chamber were inscribed with the last known instance of the Pyramid Texts.27 The texts seem to have been directly inscribed for Ibi rather than appropriated by him. Jquier judged the quality of the inscriptions as very average.7 Furthermore the placement of the spells appears relatively indiscriminate.9 The burial chambers ceiling was flat and decorated with stars. It was probably made of a single 5 m 16 ft long block of Tura limestone7 now missing. Today a large block of concrete protects the chamber. On the west side of the burial chamber is a false door and a huge granite block on which once stood the sarcophagus of the king. On the east side there is a serdab for the statue of the Ka of the deceased. Chapeledit Adjacent to the east side of the pyramid is a small mudbrick chapel which served as temple for the cult of the dead king.2 The entrance of the chapel is located on its north side. Inside the temple immediately against the pyramid wall is an offering hall where Jequier found a stone washbasin as well as stele or a false door of which only the foundations remain. An alabaster tray and obsidian mortar tools were also discovered there. The south part of the chapel is occupied by magazine rooms. See alsoedit List of Egyptian pyramids List of megalithic sites Referencesedit  a b c Kim Ryholt The Late Old Kingdom in the Turin Kinglist and the Identity of Nitocris Zeitschrift fr gyptische 127 2000 p. 99  a b c d e f g h Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 302  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Mnchner gyptologische Studien Heft 49 Mainz  P. von Zabern 1999 ISBN 3805325916 available online Archived 20151222 at the Wayback Machine see pp. 6869  Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.107 ISBN 9780192804587  Jrgen von Beckerath The Date of the End of the Old Kingdom of Egypt JNES 21 1962  Karl Richard Lepsius Denkmler aus Aegypten und Aethiopien available online.  a b c d e Gustave Jquier La pyramide dAba 1935  Saqqara City of the Dead The Pyramid of Ibi The Ancient Egypt Site Archived September 27 2007 at the Wayback Machine  a b Rainer Stadelmann The Egyptian pyramids. From brick to the wonders of the world. 
3 rd edition of Saverne Mainz 1997 ISBN 3805311427 pp. 203204. Bibliographyedit Mark Lehner. The secret of the pyramids of Egypt Orbis Munich 1999 ISBN 3572010
39 X p. 164 Christopher Theis The Pyramids of the First Intermediate Period. After philological and archaeological sources  studies of ancient Egyptian culture. Vol 39 2010. pp. 321339. Miroslav Verner. The Pyramids Universe Books New 1998 ISBN 3499608901 pp. 415416. Preceded by Neferkamin Anu Pharaoh of Egypt Eighth Dynasty Succeeded by Neferkaure II v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleQakareIbioldid1107451644 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Pyramids of the Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Saqqara Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 August 2022 at 0217 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width