Min (god) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Myths and function 
2 Appearance 
3 Family 
4 Ejaculation legend 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Further reading 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Min god 50 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Azrbaycanca  Bosanski Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar    Bahasa Melayu   Mngdngng Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus Romn  Scots Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Trke   Ting Vit   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian deity Min The darkskinned fertility god Min with an erect penis and a flail Name in hieroglyphs Major cult center Qift Akhmim Symbol the lettuce the phallus the bull the belemnite Parents Isis Consort Iabet Repyt Isis Equivalents Greek equivalent Pan Priapus Min Egyptian mnw1 is an ancient Egyptian god whose cult originated in the predynastic period 
4 th millennium BCE.2 He was represented in many different forms but was most often represented in male human form shown with an erect penis which he holds in his right hand and an upheld left arm holding a flail. Myths and functionedit Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Cosmology Duat Maat Mythology Index Numerology Philosophy Soul Practices Funerals Offerings Offering formula Temples Priestess of Hathor Pyramids Deities list Ogdoad Amun Amunet Hauhet Heh Kauket Kek Naunet Nu Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun Duau god F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mandulis Medjed Mafdet Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nemty Nekhbet Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Locations Aaru Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Aani Abtu Ankh Atef Atet Book of Thoth Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Griffin Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Hieracosphinx Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Matet boat Medjed Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Serpopard Set animal Shen ring Sphinx Tyet Uraeus Ushabti Wassceptre Winged sun Texts Funerary texts Amduat  Books of Breathing  Book of Caverns  Book of the Dead  Book of the Earth  Book of Gates Related religions Atenism Hermeticism Thelema Kemeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy  Church of the Most High Goddess Ancient Egypt portal v t e Min in a relief from the reign of Thutmose III from Deir elBahari3 Mins cult began and was centered around Coptos Koptos and Akhmim Panopolis of upper Egypt4 where in his honour great festivals were held celebrating his coming forth with a public procession and presentation of offerings.2 His other associations include the eastern desert and links to the god Horus. Flinders Petrie excavated two large statues of Min at Qift which are now in the Ashmolean Museum and it is thought by some that they are predynastic. Although not mentioned by name a reference to he whose arm is raised in the East in the Pyramid Texts is thought to refer to Min.5 Head of the god MinAmun wearing the double plume. Possibly reign of Tutankhamun 
14 th century BCE. From Koptos Qift Egypt. Petrie Museum His importance grew in the Middle Kingdom when he became even more closely linked with Horus as the deity MinHorus. By the New Kingdom he was also fused with Amun in the form of MinAmun who was also the serpent Irta a kamutef the bull of his mother  a god who fathers himself with his own mother6. Min as an independent deity was also a kamutef of Isis. One of Isiss many places of cult throughout the valley was at Mins temple in Koptos as his divine wife.7 Mins shrine was crowned with a pair of bull horns.5 As the central deity of fertility and possibly orgiastic rites Min became identified by the Greeks with the god Pan. One feature of Min worship was the wild prickly lettuce Lactuca serriola  the domestic version of which is Lactuca sativa lettuce  which has aphrodisiac and opiate qualities and produces latex when cut possibly identified with semen. He also had connections with Nubia. However his main centers of worship remained at Coptos and Akhmim Khemmis.8 Belemnite shown on left of Min Here a board has been placed a board over Mins penis. Male deities as vehicles for fertility and potency rose to prevalence at the emergence of widespread agriculture. Male Egyptians would work in agriculture making bountiful harvests a malecentered occasion. Thus male gods of virility such as Osiris and Min were more developed during this time. Fertility was not associated with solely women but with men as well even increasing the role of the male in childbirth.9 As a god of male sexual potency he was honoured during the coronation rites of the New Kingdom when the Pharaoh was expected to sow his seedgenerally thought to have been plant seeds. At the beginning of the harvest season his image was taken out of the temple and brought to the fields in the festival of the departure of Min the Min Festival when they blessed the harvest and played games naked in his honour the most important of these being the climbing of a huge tent pole. This four day festival is evident from the great festivals list at the temple of Ramses III at Medinet Habu.710 Cult and worship in the predynastic period surrounding a fertility god was based upon the fetish of fossilized belemnite.9 Later symbols widely used were the white bull a barbed arrow and a bed of lettuce that the Egyptians believed to be an aphrodisiac. Egyptian lettuce was tall straight and released a milklike sap when rubbed characteristics superficially similar to the penis. Lettuce was sacrificially offered to the god then eaten by men in an effort to achieve potency.9 Later pharaohs would offer the first fruits of harvest to the god to ensure plentiful harvest with records of offerings of the first stems of sprouts of wheat being offered during the Ptolemaic period.9 Civilians who were not able to formally practice the cult of Min paid homage to the god as sterility was an unfavorable condition looked upon with sorrow. Concubine figurines ithyphallic statuettes and exvoto phalluses were placed at entrances to the houses of Deir elMedina to honor the god in hopes of curing the disability.9 Egyptian women would touch the penises of statues of Min in hopes of pregnancy a practice still continued today.9 Appearanceedit In Egyptian art Min is depicted as an anthropomorphic male deity with a masculine body covered in shrouds wearing a crown with feathers and often holding his erect penis in his left hand and a flail referring to his authority or rather that of the Pharaohs in his upward facing right hand. Around his forehead Min wears a red ribbon that trails to the ground claimed by some to represent sexual energy. The legs are bandaged because of his chthonic force in the same manner as Ptah and Osiris.7 His skin was usually painted black which symbolized the fertile soil of the Nile.111213 Familyedit In Hymn to Min it is said Min Lord of the Processions God of the High Plumes Son of Osiris and Isis Venerated in Ipu... Mins wives were Iabet and Repyt Repit. Isis is the mother of Min as well as his wife.14 Ejaculation legendedit There have been controversial suggestions by authors such as British journalist Jonathan Margolis that the pharaoh was expected to demonstrate as part of a Min festival that he could ejaculateand thus ensure the annual flooding of the Nile.15 No hard evidence of this exists according to Egyptologists Kara Cooney professor of ancient Egyptian art and architecture at UCLA and her colleague Jonathan Winnerman. This myth may have originated from a misinterpretation of a different festival.16 See alsoedit List of Egyptian deities Referencesedit  Allen James 2014. Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs 
3 rd ed.. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. p. 493. ISBN 9781107663282.  a b Min. Encyclopdia Britannica. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 2008. Retrieved 20080327.  Wilkinson Richard H. 2003. The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p. 116  Alan. Lothian 2012. Ancient Egypts myths and beliefs. Rosen Pub. ISBN 9781448859948. OCLC 748941784.  a b Frankfort Henry 1978. Kingship and the Gods A Study of Ancient Near Eastern Religion as the Integration of Society and Nature. University of Chicago Press. pp. 187189. ISBN 9780226260112.  Wilkinson Richard H. 2003. The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 93. Retrieved 9 October 2022.  a b c Christiane ZivieCoche 2004. Gods and men in Egypt 3000 BCE to 395 CE. Ithaca NY Cornell Univ. Press. pp. 1718. ISBN 9780801441653. OCLC 845667204.  Manchip White J. E. 2013. Ancient Egypt Its Culture and History. Dover Publications. ISBN 9780486225487. OCLC 868271431.cite book CS1 maint multiple names authors list link  a b c d e f Najovits Simson R. 2004. Egypt trunk of the tree a modern survey of an ancient land. Algora Pub. pp. 68 93. ISBN 9780875862224. OCLC 51647593.  Festivals in the ancient Egyptian calendar. University College London. Retrieved 20170515.  Orlin Eric 20151119. Routledge Encyclopedia of Ancient Mediterranean Religions. Routledge. ISBN 9781134625529.  Power Mick 20120106. Adieu to God Why Psychology Leads to Atheism. John Wiley  Sons. ISBN 9781119979951.  Sabbahy Lisa K. 20190424. All Things Ancient Egypt An Encyclopedia of the Ancient Egyptian World 2 volumes. ABCCLIO. ISBN 9781440855139.  Bagnall Director of the Institute for the Study of the Ancient World Roger S. 2004. Egypt from Alexander to the Early Christians An Archaeological and Historical Guide. Getty Publications. ISBN 9780892367962.  O  the intimate history of the orgasm 2004 by Margolis Jonathan p. 134. He seems to be based on an earlier collection of unusual sex practices.  Egyptian pharaohs didnt masturbate into Nile. Further readingedit McFarlane Ann. 1995. The God Min to the End of the Old Kingdom. Australian Center for Egyptology. ISBN 9780856686788. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Min god. Site on Min with some pictures Archived 20150120 at the Wayback Machine v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aati Aker Akhty Amenhotep son of Hapu Amesemi Ammit Amheh AmuAa Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata BaPef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun DionysusOsiris F Four sons of Horus G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hauron Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemusek Imentet Imhotep Ipy Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit KhentiAmentiu Khentikheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu KotharwaKhasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen MehetWeret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Perit Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qedher Qetesh R Ra RaetTawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt TaBitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadjwer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Wassceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal Authority control databases National Germany Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMingodoldid1218647753 Categories Egyptian gods Fertility gods Harvest deities Priapists Love and lust deities Love and lust gods Epithets of AmunRa Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 maint multiple names authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with GND identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 12 April 2024 at 2330 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width