Qift - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History Toggle History subsection 
1.1 Pharaonic Period 
1.2 GrecoRoman and Byzantine Periods 
1.3 Muslim Period 
2 Archaeology Toggle Archaeology subsection 
2.1 Northern temple 
2.2 Middle temple 
2.3 Southern temple 
2.4 Temple of Claudius at ElQala 
3 Ecclesiastical history Toggle Ecclesiastical history subsection 
3.1 Titular see 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Bibliography 
7 Sources and external links Toggle the table of contents Qift 28 languages   Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano   Nederlands Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Simple English Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska    Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 2559
44 N 3248
57 E  
25.9 95
56 N 
32.8 15
83 E  
25.9 9556 
32.8 1583 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Town in Egypt Keft redirects here. For the villages in Iran see Keft Iran. City in Qena Governorate Egypt Qift  City Qift Location in Egypt Coordinates 2559
44 N 3248
57 E  
25.9 95
56 N 
32.8 15
83 E  
25.9 9556 
32.8 1583 Country Egypt Governorate Qena Governorate Area 1  Total 
43.5  sq mi 1
12.6  km2 Population 20211  Total 157383  Density 36
00 sq mi 14
00 km2 Time zone UTC2 EST Qift Egyptian Arabic  eft Coptic  Keft or Kebto Egyptian Gebtu Ancient Greek  Coptos  Koptos Roman Justinianopolis is a city in the Qena Governorate of Egypt about 43 km 27 mi north of Luxor situated a little south of latitude 26 north on the east bank of the Nile. In ancient times its proximity to the Red Sea made it an important trading emporium between India Punt Arabia Felix and the North.2 It was important for nearby gold and quartzite mines in the Eastern Desert and as a starting point for expeditions to Punt in modern Somalia. Historyedit Pharaonic Periodedit or gbtjw34 in hieroglyphs Limestone lintel of Hesy Hesi the Kings acquaintance. Old Kingdom 
3 rd to 
4 th Dynasties. From Koptos Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London In ancient Egypt Qift known then as Gebtu was an important center for administration religion and commerce being the chief city of the fifth Upper Egyptian nome of Haraw Two Hawks. From Qift and Qus trading expeditions heading for the Red Sea and many mining expeditions into the Eastern Desert left the Nile Valley. Gebtu was at the startingpoint of the two great caravan routes leading to the coast of the Red Sea the one toward the port Tou Myoshormos or Myos Hormos the other more southerly toward the port of Shashirt Berenice. Under the native pharaohs the whole trade of southern Egypt with the Red Sea passed over these two roads under the Ptolemies as well as in Roman and Byzantine times merchants followed the same roads for purposes of barter at the coasts of Zanzibar and in Southern Arabia India and the Far East. MinAmenkaMutef Gebtu male fertility deity  Louvre Gebtu was the most important religious center in the area. Its principal male deity was Min a skygod whose symbol was a thunderbolt.5 He became a male fertility deity6 and also was regarded as the male deity of the desert region to the east. Isis nursing her infant son  Louvre His cult rose to prominence in the Middle Kingdom. At that time he became associated with Horus as the deity MinHorus. Later he was fused with Amen in the deity MinAmenkaMutef as MinAmenbull of his mother HathorIsis. Isis HathorIsis and her infant Horus were the deities connected with Gebtu named Coptos during the GrecoRoman period probably from the reinterpretation of the Two Hawks of the Nome Haraw standard as Min and Horus. Gebtu once politically important especially under the Eleventh Dynasty was overshadowed by Thebes. GrecoRoman and Byzantine Periodsedit The town was of importance in Hellenistic times when it was the terminus of a caravan route to Berenice on the Red Sea. It was built up by Augustus fell to the Blemmyes in the 
3 rd cent. AD and was almost destroyed by Diocletian in AD 2
92.7  It recuperated its prominence under the Antonines it was the base camp of Legio III Cyrenaica or at least one of its subunits. It rebelled but soon was captured in 292 by Diocletian after a long siege and the original city got heavily damaged. It was then reconstructed as a Roman City with many fortifications and Roman camps. In the 
6 th century Qift was renamed Justinianopolis like several other cities after the Byzantine emperor Justinian I. The presentday village of Qift is on the site. The epic poet Christodorus was from the city. Muslim Periodedit Under the caliphs and the sultans in the Islamic era Qift was a chief city of Upper Egypt and a Shiite waqf of the Ashraf Alids. In the 
12 th
13 th century the geographer Yaqut alHamawi wrote of Qifts commerce with India and its surrounding orchards. Several generations of qadi highofficials of the Ayubids derived their family nisba surname AlQifti from the territory. The celebrated biographer alQifti was born here in 1172 where he received an early education.2 In 1176 the Copts revolted against the rule of AlAdil I the brother of Saladin. He forcefully put down the revolt by hanging 3000 Copts from trees around the city. In the 
13 th century numerous monasteries continued in operation around the city. However when the Ottomans who ruled over Egypt leveled much of the medieval town in the 
16 th century its former significance was never regained and by the early 
20 th century its population stood at just 89
34.2 8 Archaeologyedit Storage jar with blue lotus flower decorations. Ibex or gazelles head peeking out from vegetation. 
18 th Dynasty. From Koptos Qift Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London Remains of three temple groups surrounded by an enclosure wall were located during the excavations of W. M. Flinders Petrie in 18931894 and later by Raymond Weill and Adolphe Joseph Reinach in 19101911. Qift was the focus of an American archaeological project from 1987 to 1992 and an Australian one between 2000 and 2003. Northern templeedit The undecorated northern temple of Min and Isis9 dates to the Ptolemaic period.10 Earlier structures on the site date back to the Middle Kingdom with significant work during the New Kingdom reign of Tuthmosis III. The temple was rebuilt during the Ptolemaic Period.1011 The later work has been attributed to an official named Sennuushepsi on behalf of Ptolemy II Philadelphus ruling from 281 BC to 246 BC. This northern temple has some later additions by Ptolemy IV Philopator ruling from 221205 BC.12 He was the son of Ptolemy III and Berenice II of Egypt and was the fourth pharaoh of the Ptolemaic Egypt when the decline of the Ptolemaic kingdom began. More additions were added by JulioClaudian emperors of Rome Caligula and Nero.910 The second pylon still carries the dedication text of Nero and the cartouche of Caligula appears on the north end of this structure.11 In the court of the temple a headdress of a statue of Arsinoe II the wife of Ptolemy II Philadelphus was found. A chapel from the Saite period stands in the court. The remains of this chapel of Osiris erected by Amasis II of the 
26 th Dynasty also were found near the northern temple.10 It was built by AhmosesiNeith.1112 Scenes on the facade of the temple show the deified king Ptolemy I Soter leaving a palace while other items such as a triad and a stela date to the time of Ramesses II.11 Bronze knife blade inscribed with cartouche of Thutmose III Beloved of Min of Koptos. 
18 th Dynasty. Probably foundation deposit no.1 Temple of Min Koptos Egypt. Petrie Museum This temple stands on the site of earlier Ancient Egyptian temple structures.9 Foundation deposits point to a temple of Thutmose III of the 
18 th Dynasty.11 Another temple belonged to Amenemhat I and his son Senusret I both of the 
12 th Dynasty. Senusret I is shown receiving life from Bubastis and Nekhbet.11 Within this temple a decree from the 
17 th Dynasty ruler Nubkheperre Intef was found by the East doorway. The decree describes how Nubkheperre Intef deposed a man named Teti.911 Middle templeedit Limestone slab showing the Nile flood god Hapy. 
12 th Dynasty. From the foundations of the temple of Thutmose III Koptos Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London The middle temple dates back to the time of Thutmose III of the 
18 th Dynasty. The temple was later rebuilt by Ptolemy II Philadelphus and restored by the Roman emperor Claudius.11 At the site of the later middle temple built during the Ptolemaic kingdom blocks of an earlier structure by Senusret I and a gate of Thutmose III with additions probably made by Osorkon II of the 
22 nd Dynasty were found. This later middle temple was built during the Ptolemaic kingdom by Ptolemy II Philadelphus with minor additions by members of the JulioClaudian Dynasty of Rome Caligula Claudius and Trajan.11 The foundations contained objects from the Old Kingdom and the First Intermediate Period. Stelae were found depicting Pepi I and his mother Queen Iput before the god Min two decrees and fragments of others by Pepi II. A First Intermediate Period decree regarding offerings to a statue of Pepi II was found. The stele mentions the overseer of the prophets named Idi. Three decrees of Neferkauhor two of which were addressed to a Vizier and are now in the Cairo Museum.11 Southern templeedit The southern temple was likely dedicated to Geb At the site of the southern temple are the gates of Nectanebo II of the 
30 th Dynasty1112 who was the last native king of Egypt. He was placed on the throne by a Spartan king and lost a conflict with the Persians who then overtook Egypt. Other structures found at the site include a set of stelae now known as the Coptos Decrees. These stelae date to the Sixth and Seventh dynasties with copies of royal decrees from the pharaohs concerning the temple and its personnel. The name by which the stelae are known reflects the much later Greek name for the city Coptos or Koptos however. A chapel of Ptolemaic dynasty pharaoh Cleopatra VII and her son Ptolemy XV Caesarion has been found at the site as well.1112 These rulers of Ancient Egypt for six hundred years were not native but of Macedonian Greek origin the Macedonians had begun the merging of Greek and Near Eastern culture known as the Hellenistic Culture under Alexander the Great. Without many changes however they adopted the culture and religious practices of the country they occupied. Cleopatra even learned the ancient Egyptian language which never had been used by these rulers. The Greeks sought to find parallels to their own religious beliefs and would describe the Egyptian deities as related to their own. Built even later after the conquest by the Romans in 30 AD gates associated with the Roman emperors Caligula and Claudius are documented at the site.11 The Romans also continued the religious traditions of Ancient Egypt adopting some completely and drawing parallels similar to the Greek rulers for others. Temple of Claudius at ElQalaedit Northeast of Qift at the modern village of ElQala the Roman emperor Claudius also built a small temple and dedicated it to Min Isis and Horus.1011 The Horus name of the Roman emperor Tiberius emperor 1437 A.D. is shown on two columns in the sanctuary. In the same sanctuary Claudius is shown before Isis. In the south chapel the emperor offers to Hathor while on the exterior he is shown offering to the united emblems of Upper and Lower Egypt.11 Ecclesiastical historyedit This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. December 2017 Learn how and when to remove this message This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedias inclusion policy. December 2017 Learn how and when to remove this message The Christian city was still important enough to become a bishopric suffragan of Ptolemais in the Late Roman province Thebais Secunda. Five bishops are known Le Quien II 607 Theodorus a partisan of Meletius Phoebammon in 431 Sabinus in 451 Vincent author of the Canonical Solutions preserved in an Arabic translation and highly esteemed by the Copts Moyses who wrote the panegyric of Vincent. It faded under Islamic rule no later than the Ottoman ruin of the city. Titular seeedit The diocese was nominally restored as a Latin Catholic titular bishopric initially under the name Coptos which was changed in 1925 to Coptus. It is vacant since decades having had the following incumbents both of the lowest episcopal rank Francis Hennemann Pallottines S.A.C. 19
13.0 
7.1 6  19
51.0 
1.1 7 Luis Alfredo Carvajal Rosales 19
55.0 
7.2 8  19
67.0 
2.1 7. See alsoedit List of cities and towns in Egypt Wadi Hammamat Referencesedit Egypt portal  a b Qif Markaz Egypt  Population Statistics Charts Map and Location. www.citypopulation.de. Retrieved 17 March 2023.  a b c Encyclopedia of Islam Dictionary of the Geography Ethnography  Biography of the Muhammadan Peoples vol. 2 EK E.J. Brill p. 1004  Wallis Budge E. A. 1920. An Egyptian hieroglyphic dictionary with an index of English words king list and geological list with indexes list of hieroglyphic characters coptic and semitic alphabets etc. Vol II. John Murray. p. 1044.  M. Vygus. Middle Egyptian dictionary p. 2366  Min. egyptartsite.com.  Egypt Min God of Fertility Power and the Eastern Desert. touregypt.net.  Qift city  Baedeker Egypt  a b c d Spencer Margaret Murray Egyptian Temples Routledge 2013 retrieved via Google Books.  a b c d e Wilkinson Richard H. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt Thames and Hudson 2000 pp 151152 ISBN 0500051003  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Porter Bertha and Moss Rosalind. Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Egyptian Hieroglyphic Texts Reliefs and Paintings V Upper Egypt Sites Volume 5. Griffith Institute. 2004.  a b c d Margaret Bunson Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt Infobase Publishing 2009 pg 207 Bibliographyedit Breasted James Henry General Index geographical under Coptos Egypt Kiepert Heinrich 1878 Lehrbuch der alten Geographie Berlin Columbia University Press p. 202 Ab li the Armenian 1895 Evetts B. T. A. ed. Churches  Monasteries of Egypt Anecdota Oxoniensia Semitic Series 7 translated by Evetts Basil Thomas Alfred Oxford Clarendon Press Yaqb B.G.A. vol. vii p. 333 Ibn alFaqh B.G.A. vol. 73 Mehren 1874 Manuel de la cosmographie de Moyenge Copenhague pp. 325 3
28 citation CS1 maint location missing publisher link alMaqrz Wiet ed. Mawi M. I. F. A. O. xxx ibid. vol. xxxiii ibid. vol. xlvi Ibn Duqmq 1893 Vollers ed. K. alIntir vol. ii Cairo p. 
32 citation CS1 maint location missing publisher link ibid. p. 33 Idrs Muhammad Gographie ddrisi vol. i translated by Jaubert Pierre Amde Ab lFid Reinaud de Slane eds. Kitb Takwm alBuldn p. 210 Yqt Wstenfeld ed. Mujam alBuldan vol. iv p. 152 Ali Basha Mubrak 1889 alKhitat alTawfiqiyya alJadida vol. xiv Blk p. 1
04 citation CS1 maint location missing publisher link ibid. p. 105 Sources and external linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Qift. Home Page The Qift Regional Expedition 31 July 2003 archived from the original on 9 April 2005 retrieved 28 June 2009 GigaCatholic with titular incumbent biography links This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Herbermann Charles ed. 1913. Coptos. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York Robert Appleton Company. v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Cities and towns of Egypt Cairo Governorate Cairo Giza Governorate Giza 
6 th of October City Sheikh Zayed City El Hawamdeya El Badrashein El Saff Atfih El Ayyat Bawiti Manshiyat al Qanater Awsim Kerdasa Abu El Numrus Qalyubia Governorate Benha Qalyub Shubra El Kheima El Qanater El Khayreya Khanka Kafr Shukr Toukh Qaha Obour City Khusus Shibin El Qanater Saryaqos El Kulzom Alexandria Governorate Alexandria Borg El Arab New Borg El Arab Beheira Governorate Damanhur Kafr El Dawwar Rosetta Edku Abu El Matamir Abu Hummus El Delengat El Mahmoudiyah El Rahmaniya Itay El Barud Hosh Issa Shubra Khit Koum Hamada Badr Wadi El Natrun New Nubariya Matrouh Governorate Mersa Matruh El Hamam El Alamein El Dabaa El Negaila Sidi Barrani Sallum Siwa Oasis Damietta Governorate Damietta New Damietta Ras El Bar Faraskur Kafr Saad El Zarqa Assarw Arrawda Kafr El Battikh Ezbet El Borg Mit Abu Ghaleb Dakahlia Governorate Mansoura Talkha Mit Ghamr Dekernes Aga Minyat AnNasr El Senbellawein El Kurdi Bani Ebaid El Manzala Temay El Amdeed El Gammalia Sherbin El Matareya Dakahlia Belqas Mit Salsil Gamasa Mahallat Damana Nabaruh Kafr El Sheikh Governorate Kafr El Sheikh Desouk Fuwwah Metoubes Baltim El Hamool Biyala El Reyad Sidi Salem Qallin Sidi Ghazi Borg El Burulus Gharbia Governorate Tanta El Mahalla El Kubra Kafr AzZayyat Zefta El Santa Qutur Basyoun Sebennytos Monufia Governorate Shibin El Kom Sadat city Menouf Sirs AlLayyan Ashmoun El Bagour Quesna Birket El Sab Tala Shuhada Sharqia Governorate Zagazig 
10 th of Ramadan city Minya El Qamh Bilbeis Mashtool El Souk AlQinayat Abu Hammad El Qurein Hihya Abu Kebir Faqous El Salheya El Gedida El Ibrahimiya Diyarb Negm Kafr Saqr Awlad Saqr El Husseiniya Tanis Minshat Abu Omar Qantir Port Said Governorate Port Said Port Fuad Ismailia Governorate Ismailia Fayed El Qantara Tell El Kebir Abu Suwir Kassassin Suez Governorate Suez North Sinai Governorate Arish Sheikh Zuweid Rafah Bir alAbd El Hasana Nekhel South Sinai Governorate El Tor Sharm El Sheikh Dahab Nuweiba Taba Saint Catherine Abou Redis Abu Zenima Ras Sedr Beni Suef Governorate Beni Suef New Beni Suef Al Wasta Nasser Heracleopolis Magna Biba Sumusta El Fashn Faiyum Governorate Faiyum New Faiyum Tamiya Sinnuris Itsa Ibsheway Yousef El Seddik Minya Governorate Minya New Minya El Idwa Maghagha Beni Mazar Matai Samalut Mallawi Dir Mawas Aba alWaqf Dir Mawas Dalga Bahnasa Idmo Tuna elGebel Al Madinah Al Fikriyyah Asyut Governorate Asyut New Asyut Dairut Dayrut alSharif Manfalut El Quseyya Abnub Abu Tig El Ghanayem Sahel Selim El Badari Sidfa Manqabad Musha New Valley Governorate El Kharga Baris Mut Farafra Balat Abu Minqar Red Sea Governorate Hurghada Ras Ghareb Safaga El Qoseir Marsa Alam Shalateen Halayeb Sohag Governorate Sohag New Sohag Akhmim New Akhmim El Balyana El Maragha Ptolemais Hermiou Dar El Salam Girga West Juhayna Saqultah Tima Tahta Qena Governorate Qena New Qena Abu Tesht Nag Hammadi Dishna El Waqf Qift Naqada Qus Farshut Shaarani Luxor Governorate Luxor New Luxor New Thebes Zainiya Bayadiya Kurna Armant ElTod Esna Medamud Aswan Governorate Aswan New Aswan Daraw Kom Ombo Nasr AlNuba Kalabsha Edfu Radisia Busylia Sebaiya Abu Simbel Capital cities are in bold font. 2559
44 N 3248
57 E  
25.9 95
56 N 
32.8 15
83 E  
25.9 9556 
32.8 1583 Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleQiftoldid1215548864 Categories Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Egypt Catholic titular sees in Africa Suppressed Roman Catholic dioceses Roman fortifications in Egypt Populated places in Qena Governorate Former populated places in Egypt Roman fortified camps in Egypt Blemmyes Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Egyptian Arabiclanguage text Pages with Egyptian Arabic IPA Articles containing Copticlanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from December 2017 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2017 All articles with style issues CS1 maint location missing publisher Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Pleiades identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 25 March 2024 at 2008 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width