Neferkauhor - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations on king lists 
2 The decrees of Neferkauhor 
3 Other attestations 
4 See also 
5 References Toggle the table of contents Neferkauhor 22 languages  etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Nederlands Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Neferkauhor Neferkawhor Chuwihapi Chui... Khuihapy Kapuibi The cartouche of Neferkauhor on the Abydos King List. Pharaoh Reign 2 years 1 month and 1 day Predecessor Neferkaure II Successor Neferirkare Royal titulary Horus name Netjerbaw Nrb
3 w Divine of Bas Prenomen Praenomen Neferkauhor Nfrk.wr Perfect are the Kas of Horus Variant1 Nomen Khuwihapi wwpw Hapi protects me2 Variant1 Pu...hapi Pw...pw Children Nebet Nebyet married to Shemay Dynasty Eighth Dynasty Neferkauhor Khuwihapi was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the Eighth Dynasty during the early First Intermediate Period 21812055 BC at a time when Egypt was possibly divided between several polities. Neferkauhor was the sixteenth and penultimate3 king of the Eighth Dynasty and as such would have ruled over the Memphite region.45 Neferkauhor reigned for little over 2 years6 and is one of the best attested kings of this period with eight of his decrees surviving in fragmentary condition to this day.7 Attestations on king listsedit Neferkauhor is listed on entry 55 of the Abydos King List a king list redacted during the reign of Seti I some 900 years after Neferkauhors lifetime.5 He is believed to have been listed on the Turin Canon as well even though his name is lost in a lacuna affecting column 5 row 12 of the document following Kim Ryholts reconstruction.56 The duration of his reign is however preserved and given as 2 years 1 month and 1 day.6 The decrees of Neferkauhoredit See also Coptos Decrees A total of eight5 different decrees found in the temple of Min at Coptos are attributed to Neferkauhor and survive to this day in fragmentary condition.8 Four of these decrees inscribed on limestone slabs were given in 1914 by the philanthropist Edward Harkness to the Metropolitan Museum of Art where there are now on display in Gallery 1
03.9  Seven out of the eight decrees were issued on a single day5 of the first year of reign of Neferkauhor perhaps on the day of his accession to the throne.7 The year in question is given the name of Year of Uniting the Two Lands. In the first decree Neferkauhor bestows titles to his eldest daughter Nebyet wife of a vizier named Shemay. He attributes her a bodyguard the commandant of soldiers Khrodny also read Kharedni10 and orders the construction of a sacred barque for a god called TwoPowers perhaps the syncretized god HorusMin.710 The second and best preserved of the decrees concerns the appointment of Shemays son Idy to the post of governor of Upper Egypt ruling over the seven southernmost nomes from Elephantine to Diospolis Parva17 The Horus Netjerbau. Sealed in the presence of the king himself in the Month 2 of Peret Day 20. Royal decree to the count the overseer of priests Idy you are appointed count governor of Upper Egypt overseer of priests in this same Upper Egypt which is under your supervision southward to Nubia northward to the Sistrum nome functioning as count overseer of priests chief of the rulers of towns who are under your supervision in place of your father the father of the god beloved of the god the hereditary prince mayor of the pyramid city chief justice vizier keeper of the kings archives count governor of Upper Egypt overseer of priests Shemay. No one shall have rightfull claim against it... Reunited Coptos decrees P and Q addressed to Idy and his brother. Metropolitan Museum of Art New York Acc. No. 

14.7.1 2 The third and fourth decrees are partially preserved on a single fragment. They record Neferkauhor giving Idys brother a post in the temple of Min and possibly also informing Idy about it.7 This last decree records why the decrees were found in the temple of Min17 My majesty commands you to post the words of this decree at the gateway of the temple of Min of Coptos forever and ever. There is sent the sole companion Hemys son Intef concerning it. Sealed in the presence of the king himself in the Year of Uniting the Two Lands Month 2 of Peret Day 20. The remaining decrees concern the appointment of mortuary priests to the chapels of Nebyet and Shemay as well as ordering inventories at the temple of Min.5 Other attestationsedit Beyond the decrees Neferkauhor is also attested by two inscriptions on a wall in Shemays tomb. They are dated to the first year of his reign Month 4 of Shemu Day 
2.1 1 The inscriptions report the bringing of stone from the Wadi Hammamat Coptos is the starting point for expeditions to this Wadi. The inscriptions are partly destroyed but seem to mention that the work was done within 19 days. From the Wadi Hammamat are known three rock inscriptions reporting the bringing of a stone. One of the texts is dated under year one of an unnamed king. In two of the inscriptions an Idy is also mentioned. If this Idy is identical to the one known from the decrees the inscriptions also refer to this expedition under the king.12 See alsoedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Neferkauhor. List of pharaohs Referencesedit  a b c d Kurt Sethe Urkunden des Alten Reichs  Urkunden des gyptischen Altertums. Abteilung 1. 1. Band 4. Heft. 2. augmented edition Hinrichssche Buchhandlung Leipzig 1933 see p. 297299 available online.  Translation after Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 p. 175.  Jrgen von Beckerath The Date of the End of the Old Kingdom Journal of Near Eastern Studies 21 1962 p.143  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Mnchner gyptologische Studien Heft 49 Mainz  P. von Zabern 1999 ISBN 3805325916 available online Archived 20151222 at the Wayback Machine see p. 68  a b c d e f Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 271272  a b c Kim Ryholt The Late Old Kingdom in the Turin Kinglist and the Identity of Nitocris Zeitschrift fr gyptische 127 2000 p. 99  a b c d e f William C. Hayes The Scepter of Egypt A Background for the Study of the Egyptian Antiquities in The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Vol. 1 From the Earliest Times to the End of the Middle Kingdom  MetPublications 1978 pp.136138 available online  William C. Hayes Royal Decrees from the Temple of Min at Coptos JEA 321946 pp. 323.  The fragments of the decrees on the catalog of the MET fragment 1 2 and 3.  a b Margaret Bunson Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt Infobase Publishing 2009 ISBN 9781438109978 available online see p. 268 and p. 284 for Kharedni.  Nigel C. Strudwick Texts from the Pyramid Age Writings from the Ancient World Ronald J. Leprohon ed. Society of Biblical Literature 2005 ISBN 9781589831384 available online see pp.345347  Maha Farid Mostafa The Mastaba of SmAj at Naga Kom elKoffar Qift Vol. I Cairo 2014 ISBN 9789776420045 p. 88111 Preceded by Neferkaure II Pharaoh of Egypt Eighth Dynasty Succeeded by Neferirkare v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNeferkauhoroldid1184144153 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 November 2023 at 1618 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width