Neferirkare - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations 
2 Identity 
3 Reign 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Neferirkare 25 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Nederlands  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh For the better known pharaoh of the 
5 th Dynasty see Neferirkare Kakai. Neferirkare Neferirkare II The cartouche of Neferirkare on the Abydos King List. Pharaoh Reign 1 year and 6 months c. 2160 BC Predecessor Neferkauhor Successor uncertain possibly Meryibre Khety Royal titulary Horus name Demedjibtawy Dmibt
3 wy He who unifies the heart of the two lands Prenomen Praenomen Neferirkare Nfrjrj k3 R What the Ka of Ra does is perfect Nomen Pepy Burial unknown Dynasty Eighth Dynasty Neferirkare sometimes referred to as Neferirkare II because of Neferirkare Kakai was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the Eighth Dynasty during the early First Intermediate Period 21812055 BC. According to the egyptologists Kim Ryholt Jrgen von Beckerath and Darrell Baker he was the 
17 th and final king of the Eighth Dynasty.123 Many scholars consider Neferirkare to have been the last pharaoh of the Old Kingdom which came to an end with the 
8 th Dynasty.4 Attestationsedit Neferirkare IIs name is clearly attested on the 
56 th entry of the Abydos King List a king list which was redacted some 900 years after the First Intermediate Period during the reign of Seti I.2 The latest reconstruction of the Turin canon another king list compiled in the Ramesside era indicates that Neferirkare II is also attested there on column 5 line 
13.1 2 Identityedit Farouk Goma William C. Hayes and Baker identify Neferirkare II with the horus name Demedjibtawy Dmibt
3 wy He who unifies the heart of the two lands appearing on a single decree the Coptos Decree R now in the Egyptian Museum JE 41894. The decree concerns the temple of Min at Coptos exempting it from dues and duties.56789 This identification is rejected by Jrgen von Beckerath.10 Another proposed identification concerns the prenomen Wadjkare W
3 k
3 R Flourishing is the Ka of Ra which also appears on the Coptos Decree R.11 Kurt Heinrich Sethe Goma Hayes and Baker see Wadjkare as distinct from Demedjibtawy but von Beckerath believes that Wadjkare may have been the prenomen of Neferkare II and the same person as Demedjibtawy.3 At the opposite Goma and Hayes equate Wadjkare with an obscure ruler named HorKhabaw.5 Alternatively Hans Goedicke proposed that Wadjkare is the predecessor of Demedjibtawy and places both rulers chronologically into the 
9 th Dynasty.12 Thomas Schneider leaves the problem open and relates Wadjkare equally to either Neferkare II or Neferirkare II without further reference to Demedjibtawy.13 Finally both Demedjibtawy and Wadjkare are not known from any other contemporary attestation than the decree and unless they are to be identified with Neferirkare II or Neferkare II they are also absent from both the Abydos king list and the Turin canon. In 2014 Maha Farid Mostafa published an inscription found in the tomb of Shemay. The inscription belongs most likely to Idy a son of Shemay albeit Idys name is not preserved. The text is dated under a king with the name Pepy and with a throne name Neferka destroyedRa. Maha Farid Mostafa reconstructed that throne name to Neferirkare. The inscription dates for sure to the 
8 th Dynasty. If this reconstruction is correct Neferirkare is most likely identical with Demedjibtawy. Idy is mentioned on one of the Coptos decrees together with Demedjibtawy .14 Reignedit The Turin canon credits Neferirkare II with a year and half of reign.110 Both the Turin canon and the Abydos king list record Neferirkare II as the last ruler of the combined 
7 th
8 th.10 Neferirkare was possibly overthrown by the first king of the succeeding Herakleopolitan 
9 th Dynasty Meryibre Khety. Alternatively the Egyptian state may have completely collapsed with the onset of low Nile floods mass famine and chaos which engulfed Egypt at the start of the First Intermediate Period. Referencesedit  a b c Kim Ryholt The Late Old Kingdom in the Turin Kinglist and the Identity of Nitocris Zeitschrift fr gyptische 127 2000 p. 99  a b c Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 260  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Mnchner gyptologische Studien Heft 49 Mainz  P. von Zabern 1999 ISBN 3805325916 available online Archived 20151222 at the Wayback Machine see p. 68  Renate MuellerWollermann End of the Old Kingdom UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology 2014 available online.  a b Farouk Goma gypten whrend der Ersten Zwischenzeit Beihefte zum Tbinger Atlas des Vorderen Orients. Reihe B Geisteswissenschaften. vol. 27. Reichert Wiesbaden 1980 ISBN 3882260416 p. 59.  William C. Hayes Royal Decrees from the Temple of Min at Coptus JEA vol. 32 1946.  Coptos decree R translation available online Archived 20180726 at the Wayback Machine after M. A. Moret Chartes dimmunit dans lAncien Empire gyptien in Journal Asiatique 1917 Sr. 
11 T.10 Paris  Nigel Strudwick Texts from the Pyramid Age Brill 2005 ISBN 9004130489  William C. Hayes The Scepter of Egypt A Background for the Study of the Egyptian Antiquities in The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Vol. 1 From the Earliest Times to the End of the Middle Kingdom p. 134 available online  a b c Jrgen von Beckerath The Date of the End of the Old Kingdom of Egypt JNES 21 1962 p. 143  Margaret Bunson Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Infobase Publishing 2009 ISBN 1438109970 p. 429 available online  Hans Goedicke Knigliche Dokumente aus dem Alten Reich  gyptologische Abhandlungen Bd. 14. Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1967 p. 215.  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533.  Maha Farid Mostafa The Mastaba of SmAj at Naga Kom elKoffar Qift Vol. I Cairo 2014 ISBN 9789776420045 p. 157161 v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNeferirkareoldid1172151145 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 August 2023 at 0830 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width