File:Nebkaure Khety Petrie.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileNebkaure Khety Petrie.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. NebkaureKhetyPetrie.png 277  343 pixels file size 99 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionNebkaure Khety Petrie.png English Weight stone bearing the cartouche of Nebkaure Khety nesut bit Khety Nebkau ankh djet  Lord of Upper and Lower Egypt Khety Nebkau may he live forever. Red jasper from Tell elRataba in the Nile Delta 
9 th
10 th dynasty First intermediate period. Petrie Museum UC 11782. Date 22 January 2014 112013 Source Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. X n. 
9.2 . Author Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic    Items portrayed in this file depicts File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1037 22 January 2014 277  343 99 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Nebkaure Khety Ninth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on af.wikipedia.org Lys van faraos Usage on am.wikipedia.org   Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on arz.wikipedia.org      Usage on bg.wikipedia.org      Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Jety VI Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Kheti VI.a Usage on fa.wikipedia.org   Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Nebkaour Khety Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Nebkaur Heti Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Nebkaure Khety Usage on it.wikipedia.org Kheti VI Lista dei faraoni Usage on ka.wikipedia.org  Usage on ko.wikipedia.org   Usage on mk.wikipedia.org    Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Cheti V Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org   Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Nebkaure Heti Usage on th.wikipedia.org     Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Nebkaure Khety Usage on www.wikidata.org Q887771 TalkQ37110 Usage on yo.wikipedia.org Nebkaure Akhtoy Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileNebkaureKhetyPetrie.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width