File:Imhotep pharaoh cartouche.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileImhotep pharaoh cartouche.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. Imhoteppharaohcartouche.jpg 102  268 pixels file size 30 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionImhotep pharaoh cartouche.jpg English Drawing of pharoah Imhoteps cartouche from a graffiti in the Wadi Hammamat. Date 1859 Source Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und Aethiopen. Band IV. Page 1
15 h Author Karl Lepsius Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Imhotep pharaoh cartouche Items portrayed in this file depicts pharaoh hieroglyph inception 1859 media type imagejpeg File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 2039 29 May 2023 102  268 30 KB Mrgengar81 Uploaded a work by Karl Lepsius from Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und Aethiopen. Band IV. Page 1
15 h with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Imhotep pharaoh List of pharaohs Ninth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on bg.wikipedia.org      Usage on th.wikipedia.org   Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileImhoteppharaohcartouche.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width