Wahkare Khety - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identity Toggle Identity subsection 
1.1 
9 th Dynasty hypothesis 
1.2 
10 th Dynasty hypothesis 
2 Attestations 
3 References 
4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Wahkare Khety 20 languages  Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais  Bahasa Indonesia  Magyar Nederlands  Simple English Slovenina Suomi Tagalog   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh of the 
9 th Dynasty Wahkare redirects here. Not to be confused with Wahkare Bakenranef. Wahkar Khety Achthos1 Khety III Outer coffin of the steward Nefri on which the cartouches of Wahkare Khety were found Cairo CG 28088 Pharaoh Reign c. 50 years Predecessor possibly Qakare Ibi or Wadjkare if 
9 th Dynasty Neferkare VIII if 
10 th Dynasty Successor uncertain if 
9 th Dynasty Merikare if 
10 th Dynasty Royal titulary Prenomen Praenomen Wahkare Khety W
3 k
3 Rhtjj The ka of Ra is purified the divine ruler Nomen Khety tjj Divine ruler Turin Canon Khety tjj Divine ruler Children Merikare Dynasty 
9 th or 
10 th Dynasty Wahkare Khety was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the 
9 th or 
10 th Dynasty during the First Intermediate Period. Identityedit The identity of Wahkare Khety is controversial. While some scholars believe that he was the founder of the 
9 th Dynasty2 many others place him in the subsequent 
10 th Dynasty.3456 
9 th Dynasty hypothesisedit If Wahkare Khety was the founder of the 
9 th Dynasty he may be identified with the hellenized king Achthos the founder of this dynasty according to Manetho. Manetho reports The first of these kings Achthos behaving more cruel than his predecessors wrought woes for the people of all of Egypt but afterwards he was smitten with madness and killed by a crocodile.17 If this hypothesis is correct Wahkare Khety may have been a Herakleopolitan prince who profited from the weakness of the Memphite rulers of the Eighth Dynasty to seize the throne of Middle and Lower Egypt around 2150 BC. This hypothesis is supported by contemporary inscriptions referring to the northern Herakleopolitan kingdom as the House of Khety8 although that only proves that the founder of the 
9 th Dynasty was a Khety but not necessarily Wahkare Khety. 
10 th Dynasty hypothesisedit Many scholars believe instead that Wahkare Khety was a king of the 
10 th Dynasty identifying him with the Khety who was the alleged author of the famous Teaching for King Merykare thus placing him between Neferkare VIII and Merikare. In this reconstruction Wahkare is the last Herakleopolitan king bearing the name Khety and the cruel Achthos founder of the 
9 th Dynasty is identified with Meryibre Khety and the House of Khety must refer to him instead. From the Instructions it is known that Wahkare Khety in alliance with the nomarchs of Lower Egypt managed to repel the nomad Asiatics who for generations roamed in the Nile Delta. Those nomarchs although recognizing Wahkares authority ruled de facto more or less independently. The expulsion of the Asiatics allowed the establishment of new settlements and defense structures on the northeastern borders as well as the reprise of trades with the Levantine coast.9 Wahkare however warned Merikare not to neglect guarding these borders as the Asiatics still were considered a danger.10 In the south Wahkare and the faithful nomarch of Asyut Tefibi retook the city of Thinis previously captured by the Thebans led by Intef II however the troops of Herakleopolis sacked the sacred necropolis of Thinis a serious crime which was reported by Wahkare himself. This crime caused the immediate reaction of the Thebans who later finally captured the Thinite nomos. After those events Wahkare Khety decided to abandon this bellicose policy and begin a phase of peaceful coexistence with the southern kingdom which endured until part of the reign of his successor Merikare who succeeded the long reign  five decades  of Wahkare.11 Attestationsedit There is no contemporary evidence bearing his name. His cartouches appears on a 
12 th Dynasty wooden coffin inscribed with Coffin Texts and originally made for a steward named Nefri was found in Deir elBersha and now is in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo CG 280
88.1 213 On it Wahkare Khetys name was found once in place of Nefris but it is unknown if the texts were originally inscribed for the king or if they were simply copied later from an earlier source.14 His name is maybe also attested in the Royal canon of Turin.14 Referencesedit  a b William Gillian Waddell Manetho  The Loeb classical library. Bd. 350. Harvard University Press Cambridge Mass. 2004 Reprint ISBN 0674993853 p. 61.  Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen 
2 nd edition Mainz 1999 p. 74.  William C. Hayes in The Cambridge Ancient History vol 1 part 2 1971 2008 Cambridge University Press ISBN 0521077915 p. 996.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Oxford Blackwell Books 1992 p. 14447.  Michael Rice Who is who in Ancient Egypt 1999 2004 Routledge London ISBN 0203443284 p. 7.  Margaret Bunson Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Infobase Publishing 2009 ISBN 1438109970 p. 202.  Margaret Bunson op. cit. p. 355.  Stephan Seidlmayer Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt ISBN 9780192804587 p. 128.  William C. Hayes op. cit. p. 466.  William C. Hayes op. cit. p. 237.  William C. Hayes op. cit. pp. 46667.  Pierre Lacau Sarcophages antrieurs au Nouvel Empire tome II Cairo 1903 pp. 1020.  Alan Gardiner Egypt of the Pharaohs an introduction. Oxford University Press 1961 p. 112  a b Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 p. 172. Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Khety Wahkare. Allen James P. 1976. The Funerary Texts of King Wahkare Akhtoy on a Middle Kingdom Coffin. In Johnson J. H. Wente E. F. eds.. Studies in Honor of George R. Hughes January 12 1977. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization SAOC. Vol. 39. Chicago The Oriental Institute. ISBN 0918986
01 X. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWahkareKhetyoldid1211246813 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs 
21 stcentury BC Pharaohs 
22 ndcentury BC writers 
21 stcentury BC writers Pharaohs of the Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Pharaohs of the Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian writers Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 March 2024 at 1549 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width