Intef the Elder - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Rule 
2 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
2.1 Tomb 
3 References 
4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Intef the Elder 14 languages Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar   Simple English Slovenina  Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Intef the Elder Intef the Great Intefaa Intef born of Iku Intef the Elder seated center on what is perhaps his funerary stele CG 200
09.1  Pharaoh Theban nomarch Reign 
22 nd century BC Successor Mentuhotep I Royal titulary Irypat Hat Intef Irypt 
3 t init.f Hereditary Prince Intef litt. His father brought him Hieroglyphic variant Children possibly Mentuhotep I Mother Ikui2 Burial uncertain possibly a tomb at Dra Abu elNaga Dynasty 
11 th Dynasty Intef whose name is commonly accompanied by epithets such as the Elder the Great  Intefaa or born of Iku was a Theban nomarch during the First Intermediate Period c. 2150 BC and later considered a founding figure of the 
11 th Dynasty which eventually reunified Egypt.3 Ruleedit Intef the Elder was not a pharaoh but rather the nomarch of Thebes c. 2150 BC. As such he would have nominally served either a king of the 
8 th Dynasty2 or one of the Herakleopolitan kings of 
9 th or 
10 th Dynasty.3 Intef the Elder would have controlled the territory from Thebes to Aswan to the south and not farther north than Coptos which was then controlled by another dynasty of nomarchs.3 Intef is believed to be the father of his successor on the Theban throne Mentuhotep I.citation needed Attestationsedit Seated statue dedicated by Senusret I to Intef the Elder here represented as a scribe.4 Intef the Elder was seemingly perceived as a founding figure of the 
11 th Dynasty after his death. For example his name figures in the chapel of royal ancestors no. 13 erected at Karnak by Thutmose III over 600 years after Intefs death.3 In the chapel Intef is given the titles of irypat Hereditary Prince and hatya Count here his name does not appear enclosed by the cartouche which is a pharaonic prerogative.3 Intef the Elder is probably to be identified with the Intefaa born of Iku to whom Senusret I dedicated a seated statue representing Intef as a scribe3 Made by the king of Upper and Lower Egypt Kheperkare as his monument for his father prince Intef the Elder ... born of Iku Intef the Elder was also the object of private cults as shown by the stele of Maati a minor official of Mentuhotep II which is now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art inv. no. 

14.2.7 .5 On his stele Maati asks that prayers be told for Intef the Elder the son of Iku.3 Intef may also be mentioned on a funerary stele found at Dendera but most likely originating from the Theban Necropolis of Dra Abu elNaga.6887 This fragmented stele the two pieces of which are now in Strasbourg inv. no. 345 and in Florence inv. no. 7595 belonged to a minor official also named Intef who was chosen by his namesake lord to attend a meeting of nomarchs in his place.68587 The stele gives Intef the Elder the title of Great overlord of Upper Egypt from which it was deduced that the southernmost districts of Thebes once the stronghold of Ankhtifis family had since been conquered by the ThebanCoptite coalition.6856 The attribution of this stele to Intef the Elder is debated.3 Given the importance of Intef the Elder in the eyes of his successors Alan Gardiner proposed that Intef the Elder was mentioned on the Turin canon in column 5 line 12. This remains conjectural however as this section of the papyrus is completely missing.3 Tombedit Auguste Mariette unearthed a stele of the hereditary prince Intefi at Dra Abu elNaga on the west bank of Thebes and now in the Egyptian Museum CG 20009. The stele gives the titles of Intef and shows that he served an unnamed pharaoh231 An offering which the king gives to Anubis who is upon his mountain who is in the place of embalming Lord of the holy place that he may give to the hereditary prince count great lord of the Theban nome satisfying the king as keeper of the gateway of the south great pillar of him who makes his two lands to live the chief prophet devoted to the great god Intefi. Jrgen von Beckerath believes this stele was Intefs funerary stele originally placed in a chapel near his tomb.2 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Intef the Elder. Referencesedit  a b Flinders Petrie A History of Egypt  vol 1  From the Earliest Times to the XVIth Dynasty 1897 available copyrightfree here p. 126 f. 77  a b c d Jrgen von Beckerath Antef in Wolfgang Helck Eberhard Otto Wolfhart Westendorf editors Lexikon der gyptologie vol. I Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1975 ISBN 3447016701.  a b c d e f g h i j Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 141142  Georges Legrain Statues et statuettes de rois et de particuliers in Catalogue gnral des antiquits gyptiennes du Muse du Caire Le Caire 1906. I available copyrightfree online Archived 20150923 at the Wayback Machine pp. 45 pl. III CG 42005.  Stela of the Gatekeeper Maati. Metropolitan Museum of Art.  a b c Fischer Henry G. 1996. Varia Nova. New York Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 8388.  a b Roccati Alessandro 2000. Una stela di Firenze recentemente ricomposta. In Russo Simona ed.. Atti del V Convegno Nazionale di Egittologia e Papirologia. Firenze 1012 dicembre 1999 in Italian. Florence Istituto Papirologico G. Vitelli. pp. 213215. Further readingedit Morenz Ludwig D. 2003. Lesbarkeit der Macht. Die Stele des Antef Kairo CG 20009 als Monument eines frhthebanischen lokalen Herrschers. Aula Orientalis. 21 229242. Preceded by  Theban nomarch Eleventh Dynasty Succeeded by Mentuhotep I v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleInteftheElderoldid1172151219 Categories Officials of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Nomarchs Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italianlanguage sources it Articles using infobox templates with no data rows All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 August 2023 at 0830 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width