Mentuhotep I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identity 
2 Family 
3 Reign 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Mentuhotep I 34 languages  Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar   Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian nomarch Mentuhotep I1 Montuhotep I Mentuhotepaa Sitting statue of Mentuhotep I from Elephantine now in Cairo Pharaoh Reign c. 2135 BC Predecessor Intef the Elder Successor Intef I Royal titulary Horus name Hor Tepia r.wtp j  Horus the ancestor Nomen Mentuhotepaa mnwtpw3 Mentuhotep the great litt. Montu is content the great2 Alternative form Itnetjeru Mentuhotepaa Merysatetnebetabu Itnrw mnwtpw3 mry st nbt Abw Father of the gods Mentuhotep the great beloved of Satet lady of Abu Consort Queen Neferu I Children Intef I  Intef II  Father possibly Intef the Elder Dynasty 
11 th dynasty Mentuhotep I also Mentuhotepaa i.e. the Great3 may have been a Theban nomarch and independent ruler of Upper Egypt during the early First Intermediate Period. Alternatively Mentuhotep I may be a fictional figure created during the later Eleventh Dynasty which rose to prominence under Intef II and Mentuhotep II playing the role of a founding father. Identityedit Mentuhotep was possibly a local Egyptian nomarch at Thebes during the early first intermediate period ca. 2135 BC. The Karnak king list found in the Festival Hall of Thutmose III preserves in position No. 12 the partial name Men in a royal cartouche distinct from those of Mentuhotep II No. 29 or Mentuhotep III No. 30. The available fragments of the Karnak list do not seem to represent past pharaohs in any chronological order and thus one cannot ascertain if or when this Men pharaoh lived. Many scholars have argued from the list that a Mentuhotep I who might have been merely a Theban nomarch was posthumously given a royal titulary by his successors thus this conjectured personage is referred to conventionally as Mentuhotep I.4567 The fact that no contemporary monument can safely be attributed to a king Mentuhotep I has led some Egyptologists to propose that he is a fictional ancestor and founder of the Eleventh dynasty invented for that purpose during the later part of the dynasty. Karnak king list showing the partial name Men... in a cartouche No. 12. On the base of a statue from the sanctuary of Heqaib on Elephantine a Mentuhotep is referred to as Father of the gods.89 This title probably refers to Mentuhoteps immediate successors Intef I and Intef II who reigned as kings over Upper Egypt. From this title many Egyptologists argued that this Mentuhotep was probably the father of Intef I and II4810 and also that he was never a pharaoh as this title was usually reserved for the nonroyal ancestors of pharaohs.5678 The throne name of Mentuhotep is unknown since he might not have been a king or no subsequent 
11 th Dynasty king bore any throne name until Mentuhotep II it is probable that he never had one. His Horus name Tepia The ancestor was certainly given to him posthumously.11 Familyedit See also Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt family tree Mentuhoteps wife might have been Neferu I and the statue from Heqaib may be interpreted to show that he was the father of Intef I and II. The Karnak king list has apparently one nonroyal personage without cartouche named Intef in position no. 13. This could possibly refer to Intef the elder son of Iku a Theban nomarch loyal to the Herakleopolitan kings in the early first intermediate period. However the kings on the remaining fragments are not listed in chronological order so this is not at all certain. Reignedit As Theban nomarch Mentuhoteps dominion perhaps extended south to the first cataract. Mentuhotep might hypothetically have formed an alliance with the nomarch of Coptos which then brought his successor Intef I to war with the Herakleopolitan kings of the 
10 th Dynasty ruling over Lower Egypt and their powerful nomarch allies in Middle Egypt in particular Ankhtifi. Referencesedit  Annales du Service des Antiquits de lEgypt Le Caire. Nr. 55 1900 p. 178.  Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p72. 2006. ISBN 0500286280  Wolfram Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History Archaeology and Society Duckworth Egyptology London 2006 ISBN 9780715634356 pp. 1011  a b William C. Hayes The Middle Kingdom in Egypt. Internal History from the Rise of the Heracleopolitans to the Death of Ammenemes III. in The Cambridge Ancient History vol. I part 2 Cambridge University Press 1971 ISBN 0 521 077915 p. 476  a b Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Oxford Blackwell Books 1992 p. 143.  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen  Mnchner gyptologische Studien vol 46 Mainz am Rhein Verlag Philipp von Zabern 1999. ISBN 3805323107 pp. 7677.  a b Kim Ryholt The Royal Canon of Turin in Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss and David A. Warburton eds. Ancient Egyptian Chronology Brill LeidenBoston 2006 ISBN 978 90 04 11385 5 p. 30.  a b c Labib Habachi Gods fathers and the role they played in the history of the First Intermediate Period ASAE 55 p. 1
67 ff.  Labib Habachi The Sanctuary of Hequaib Mainz 1985 photos of the statue vol. II pp. 18789.  Louise Gestermann Kontinuitt und Wandel in Politik und Verwaltung des frhen Mittleren Reiches in gypten Wiesbaden 1987 p. 26.  The name is preserved only on an old drawing of mile Prisse dAvennes see Habachi Figure 4. Preceded by As nomarch of Thebes Intef the Elder Pharaoh of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty Succeeded by Intef I v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMentuhotepIoldid1200089204 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs Mentuhotep I Nomarchs People whose existence is disputed Pharaohs of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Ancient Egyptian gods fathers Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers This page was last edited on 28 January 2024 at 1845 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width