Mentuhotep II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
2.1 Early reign 
2.2 Reunification of Egypt 
2.3 Military activities outside Egypt 
2.4 Officials 
2.5 Reorganization of the government 
2.6 Titulary 
3 Monuments Toggle Monuments subsection 
3.1 Abydos 
4 Mortuary temple of Mentuhotep II Toggle Mortuary temple of Mentuhotep II subsection 
4.1 Situation 
4.2 Discovery and excavations 
4.3 Foundational offerings 
4.4 Architecture 

4.4.1 Causeway and courtyard 

4.4.2 Front part of the temple 

4.4.3 Rear part of the temple 
4.5 Royal tomb 
5 Gallery 
6 References 
7 Further reading 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mentuhotep II 43 languages Afrikaans   Azrbaycanca  Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh of the 
11 th Dynasty Mentuhotep II Relief showing Mentuhotep II in front of Montu from his mortuary temple in Deir el Bahri Londres Pharaoh Reign 20602009 BC1 Predecessor Intef III Successor Mentuhotep III Royal titulary Horus name Sematawy Sm
3 t3.wj He who unifies the two lands Nebty name Sematawy Sm
3 t3.wj He who unifies the two lands Golden Horus Biknebu Qashuti Bjknbwq
3 wtj The Golden Falcon lofty in plumes Abydos King List Nebhepetre Nb
3 ptR The Lord of the rudder is Ra Karnak king list Nebhepetre Nb
3 ptR The Lord of the rudder is Ra Turin King List Nebhepetre Nb
3 ptR The Lord of the rudder is Ra 2 Prenomen Praenomen Nebhepetre Nb
3 ptR The Lord of the rudder is Ra3 Nomen Mentuhotep Mnwtp Montu is content4 Consort Tem Neferu II Ashayet Henhenet Kawit Kemsit Sadeh Children Mentuhotep III Mayet Father Intef III Mother Iah Died 2009 BC  Burial mortuary temple at DeirelBahri Dynasty 
11 th Dynasty Mentuhotep II Ancient Egyptian Mnwtp meaning Mentu is satisfied also known under his prenomen Nebhepetre Ancient Egyptian NbptR meaning The Lord of the rudder is Ra was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh the sixth ruler of the Eleventh Dynasty. He is credited with reuniting Egypt thus ending the turbulent First Intermediate Period and becoming the first pharaoh of the Middle Kingdom. He reigned for 51 years according to the Turin King List.5 Mentuhotep II succeeded his father Intef III on the throne and was in turn succeeded by his son Mentuhotep III. Mentuhotep II ascended Egypts throne in the Upper Egyptian city of Thebes during the First Intermediate Period. Egypt was not unified during this time and the Tenth Dynasty rival to Mentuhoteps Eleventh ruled Lower Egypt from Herakleopolis. After the Herakleopolitan kings desecrated the sacred ancient royal necropolis of Abydos in Upper Egypt in the fourteenth year of Mentuhoteps reign Pharaoh Mentuhotep II dispatched his armies north to conquer Lower Egypt. Continuing his father Intef IIIs conquests Mentuhotep succeeded in unifying his country probably shortly before his 
39 th year on the throne.67 Following and in recognition of the unification in regnal year 39 he changed his titulary to Shematawy Ancient Egyptian mt.wj meaning He who unifies the two lands.8 Following the unification Mentuhotep II reformed Egypts government. To reverse the decentralization of power which contributed to the collapse of the Old Kingdom and marked the First Intermediate Period he centralized the state in Thebes to strip nomarchs of some of their power over the regions. Mentuhotep II also created new governmental posts whose occupants were Theban men loyal to him giving the pharaoh more control over his country. Officials from the capital travelled the country regularly to control regional leaders.9 Mentuhotep II was buried at the Theban necropolis of Deir elBahari. His mortuary temple was one of Mentuhotep IIs most ambitious buildingprojects and included several architectural and religious innovations. For example it included terraces and covered walkways around the central structure and it was the first mortuary temple that identified the pharaoh with the god Osiris. His temple inspired several later temples such as those of Hatshepsut and Thutmose III of the Eighteenth Dynasty.9 Some depictions of Mentuhotep II seem to indicate that he suffered from elephantiasis resulting in swollen legs.1011 Familyedit See also Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt family tree Silsileh rock relief depicting a giant king Mentuhotep II on the right Intef III and the treasurer Kheti and on the left queen Iah. Mentuhotep II was the son of Intef III and Intef IIIs wife Iah who may also have been his sister. This lineage is demonstrated by the stele of Henenu Cairo 36346 an official who served under Intef II Intef III and his son which the stele identifies as Horus sankhibt
3 wy1213 Mentuhotep IIs first Horus name. As for Iah she bore the title of mwtnswt Kings mother.14 The parentage of Mentuhotep II is also indirectly confirmed by a relief at Shatt erRigal. Some scholars have suggested that Mentuhotep II was of Nubian origin. Specifically Wildung and Lobban have argued that Egyptian iconography represented Mentuhotep II with pronounced Nubian facial features. Crawford noted that the rulers of the 
11 th dynasty were based in the Theban or southern region of Upper Egypt and had close relations with Nubia.151617 Mentuhotep II had many wives who were buried with him in or close to his mortuary temple18 Tem tm who might have been Mentuhotep IIs chief wife as she bore the titles of mtnswt Kings wife mtnswt mryt.f Kings wife his beloved and wrttsnbwj Great one of the hetessceptre of the two Lords. She gave Mentuhotep II two children one of whom was certainly Mentuhotep III since Tem was also called mwtnswt Kings mother and mwtnswtbjtj Dual kings mother. Apparently she died after her husband and was buried by her son in Mentuhoteps temple.19 Her tomb was discovered in 1859 by Lord Dufferin20 and fully excavated in 1968 by D. Arnold.21 Neferu II The beautiful was called Kings wife and mtnswtmryt.f Kings wife his beloved. She might have been Mentuhotep IIs sister since she also bore the titles of stnswtmswtntt.f Eldest king daughter of his body jrjtpt hereditary princess and mwtnbwt mistress of all women. She was buried in the tomb TT319 of Deir elBahri. Sarcophagus of Kawit photograph by E. Naville 19
07.2 2 Kawit kwj.t was one of Mentuhotep IIs secondary wives. She bore the titles of mtnswt mryt.f Kings wife his beloved and krtnswt Kings embellishment. She was a Priestess of the goddess Hathor. It has been suggested that she was Nubian.2324 She was buried under the terrace of Mentuhotep IIs mortuary temple where E. Naville uncovered her sarcophagus in 1907. Sadeh Ashayet Henhenet and Kemsit were all Mentuhotep IIs secondary wives. They bore the title of mtnswt mryt.f Kings wife his beloved and krtnswtwtit Unique embellishment of the King. They were priestesses of Hathor25 and each of them was buried in a single pit dug under the terrace of Mentuhotep IIs temple.2627 Note that an alternative theory holds that Henhenet was one of Intef IIIs secondary wives possibly the mother of Neferu II. Henhenet might have died in childbirth. Mwyt a fiveyearold girl buried with Mentuhotep IIs secondary wives. She is most likely one of his daughters. Reignedit Mentuhotep II is considered to be the first ruler of the Middle Kingdom of Egypt. The Turin Canon credits him with a reign of 51 years.5 Many Egyptologists have long considered two rock reliefs showing Mentuhotep II towering over smaller figures labeled king Intef to be conclusive evidence that his predecessor Intef III was his own father this is however not entirely certain as these reliefs may have had other propagandistic purposes and there are other difficulties surrounding Mentuhoteps true origin his three namechanges and his frequent attempts to claim descent from various gods.28 Painted sandstone seated statue of Nebhepetre Mentuhotep II Egyptian Museum Cairo. Early reignedit When he ascended the Theban throne Mentuhotep II inherited the vast land conquered by his predecessors from the first cataract in the south to Abydos and Tjebu in the north. Mentuhotep IIs first fourteen years of reign seem to have been peaceful in the Theban region as there are no surviving traces of conflict firmly datable to that period. In fact the general scarcity of testimonies from the early part of Mentuhoteps reign might indicate that he was young when he ascended the throne a hypothesis consistent with his 51 years long reign. Reunification of Egyptedit In the 
14 th year of his reign an uprising occurred in the north. This uprising is most probably connected with the ongoing conflict between Mentuhotep II based in Thebes and the rival 
10 th Dynasty based at Herakleopolis who threatened to invade Upper Egypt. The 
14 th year of Mentuhoteps reign is indeed named Year of the crime of Thinis. This certainly refers to the conquest of the Thinite region by the Herakleopolitan kings who apparently desecrated the sacred ancient royal necropolis of Abydos in the process. Mentuhotep II subsequently dispatched his armies to the north. The famous tomb of the warriors at Deir elBahari discovered in the 19
20 s contained the linenwrapped unmummified bodies of 60 soldiers all killed in battle their shroud bearing Mentuhotep IIs cartouche. Due to its proximity to the Theban royal tombs the tomb of the warriors is believed to be that of heroes who died during the conflict between Mentuhotep II and his foes to the north.29 Merikare the ruler of LowerEgypt at the time may have died during the conflict which further weakened his kingdom and gave Mentuhotep the opportunity to reunite Egypt. The exact date when reunification was achieved is not known but it is assumed to have happened shortly before year 39 of his reign.6 Indeed evidence shows that the process took time maybe due to the general insecurity of the country at the time commoners were buried with weapons the funerary stelae of officials show them holding weapons instead of the usual regalia29 and when Mentuhotep IIs successor sent an expedition to Punt some 20 years after the reunification they still had to clear the Wadi Hammamat of rebels. Cylinder seal of Mentuhotep II Muse du Louvre. Following the reunification Mentuhotep II was considered by his subjects to be divine or half divine. This was still the case during the late 
12 th Dynasty some 200 years later Senusret III and Amenemhat III erected stelae commemorating opening of the mouth ceremonies practiced on Mentuhotep IIs statues.30 Military activities outside Egyptedit Mentuhotep II launched military campaigns under the command of his vizier Khety south into Nubia which had gained its independence during the First Intermediate Period in his 
29 th and 
31 st years of reign. This is the first attested appearance of the term Kush for Nubia in Egyptian records. In particular Mentuhotep posted a garrison on the island fortress of Elephantine so troops could rapidly be deployed southwards.29 There is also evidence of military actions against Canaan. An inscription was found at Gabal El Uweinat close to the borders of modern Libya Sudan and Chad naming the king and attesting at least trade contacts to this region.31 Officialsedit The king reorganized the country and placed a vizier at the head of the administration. The viziers of his reign were Bebi and Dagi. His treasurer was Kheti who was involved in organising the sed festival for the king. Other important officials were the treasurer Meketre and the overseer of sealers Meru. His general was Intef. Reorganization of the governmentedit Throughout the First Intermediate Period and until Mentuhotep IIs reign the nomarchs held important powers over Egypt. Their office had become hereditary during the 
6 th Dynasty and the collapse of central power assured them complete freedom over their lands. After the unification of Egypt however Mentuhotep II initiated a strong policy of centralization reinforcing his royal authority by creating the posts of Governor of Upper Egypt and Governor of Lower Egypt who had power over the local nomarchs.32 Mentuhoteps third titulary from his temple of Montu at Tod. Mentuhotep also relied on a mobile force of royal court officials who further controlled the deeds of the nomarchs.33 Finally the nomarchs who supported the 
10 th Dynasty such as the governor of Asyut certainly lost their power to the profit of the king. In the meantime Mentuhotep II started an extensive program of selfdeification emphasizing the divine nature of the ruler.33 Titularyedit Mentuhotep IIs selfdeification program is evident from temples he built where he is represented wearing the headgear of Min and Amun. But perhaps the best evidence for this policy is his three titularies his second Horus and Nebty names were The divine one of the white crown while he is also referred to as the son of Hathor at the end of his reign. Mentuhotep II changed his titulary twice during his reign8 the first time in his 
14 th regnal year marking the initial successes of his campaign against Herakleopolis Magna to the north. The second time on or shortly before his 
39 th year of reign marking the final success of that campaign and his reunification of all of Egypt. More precisely this second change may have taken place on the occasion of the sed festival celebrated during his 
39 th year on the throne.34 First titulary Second titulary Third titulary Horus name Seankhibtawy S.nibtwy He who invigorates the heart of the two lands Netjerihedjet Nrjt The divine one of the white crown Sematawy Smt.wj He who unifies the two lands Nebty name Netjerihedjet Nrjt The divine one of the white crown Sematawy Smt.wj He who unifies the two lands Golden Horus name Biknebuqashuty Bjknbwqwtj The Golden Falcon lofty in plumes Prenomen Nebhepetre NbptR The Lord of the rudder is Re Nomen Mentuhotep Mnwtp Montu is satisfied In general the titularies of Mentuhotep II show a desire to return to the traditions of the Old Kingdom. In particular he adopted the complete fivefold titulary after his reunification of Egypt seemingly for the first time since the 
6 th Dynasty though known records are sparse for much of the First Intermediate Period that preceded him. Another proof that Mentuhotep II paid great attention to the traditions of the Old Kingdom is his second Nomen sometimes found as s w.tr nb.t jwn.t Mnwtp The son of Hathor the lady of Dendera Mentuhotep This reference to Hathor rather than Re is similar to the titulary of Pepi I. Finally in later king lists Mentuhotep was referred to with a variant of his third titulary Monumentsedit Mentuhotep II commanded the construction of many temples though few survive to this day. In doing so Mentuhotep followed a tradition started by his grandfather Intef II royal building activities in the provincial temples of Upper Egypt began under Intef II and lasted throughout the Middle Kingdom.35 Most of the temple remains are also located in Upper Egypt more precisely in Abydos Aswan Tod Armant Gebelein Elkab Karnak and Denderah.36 Abydosedit At Abydos a well preserved funerary chapel called the Mahat chapel was found in 2014. Mortuary Temple of Mentuhotep II in hieroglyphs 
3 swtnbptR AkhsutnebhepetRe Transfigured are the places of Nebhepetre 
3 swtJmn Akhsutamun Transfigured are the places of Amun37 Mortuary temple of Mentuhotep IIedit I Mentuhoteps mortuary temple 1 Bab elHosan cache 2 Lower pillared halls 3 Upper hall 4 core building maybe a pyramid and between 3 and 4 is the ambulatory 5 Hypostyle Hall 6 Sanctuary. Mentuhotep IIs most ambitious and innovative building project remains his large mortuary temple at Deir elBahri. The many architectural innovations of the temple mark a break with the Old Kingdom tradition of pyramid complexes and foreshadow the Temples of Millions of Years of the New Kingdom.38 As such Mentuhotep IIs temple was certainly a major source of inspiration for the nearby but 5
50 year later temples of Hatshepsut and Thutmose III. However the most profound innovations of Mentuhotep IIs temple are not architectural but religious. First it is the earliest mortuary temple where the king is not just the recipient of offerings but rather enacts ceremonies for the deities in this case AmunRa.39 Second the temple identifies the king with Osiris. Indeed the decoration and royal statuary of the temple emphasizes the Osirian aspects of the dead ruler an ideology apparent in the funerary statuary of many later pharaohs.40 Finally most of the temple decoration is the work of local Theban artists. This is evidenced by the dominant artistic style of the temple which represents people with large lips and eyes and thin bodies.41 At the opposite the refined chapels of Mentuhotep IIs wives are certainly due to Memphite craftsmen who were heavily influenced by the standards and conventions of the Old Kingdom. This phenomenon of fragmentation of the artistic styles is observed throughout the First Intermediate Period and is a direct consequence of the political fragmentation of the country.41 Situationedit The temple is located in the cliff at Deir elBahri on the west bank of Thebes. The choice of this location is certainly related to the Theban origin of the 
11 th Dynasty Mentuhoteps predecessors on the Theban throne are all buried in close by saff tombs. Furthermore Mentuhotep may have chosen Deir elBahri because it is aligned with the temple of Karnak on the other side of Nile. In particular the statue of Amun was brought annually to Deir elBahri during the Beautiful Festival of the Valley something which the king may have perceived as beneficial to this funerary cult.38 Consequently and until the construction of the DjeserDjeseru some five centuries later Mentuhotep IIs temple was the final destination of the barque of Amun during the festival.4243 Discovery and excavationsedit In the early 
19 th century the ruins of the temple of Mentuhotep II were completely covered with debris. They consequently went unnoticed until the second half of the century in spite of extensive excavations performed on the nearby DjeserDjeseru of Hatshepsut. Thus it was only in 1859 that Lord Dufferin and his assistants Dr. Lorange and Cyril Clerke Graham started to excavate the southwest corner of the hypostyle hall of Mentuhoteps temple. Clearing the immense mass of debris they soon discovered the plundered grave of Queen Tem one of Mentuhoteps wives. Realising the potential of the site they then gradually worked their way to the sanctuary where they found the granite altar of Mentuhotep with a representation of AmunRe and various other finds such as the grave of Neferu TT319. Finally in 1898 Howard Carter discovered the Bab elHosan44 cache in the front court where he uncovered the famous black seated statue of the king.45 Crosssection of Mentuhotep II mortuary temple by E. Naville The next important excavation works took place from 1903 to 1907 under the direction of Henri douard Naville who worked there on behalf of the Egypt Exploration Fund. He was the first to undertake a systematic exploration of the temple. About ten years later between 1920 and 1931 Herbert E. Winlock further excavated the temple for the Metropolitan Museum of Art. However his results were published only in the form of preliminary reports in summary form.46 Finally from 1967 to 1971 Dieter Arnold conducted research on the site on behalf of the German Archaeological Institute. He published his results in three volumes.47 Painted sandstone statue of Mentuhotep II wearing the Deshret crown discovered by H. Winlock. Foundational offeringsedit Under the four corners of the temple terrace H. Winlock discovered four pits during his 19211922 excavations. These pits were dug into the ground before the construction of the temple for the purpose of foundation rituals. Indeed when H. Winlock discovered them they still contained many offerings a cattle skull pitchers and bowls filled with fruits barley and bread and a mud brick bearing Mentuhotep IIs name.48 Further excavations of the pits undertaken in 1970 by Dieter Arnold revealed more food offerings such as bread and beef ribs but also some bronze objects a faience scepter and sheets of fabric. The sheets were marked in red ink at the corner seven with the name of Mentuhotep II and three with that of Intef II.49 Architectureedit Causeway and courtyardedit Similarly to the mortuary complexes of the Old Kingdom Mentuhotep IIs mortuary complex comprised two temples the high temple of Deir elBahri and a valley temple located closer to the Nile on cultivated lands. The valley temple was linked to the high temple by a 
1.2  km long and 46 m wide uncovered causeway. The causeway led to a large courtyard in front of the Deir elBahri temple. The courtyard was adorned by a long rectangular flower bed with fiftyfive sycamore trees planted in small pits and six tamarisk plus two sycamore trees planted in deep pits filled with soil.50 This is one of the very few archaeologically documented templegardens of ancient Egypt that are known enough about to reconstruct its appearance.51 The maintenance of such a garden more than 1 km from the Nile into the arid desert must have required the constant work of many gardeners and an elaborate irrigation system. Seated statues of Mentuhotep II next to the causeway Left and right of the processional walkway were at least 22 seated statues of Mentuhotep II wearing on the south side the White Crown of Upper Egypt and on the north side the Red Crown of Lower Egypt. These were probably added to the temple for the celebration of Mentuhotep IIs Sed festival during his 
39 th year on the throne.52 Some headless sandstone statues are still on site today. Another was discovered in 1921 during Herbert Winlocks excavations and is now on display at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.53 Front part of the templeedit West of the causeway is the main temple which consisted of two parts. The front part of the temple is dedicated to MonthuRa a merger of the sun god Ra with the Theban god of war Monthu particularly worshipped during the 
11 th Dynasty. A ramp aligned with the central axis of the temple led to the upper terrace. The ramp that is visible today was constructed in 1905 by douard Naville over the remains of the original ramp which only is visible in two places as the lowest two layers of the lateral limestone cladding.54 The eastern front part of the temple on both sides of the rising ramp consists of two porticos with a double row of rectangular pillars which make the temple look like a saff tomb the traditional burial of Mentuhotep IIs 
11 thDynasty predecessors.55 The ruins of the ambulatory On the temple terrace a 
60 metrewide 
43 metredeep and 
5 metrehigh podium supports the upper hall surrounding an ambulatory and the core building. The ambulatory separated from the upper hall by a 
5 cubitthick wall comprised a total of 140 octagonal columns disposed in three rows.56 For most of these columns only the base is still visible today.57 The courtyard of the ambulatory was completely filled by the core building a massive 22 m large and 11 m high construction. This edifice located at the center of the temple complex was excavated in 1904 and 1905 by Edouard Naville. He reconstructed it as a square structure topped by a small pyramid a representation of the primeval mount which possibly resembled the superstructures of the royal tombs at Abydos. This reconstruction supported by H. E. Winlock was contested by D. Arnold who argued that for structural reasons the temple could not have supported the weight of a small pyramid. Instead he proposed that the edifice was flatroofed.58 Reconstruction of Mentuhotep IIs mortuary temple by douard Naville. The presence of a pyramid is debated. Rear part of the templeedit Behind the core edifice was the center of the cult for the deified king. The rear part of the temple was cut directly into the cliff and consisted of an open courtyard a pillared hall with 82 octagonal columns and a chapel for a statue of the king.59 This part of the temple was dedicated to AmunRa. The open courtyard is flanked on the north and south sides by a row of five columns and on the east side by a double row totalling sixteen columns. At the center of the open courtyard lies a deep dromos leading to the royal tomb. Archaeological finds in this part of the temple include a limestone altar a granite stele and six granite statues of Senusret III.60 To the west the courtyard leads to the hypostyle hall with its ten rows of eight columns each plus two additional columns on both sides of the entrance. The hypostyle hall is separated from the courtyard by a wall and being also higher is accessed via a small ramp.61 On the west end of the hypostyle hall lies the holiest place of the temple a sanctuary dedicated to Mentuhotep and AmunRa leading to a small speos which housed a largerthanlife statue of the king. The sanctuary itself housed a statue of AmunRe and was surrounded on three sides by walls and on one side by the cliff. The inner and outer faces of these walls were all decorated with painted inscriptions and representations of the kings and gods in high relief.62 Surviving relief fragments show the deified king surrounded by the chief deities of Upper and Lower Egypt Nekhbet Seth Horus and Wadjet and on a par with them.63 The gods present the king with bundles of palm branches the symbol of Millions of Years. This relief is a manifestation of the profound religious changes in the ideology of kingship since the Old Kingdom In the Old Kingdom the king had been the lord of the pyramid complex ... now he is reduced to a human ruler dependent on the gods goodwill. His immortality is no longer innate it has to be bestowed on him by the gods.64 Royal tombedit Corridor leading to Mentuhotep IIs tomb As mentioned above the open courtyard of the rear part of the temple presents a dromos in its center. This dromos a 150 m long straight corridor leads down to a large underground chamber 45 m below the court which is undoubtedly the tomb of the king. This chamber is entirely lined with red granite and has a pointed roof. It contained an alabaster chapel in the form of an UpperEgyptian Perwer sanctuary.65 This chapel was once closed by a double door now missing. It contained a wooden coffin and ointment vessels which left traces in the ground. Most of the grave goods that must have been deposited there are long gone as a result of the tomb plundering. The few remaining items were a scepter several arrows and a collection of models including ships granaries and bakeries.66 Galleryedit Head statue of Mentuhotep II originally in Thebes now on display in the Museo Gregoriano Egiziano Vatican. Mentuhotep II receives offering Muse du Louvre. Cylinder seals of Mentuhotep II Muse du Louvre. Mentuhotep IIs cartouche on the Abydos king list. Aerial view of Mentuhotep IIs mortuary temple at Deir elBahari. Shadebearer of Neferu Mentuhotep IIs royal wife in the typical regional artistic style of the 
11 th Dynasty. Model of granary from Mentuhotep IIs tomb Referencesedit  Stewart John 2006. African States and Rulers Third ed.. London McFarland. p. 81. ISBN 0786425628.  Alan H. Gardiner The royal canon of Turin.  Ancient Egypt  Dynasty XI. www.narmer.pl.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt Thames  Hudson p. 72. 2006. ISBN 0500286280  a b The Ancient Egypt Site. www.ancientegypt.org.  a b Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom p. 19  Franke Detlef 1988. Zur Chronologie des Mittleren Reiches Teil II Die sogenannte Zweite Zwischenzeit Altgyptens. Orientalia. Nova Series in German. 57 3. Gregorian Biblical Press 133. ISSN 00305367. JSTOR 3793107.  a b Vandersleyen Claude 1994. La titulature de Montouhotep II. In Bryan Betsy Morrell Lorton David eds.. Essays in Egyptology in honor of Hans Goedicke in Italian. San Antonio Texas Van Siclen Books. pp. 317320. ISBN 0933175
40 X. OCLC 34552368.  a b Callender Gae 2003 2000. The Middle Kingdom Renaissance c.20551650 BC. In Shaw Ian ed.. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford New York Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191604621.  History of Parasitology. Cairo University Parasitology Department. Retrieved 2 June 2022.  Statue of King Mentuhotep II in the Jubilee Garment c. 20512000 B.C. From Thebes Deir elBahri. Research Gate. Retrieved 2 June 2022.  Clere J.J. Vandier J. Textes de la premiere periode intermediaire et de la XIeme dynasty. Bibliotheca Aegyptiaca X. Vol. 1. Complete Stele on p. 21  Gauthier Henri 1906. Quelques remarques sur la XIe dynastie. BIFAO 5 39.  Tyldesley Joyce 2006. Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt. London UK Thames  Hudson. pp. 6668. ISBN 0500051453.  Wildung D. About the autonomy of the arts of ancient Sudan. In M. Honegger Ed. Nubian archaeology in the XXIst Century. Peeters Publishers. pp. 105112.  Lobban Richard A. 9 December 2003. Historical Dictionary of Ancient and Medieval Nubia. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810865785.  Crawford Keith W. 1 December 2021. Critique of the Black Pharaohs Theme Racist Perspectives of Egyptian and KushiteNubian Interactions in Popular Media. African Archaeological Review. 38 4 695712. doi
10.1 0
07 s10437021094537. ISSN 15729842. S
2 CID 238718279.  Dodson Aidan Marc Hilton Dyan February 2010 September 2004. The complete royal families of ancient Egypt. London UK Thames and Hudson.  Roth Silke 2001. Die Knigsmtter des Alten gypten von der Frhzeit bis zum Ende der 12. Dynastie. Wiesbaden DE Otto Harrassowitz.  Ancient Egypt and Archaeology Web Site  deirelbahri068.  Arnold Dieter 1974. Der Tempel des Knigs Mentuhotep von Deir elBahari. Mainz DE Philipp von Zabern. 3 vols.  Sarcophagus of Kawit. Wikimedia Commons.  Wendrick Willike 2010. Egyptian Archaeology. WileyBlackwell. p. 151. ISBN 9781405149884  via Google Books.  Trk Lszl 2008. Between Two Worlds The Frontier Region Between Ancient Nubia and Egypt 3700 BC500 AD. Brill. p. 83. ISBN 9789004171978.  Callender. Shaw Ian ed.. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. p. 141.  Sarcophagus of Henhenet. Metropolitan Museum.  Shrine of Henhenet. Metropolitan Museum.  Callender In Ian Shaw edit. Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 139.  a b c Callender In Ian Shaw edit. Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 140.  M. Collier B. Manley and R. Parkinson How to Read Egyptian Hieroglyphs A StepbyStep Guide to Teach Yourself  Joseph Clayton Aloisia de Trafford  Mark Borda A hieroglyphic inscription found at Jebel Uweinat mentioning Yam and Tekhebet. In Sahara  preistoria e storia del Sahara 19 2008 ISSN 11205679 pp. 129134  Callender In Ian Shaw edit. Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 140141.  a b Callender In Ian Shaw edit. Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 140141.   Callender In Ian Shaw edit. Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 141.  Callender In Ian Shaw edit. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.127  Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom p. 2021  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep. vol. 2 p.90.  a b Callender In Ian Shaw edit. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 142143  Byron Esely Shafer Editor Temples of Ancient Egypt p.74 Cornell University Press 
2 nd Revised edition ISBN 0801433991 1  Search results for osiride statue  Wikimedia Commons. commons.wikimedia.org.  a b Callender In Ian Shaw edit. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 144  Byron Esely Shafer Editor Temples of Ancient Egypt p.95 Cornell University Press 
2 nd Revised edition ISBN 0801433991 2  After Hatchepsuts reign the barque of Amun visited all the royal cult complexes on the west bank that were still in activity.  Discovery of Bab elHosan. Archived from the original on 20160304. Retrieved 20120502.  Mentuhotep II The Gateof the Horseman. ib205.tripod.com.  D. Arnold Mentuhotep. vol. 1 p. 
70 f.  D. Arnold Der Tempel des Knigs Mentuhotep in Deir elBahari. 3 vols.  Dieter Arnold The Temple of Mentuhotep at Deir elBahri p. 49 ff Dieter Arnold Dictionary of Egyptian architecture p. 
95 f  Dieter. Arnold Mentuhotep vol 3 p. 52  Winlock quote after Dieter Arnold The Temple of Mentuhotep at Deir el Bahari 1979 p. 
21 ff  RobichonVarille quote after Dieter Arnold The Temple of Mentuhotep at Deir el Bahari 1979 p. 21  Byron Esely Shafer Editor Temples of Ancient Egypt p. 75 Cornell University Press 
2 nd Revised edition ISBN 0801433991  T. Khn Der knigliche Tempel und Grabbezirk Mentuhotep II. in Deir elBahari p. 21  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep vol. 1 p. 
16 f  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep vol. 1 p. 11  Similar to the column of Intef II in Karnak  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep. vol. 1 p. 
16 f  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep vol. 1 p. 
27 ff. Dieter Arnold Lexikon der Baukunst p. 159 and HvelerMller Am Anfang war gypten p. 142.  Byron Esely Shafer Editor Temples of Ancient Egypt p. 74 Cornell University Press 
2 nd Revised edition ISBN 0801433991 3  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep. vol. 1 p. 33.  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep vol. 1 p. 
34 f.  Dieter ArnoldMentuhotep vol. 3 p. 15  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep vol. 3 p. 
33 f  Dieter Arnold Byron Esely Shafer Editor Temples of Ancient Egypt p.7475 Cornell University Press 
2 nd Revised edition ISBN 0801433991 4  Dieter Arnold Encyclopedia of Ancient Egyptian Architecture I B Tauris editions ISBN 1860644651  Dieter Arnold Mentuhotep vol. 1 p. 44 Further readingedit Gae Callender The Middle Kingdom Renaissance In Ian Shaw edit. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt Oxford University Press Oxford 2000 ISBN 0198150342 pp. 148183 W. Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History Archaeology and Society Duckworth London 2006 ISBN 0715634356 1823 Habachi Labib 1963. King Nebhepetre Menthuhotp his monuments place in history deification and unusual representation in the form of gods. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 19 1652. External linksedit Media related to Mentuhotep II at Wikimedia Commons Preceded by Intef III Pharaoh of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty Succeeded by Mentuhotep III v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMentuhotepIIoldid1223047189 Categories Mentuhotep II 
21 stcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Germanlanguage sources de CS1 Italianlanguage sources it Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 9 May 2024 at 1514 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width