Intef II - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 
2.1 Titulary 
2.2 Officials 
3 Monuments Toggle Monuments subsection 
3.1 Tomb 
4 References 
5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Intef II 35 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Intef II Inyotef II Antef II SiR Ino Funerary stele of Intef II on display at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Pharaoh Reign 49 years 21122063 BC Predecessor Intef I Successor Intef III Royal titulary Horus name Wahankh W
3 n Strong in life1 Nomen Sa Re Intef Jnj jt.f The Son of Ra Intef litt. His father brought him1 Consort Possibly Neferukayet Children Intef III Iah Father Mentuhotep I Mother Neferu I Died 2063 BC2 Burial ElTarif near Thebes Dynasty 
11 th Dynasty Wahankh Intef II also Inyotef II and Antef II was the third ruler of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt during the First Intermediate Period. He reigned for almost fifty years from 2112 BC to 2063 BC.2 His capital was located at Thebes. In his time Egypt was split between several local dynasties. He was buried in a saff tomb at ElTarif. Familyedit See also Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt family tree Intefs parents were Mentuhotep I and Neferu I. His predecessor Intef I may have been his brother. Intef was succeeded by his son Intef III. Reignedit After the death of the nomarch Ankhtifi Intef was able to unite all the southern nomes down to the First Cataract. After this he clashed with his main rivals the kings of Herakleopolis Magna for the possession of Abydos. The city changed hands several times but Intef II was eventually victorious extending his rule north to the thirteenth nome. After these wars more friendly relations were established and the rest of Intefs reign was peaceful. The discovery of a statue of Intef II wrapped in a sed festival robe in the sanctuary of Heqaib at Elephantine suggests that this kings authority extended to the region of the First Cataract and perhaps over part of Lower Nubia by his 
30 th year.3 This impression would appear to be confirmed by an expedition led by Djemi from Gebelein to the land of Wawat i.e. Nubia during his reign.3 Consequently when Intef II died he left behind a strong government in Thebes which controlled the whole of Upper Egypt and maintained a border just south of Asyut.3 The earliest attested dating of the god Amun at Karnak occurs during his reign. The surviving sections of the Turin Canon for the Middle Kingdom assign this king a reign of 49 years.45 Titularyedit Intef II apparently never held the full royal fivefold titulary of the Old Kingdom pharaohs. He did however claim the dual kingship nswt bity and the title s
3 Re son of Ra which emphasizes the divine nature of kingship.2 Finally upon accession to the Theban throne Intef II added the Horus name Wahankh enduring of life to his birth name. Officialsedit We know the name and activities of some of the officials who served under Intef II  Tjetjy was the chief treasurer and kings chamberlain of Intef II and Intef III.6 His finely carved tomb stele now at the British Museum7 shows that Intef II claimed the dual throne of Egypt but also recognizes the limited extent of his rule The horus Wahankh king of Upper and Lower Egypt son of Re Intef born of Nefru he who lives eternally like Re ... this land was under his rule southwards as far as Yebu and reaching as far north as Abydos.8 Tjetjy then describes his career in the typical selflaudatory manner of the Egyptian elite. Most importantly the text demonstrates the undisputed power of the king in the Theban kingdom of the 
11 th Dynasty I was a trustworthy favorite of my lord an official great of heart and quiet of temper in the palace of his lord .... I am one who loved good and hated evil one who was loved in the palace of his lord one who performed every duty in obedience to the will of his lord. Indeed as for every task which he commanded me to undertake ... I performed it rightly and justly. Never did I disobey the orders he gave me never did I substitute one thing for another .... Moreover as for every responsibility of the royal palace which the majesty of my lord committed to me and for which he caused me to perform some task I did it for him in accordance with everything which his Ka desired.8 Djary was a military officer who fought the Herakleopolitan forces in the Abydene nome during Intef IIs armies northward push.6 His stele recounts the struggle for the control over Middle Egypt Intef fought the house of Khety to the north of Thinis.9 Hetepy was an official from Elkab who administered the three southernmost nomes of Intef IIs realm. This means that there were no monarchs in Thebancontrolled territories. Just as in the case of Tjetjy the constant reference to the king in Hetepys stele demonstrates the centralized organization of the government of the Theban kingdom and the power of the king to whom everything was due I was one beloved of my Lord and praised by the lord of this land and his majesty truly made this servant happy. His majesty said There is no one who . . . of my good command but Hetepy and this servant did it exceedingly well and his majesty praised this servant on account of it.6 Finally Hetepys stele mentions a famine that occurred during Intef IIs reign. Idudjuiker was foremost one of the chiefs of Lower Nubia. He was in charge of Lower Nubia and helped the king conquering Abydos.10 Monumentsedit The dogs of Intef II on his funerary stele Egyptian Museum Cairo. On his funerary stele Intef emphasizes his monument building activities. It is significant that the earliest surviving fragment of royal construction at Karnak is an octagonal column bearing Intef IIs name. Intef II is also the first ruler to build chapels for Satet and Khnum on the island of Elephantine.11 In fact Intef II started a tradition of royal building activities in the provincial temples of Upper Egypt which was to last throughout the Middle Kingdom. Tombedit Intefs tomb in ElTarif at Thebes is a saff tomb. Saff stands for row in Arabic and refers to the double row of columns and entry ways fronting a large 250 by 70 metres 820 ft  230 ft trapezoidal courtyard at the eastern end of which was a mortuary chapel.12 This chapel may have been intended to serve the same purpose as a valley temple.13 Intef IIs tomb was investigated by a royal commission during the reign of Ramses IX toward the end of the 
20 th Dynasty as many royal tombs were being plundered at the time.14 As reported on the Abbott Papyrus The commission noted that The pyramidtomb of king SiR Ino i.e. Intef II which is north of the House of Amenotpe of the Forecourt and whose pyramid is crushed down upon it . . .. Examined this day it was found intact.15 No remains of this pyramid have been found yet.13 Following the tradition of his nomarch ancestors Intef II erected a biographical stele in the entrance of his tomb which relates the events of his reign and credits him with 50 years of reign.216 A stela mentioning the kings dogs was also said to be set up before the tomb. Another stela mentioning a dog named Beha was discovered but it was found near the offering chapel.12 Referencesedit  a b Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p72. 2006. ISBN 0500286280  a b c d Ian Shaw The Oxford history of ancient Egypt p.125  a b c Nicholas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Oxford Blackwell Books 1992 p. 145  Column 5 row 14  The Ancient Egypt Web Site Antef II Archived 20070927 at the Wayback Machine accessed September 7 2007  a b c Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.126  Stele of Tjetjy  a b William Kelly Simpson The literature of Ancient Egypt  The stele of Djary Archived 20160304 at the Wayback Machine  Josef Wegner The Stela of Idudjuiker Formostone of the Chiefs of Wawat in Revue dgyptologie 68 20172108 153209 plates VIIXII  Ian Shaw The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p.127  a b Lehner Mark. The Complete Pyramids. Thames  Hudson. 2008 reprint. ISBN 9780500285473 pp 165  a b Dodson Aidan. The Tomb in Ancient Egypt. Thames and Hudson. 2008. ISBN 9780500051399 pp 186187  Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 pp. 145146  Alan Gardiner Egypt of the Pharaohs an introduction Oxford University Press 1961 pp. 118119  Stele of Intef II Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Intef II. Wolfram Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History Archaeology and Society Duckworth London 2006 ISBN 0715634356 1215 Preceded by Intef I Pharaoh of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty Succeeded by Intef III v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleIntefIIoldid1137928333 Categories 
22 ndcentury BC Pharaohs 
21 stcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 February 2023 at 0320 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width