Abydos, Egypt - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 History Toggle History subsection 
1.1 Cult centre 
1.2 Great Osiris Temple 
1.3 Brewery 
2 Main sites Toggle Main sites subsection 
2.1 Seti I Temple 

2.1.1 Kings List 

2.1.2 Osireion 

2.1.3 Helicopter hieroglyphs 
2.2 Ramesses II temple 

2.2.1 Kings List 
2.3 Umm El Qaab 
2.4 Forts 
2.5 Kom El Sultan 
3 See also 
4 Notes 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Abydos Egypt 51 languages  Azrbaycanca   Catal etina Dansk Deutsch  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego   Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar    Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan Polski Portugus Romn  Slovenina Slovenina      srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Coordinates 2611
06 N 3155
08 E  
26.1 85
00 N 
31.9 18
89 E  
26.1 8500 
31.9 1889 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia City in ancient Egypt Abydos  Faade of the Temple of Seti I in Abydos built c.1300 BCE Abydos Shown within Northeast Africa Show map of Northeast Africa Abydos Abydos Egypt Show map of Egypt Alternative name  Abedju Location ElBalyana Sohag Governorate Egypt Region Upper Egypt Coordinates 2611
06 N 3155
08 E  
26.1 85
00 N 
31.9 18
89 E  
26.1 8500 
31.9 1889 Type Settlement History Periods First Dynasty to Thirtieth Dynasty Abydos bads Arabic  romanized Abds or Arabic  romanized Afd1 Sahidic Coptic  Ebt is one of the oldest cities of ancient Egypt and also of the eighth nome in Upper Egypt. It is located about 11 kilometres 
6.8  miles west of the Nile at latitude 26 10 N near the modern Egyptian towns of El Araba El Madfuna and El Balyana. In the ancient Egyptian language the city was called Abedju bw or AbDwArabic Abdu .2 The English name Abydos comes from the Greek  a name borrowed by Greek geographers from the unrelated city of Abydos on the Hellespont. Abydos name in hieroglyphs Considered one of the most important archaeological sites in Egypt the sacred city of Abydos was the site of many ancient temples including Umm elQaab a royal necropolis where early pharaohs were entombed.3 These tombs began to be seen as extremely significant burials and in later times it became desirable to be buried in the area leading to the growth of the towns importance as a cult site. Today Abydos is notable for the memorial temple of Seti I which contains an inscription from the Nineteenth Dynasty known to the modern world as the Abydos King List. This is a chronological list showing cartouches of most dynastic pharaohs of Egypt from Menes until Seti Is father Ramesses I.4 It is also notable for the Abydos graffiti ancient Phoenician and Aramaic graffiti found on the walls of the Temple of Seti I. The Great Temple and most of the ancient town are buried under the modern buildings to the north of the Seti temple.5 Many of the original structures and the artifacts within them are considered irretrievable and lost many may have been destroyed by the new construction. Historyedit Possible illustration of the conflict between Abydos and Hierakonpolis on the Gebel elArak Knife Louvre Museum 33003200 BCE.6 Name of Abydos in hieroglyphs Most of Upper Egypt became unified under rulers from Abydos during the Naqada III period 32003000 BCE at the expense of rival cities such as Hierakonpolis.7 The conflicts leading to the supremacy of Abydos may appear on numerous reliefs of the Naqada II period such as the Gebel elArak Knife or the frieze of Tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis.6 Tombs and at least one temple of rulers of the Predynastic period have been found at Umm El Qaab including that of Narmer dating to c.3100 BCE.89 The temple and town continued to be rebuilt at intervals down to the times of the Thirtieth Dynasty and the cemetery was in continuous use.10 The pharaohs of the First Dynasty were buried in Abydos including Narmer who is regarded as the founder of the First Dynasty and his successor Aha.11 It was in this time period that the Abydos boats were constructed. Some pharaohs of the Second Dynasty were also buried in Abydos. The temple was renewed and enlarged by these pharaohs as well. Funerary enclosures misinterpreted in modern times as great forts were built on the desert behind the town by three kings of the Second Dynasty the most complete is that of Khasekhemwy the Shunet El Zebib.1210 King Khasekhemwy fort King Khasekhemwy fort in Abydos. c.2700 BCE King Khasekhemwy fort in Abydos. Part of the Abydos King List Tomb relief depicting the vizier Nespeqashuty and his wife KetjKetj making the journey of the dead to the holy city of Abydos  from Deir elBahri Late Period Twentysixth Dynasty of Egypt reign of Psammetichus I From the Fifth Dynasty the deity Khentiamentiu foremost of the Westerners came to be seen as a manifestation of the dead pharaoh in the underworld. Pepi I Sixth Dynasty constructed a funerary chapel which evolved over the years into the Great Temple of Osiris the ruins of which still exist within the town enclosure. Abydos became the centre of the worship of the Isis and Osiris cult. During the First Intermediate Period the principal deity of the area Khentiamentiu began to be seen as an aspect of Osiris and the deities gradually merged and came to be regarded as one. Khentiamentius name became an epithet of Osiris. King Mentuhotep II was the first to build a royal chapel. In the Twelfth Dynasty a gigantic tomb was cut into the rock by Senusret III.10 Associated with this tomb was a cenotaph a cult temple and a small town known as WahSut that was used by the workers for these structures.13 Next to the cenotaph at least two kings of the Thirteenth Dynasty were buried in tombs S9 and S10 as well as some rulers of the Second Intermediate Period such as Senebkay. An indigenous line of kings the Abydos Dynasty may have ruled the region from Abydos at the time. New construction during the Eighteenth Dynasty began with a large chapel of Ahmose I.14 The Pyramid of Ahmose I was also constructed at Abydosthe only pyramid in the area very little of it remains today. Thutmose III built a far larger temple about 130 ft  200 ft 40 m  61 m. He also made a processional way leading past the side of the temple to the cemetery beyond featuring a great gateway of granite.14 Seti I during the Nineteenth Dynasty founded a temple to the south of the town in honor of the ancestral pharaohs of the early dynasties this was finished by Ramesses II who also built a lesser temple of his own.10 Merneptah added the Osireion just to the north of the temple of Seti.13 Ahmose II in the Twentysixth Dynasty rebuilt the temple again and placed in it a large monolith shrine of red granite finely wrought. The foundations of the successive temples were comprised within approximately 18 ft 
5.5  m. depth of the ruins discovered in modern times these needed the closest examination to discriminate the various buildings and were recorded by more than 4000 measurements and 1000 levellings.1514 The last building added was a new temple of Nectanebo I built in the Thirtieth Dynasty. From the Ptolemaic times of the Greek occupancy of Egypt that began three hundred years before the Roman occupancy that followed the structures began to decay and no later works are known.1610 Cult centreedit From earliest times Abydos was a cult centre first of the local deity Khentiamentiu and from the end of the Old Kingdom the rising cult of Osiris. A tradition developed that the Early Dynastic cemetery was the burial place of Osiris and the tomb of Djer was reinterpreted as that of Osiris.17 Decorations in tombs throughout Egypt such as the one displayed to the right record pilgrimages to Abydos by wealthy families.18 Great Osiris Templeedit Panel from the Osiris temple Horus presents royal regalia to a worshipping pharaoh. From the First Dynasty to the Twentysixth Dynasty nine or ten temples were successively built on one site at Abydos. The first was an enclosure about 30 ft  50 ft 
9.1  m  
15.2  m enclosed by a thin wall of unbaked bricks. Incorporating one wall of this first structure the second temple of about 40 ft 12 m square was built with walls about 10 ft 
3.0  m thick. An outer temenos enclosure wall surrounded the grounds. This outer wall was made wider some time around the Second or Third Dynasty. The old temple entirely vanished in the Fourth Dynasty and a smaller building was erected behind it enclosing a wide hearth of black ashes. Pottery models of offerings are found in these ashes and were probably the substitutes for live sacrifices decreed by Khufu or Cheops in his temple reforms.19 At an undetermined date a great clearance of temple offerings had been made and the modern discovery of a chamber into which they were gathered yielded the fine ivory carvings and the glazed figures and tiles that demonstrate the splendid work of the First Dynasty. A vase of Menes with purple hieroglyphs inlaid into a green glaze and tiles with relief figures are the most important pieces found. The Khufu Statuette in ivory found in the stone chamber of the temple gives the only portrait of this great pharaoh.14 The temple was entirely rebuilt on a larger scale by Pepi I in the Sixth Dynasty. He placed a great stone gateway to the temenos an outer wall and gateway with a colonnade between the gates. His temple was about 40 ft  50 ft 12 m  15 m inside with stone gateways front and back showing that it was of the processional type. In the Eleventh Dynasty Mentuhotep II added a colonnade and altars. Soon after Mentuhotep III entirely rebuilt the temple laying a stone pavement over the area about 45 ft 14 m square. He also added subsidiary chambers. Soon thereafter in the Twelfth Dynasty Senusret I laid massive foundations of stone over the pavement of his predecessor. A great temenos was laid out enclosing a much larger area and the new temple itself was about three times the earlier size.14 Breweryedit On 14 February 2021 Egyptian and American archaeologists discovered what could be the oldest brewery in the world dating from around 3100 BCE at the reign of King Narmer. Dr. Matthew Adams one of the leaders of the mission stated that it was used to make beer for royal rituals.2021 Main sitesedit Plan of Abydos Seti I Templeedit Main article Temple of Seti I Abydos The temple of Seti I was built on entirely new ground half a mile to the south of the long series of temples just described. This surviving building is best known as the Great Temple of Abydos being nearly complete and an impressive sight.14 A principal purpose of the temple was to serve as a memorial to king Seti I as well as to show reverence for the early pharaohs which is incorporated within as part of the Rite of the Ancestors. The long list of the pharaohs of the principal dynastiesrecognized by Setiare carved on a wall and known as the Abydos King List showing the cartouche name of many dynastic pharaohs of Egypt from the first Narmer or Menes until Setis time. There were significant names deliberately left off of the list. So rare as an almost complete list of pharaoh names the Table of Abydos rediscovered by William John Bankes has been called the Rosetta Stone of Egyptian archaeology analogous to the Rosetta Stone for Egyptian writing beyond the Narmer Palette.22 The Chapel of Amun The Osireion at the rear of the temple There were also seven chapels built for the worship of the pharaoh and principal deities. These included three chapels for the state deities Ptah ReHorakhty and centrally positioned Amun and the challenge for the Abydos triad of Osiris Isis and Horus. The rites recorded in the deity chapels represent the first complete form known of the Daily Ritual which was performed daily in temples across Egypt throughout the pharaonic period. At the back of the temple is an enigmatic structure known as the Osireion which served as a cenotaph for SetiOsiris and is thought to be connected with the worship of Osiris as an Osiris tomb.23 It is possible that from those chambers was led out the great Hypogeum for the celebration of the Osiris mysteries built by Merenptah.24 The temple was originally 550 ft 170 m long but the forecourts are scarcely recognizable and the part still in good condition is about 250 ft 76 m long and 350 ft 110 m wide including the wing at the side.14 Magazines for food and offerings storage were built to either side of the forecourts as well as a small palace for the king and his retinue to the southeast of the first forecourt Ghazouli The Palace and Magazines Attached to the Temple of Sety I at Abydos and the Facade of This Temple. ASAE 58 1959. Except for the list of pharaohs and a panegyric on Ramesses II the subjects are not historical but religious in nature dedicated to the transformation of the king after his death. The temple reliefs are celebrated for their delicacy and artistic refinement utilizing both the archaism of earlier dynasties with the vibrancy of late 
18 th Dynasty reliefs. The sculptures had been published mostly in hand copy not facsimile by Auguste Mariette in his Abydos I. The temple has been partially recorded epigraphically by Amice Calverley and Myrtle Broome in their 4 volume publication of The Temple of King Sethos I at Abydos 19331958. Kings Listedit Main article Abydos King List Osireionedit Main article Osireion The Osirion or Osireon is an ancient Egyptian temple. It is located to the rear of the temple of Seti I. It is an integral part of Seti Is funeral complex and is built to resemble an 
18 th Dynasty Valley of the Kings tomb.25 The retouched and eroded hieroglyphs in the Temple of Seti I which are said to represent modern vehicles  a helicopter a submarine and a zeppelin or plane. Helicopter hieroglyphsedit Main article Helicopter hieroglyphs Some of the hieroglyphs carved over an arch on the site have been interpreted in esoteric and ufological circles as depicting modern technology. The helicopter image is the result of carved stone being reused over time. The initial carving was made during the reign of Seti I and translates to He who repulses the nine enemies of Egypt. This carving was later filled in with plaster and recarved during the reign of Ramesses II with the title He who protects Egypt and overthrows the foreign countries. Over time the plaster has eroded away leaving both inscriptions partially visible and creating a palimpsestlike effect of overlapping hieroglyphs.2627 The Temple of Ramesses II Ramesses II templeedit The adjacent temple of Ramesses II was much smaller and simpler in plan but it had a fine historical series of scenes around the outside that lauded his achievements of which the lower parts remain. The outside of the temple was decorated with scenes of the Battle of Kadesh. His list of pharaohs similar to that of Seti I formerly stood here the fragments were removed by the French consul and sold to the British Museum.14 Kings Listedit Main article Abydos King List Ramesses II Umm El Qaabedit Main articles Umm El Qaab and Tomb of Anedjib Pyramidion of Nesnubhotep top of a limestone chapel monument. A scarab and adoring baboons in relief. Dynasty XXVI Abydos Egypt. Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology London A rare etched carnelian bead found in Abydos tomb 197 thought to have been imported from the Indus Valley civilisation through Mesopotamia in an example of EgyptMesopotamia relations. Late Middle Kingdom of Egypt. London Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology ref. UC303
34.2 829 The royal necropolises of the earliest dynasties were placed about a mile into the great desert plain in a place now known as Umm El Qaab The Mother of Pots because of the shards remaining from all of the devotional objects left by religious pilgrims. The earliest burial is about 10 ft  20 ft 
3.0  m  
6.1  m inside a pit lined with brick walls and originally roofed with timber and matting. Other tombs also built before Menes are 15 ft  25 ft 
4.6  m  
7.6  m. The probable tomb of Menes is of the latter size. Afterwards the tombs increased in size and complexity. The tombpit was surrounded by chambers to hold offerings the sepulchre being a great wooden chamber in the midst of the bricklined pit. Rows of small pits tombs for the servants of the pharaoh surrounded the royal chamber many dozens of such burials being usual.14 Some of the offerings included sacrificed animals such as the asses found in the tomb of Merneith. Evidence of human sacrifice exists in the early tombs such as the 118 servants in the tomb of Merneith but this practice was changed later into symbolic offerings. By the end of the Second Dynasty the type of tomb constructed changed to a long passage with chambers on either side the royal burial being in the middle of the length. The greatest of these tombs with its dependencies covered a space of over 3000 square metres 
0.7 4 acres however it is possible for this to have been several tombs which abutted one another during construction the Egyptians had no means of mapping the positioning of the tombs.citation needed The contents of the tombs have been nearly destroyed by successive plunderers but enough remained to show that rich jewellery was placed on the mummies a profusion of vases of hard and valuable stones from the royal table service stood about the body the storerooms were filled with great jars of wine perfumed ointments and other supplies and tablets of ivory and of ebony were engraved with a record of the yearly annals of the reigns. The seals of various officials of which over 200 varieties have been found give an insight into the public arrangements.3014 A cemetery for private persons was put into use during the First Dynasty with some pittombs in the town. It was extensive in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Dynasties and contained many rich tombs. A large number of fine tombs were made in the Eighteenth to Twentieth Dynasties and members of later dynasties continued to bury their dead here until the Roman period. Many hundreds of funeral steles were removed by Auguste Mariettes workmen without any details of the burials being noted.31 Later excavations have been recorded by Edward R. Ayrton Abydos iii. Maclver El Amrah and Abydos and Garstang El Arabah.14 Fortsedit Some of the tomb structures referred to as forts by modern researchers lay behind the town. Known as Shunet ez Zebib it is about 450 ft  250 ft 137 m  76 m over all and one still stands 30 ft 
9.1  m high. It was built by Khasekhemwy the last pharaoh of the Second Dynasty. Another structure nearly as large adjoined it and probably is older than that of Khasekhemwy. A third fort of a squarer form is now occupied by a convent of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria its age cannot be ascertained.3214 Kom El Sultanedit Main article Kom El Sultan The area now known as Kom El Sultan is a big mudbrick structure the purpose of which is not clear and thought to have been at the original settlement area dated to the Early Dynastic Period. The structure includes the early temple of Osiris. See alsoedit Ancient Egypt portal List of ancient Egyptian towns and cities S 9 Abydos S 10 Abydos Mahat chapel of Mentuhotep II Notesedit  Peust Carsten. Die Toponyme vorarabischen Ursprungs im modernen gypten PDF. p. 11. Archived PDF from the original on 20221009.  Hawas Zahi 2002.        .    in Arabic. Cairo Almalis alal lilar high council of antiquities. p. 496. ISBN 9773053474.  Tombs of kings of the First and Second Dynasty. Digital Egypt. UCL. Archived from the original on 6 January 2008. Retrieved 20080115.  Misty Cryer 2006. Travellers in Egypt  William John Bankes. TravellersinEgypt.org. Archived from the original on 20160814.  Abydos town. Digital Egypt. UCL. Archived from the original on 4 January 2008. Retrieved 20080115.  a b Josephson Jack. Naqada IId Birth of an Empire 166167. cite journal Cite journal requires journal help  Thompson Jason 2008. A History of Egypt From Earliest Times to the Present. American Univ in Cairo Press. p. 18. ISBN 9789774160912.  Patch Diana Craig EatonKrauss Marianne Allen Susan J. Friedman Rene F. Roth Ann Macy Silverman David P. Cortes Emilia Roehrig Catharine H. Serotta Anna 2011. Dawn of Egyptian Art. Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 16. ISBN 9781588394606. Retrieved 24 August 2020.  Bestock Laurel 2009. The Development of Royal Funerary Cult at Abydos Two Funerary Enclosures from the Reign of Aha. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 2. ISBN 9783447058384. Retrieved 24 August 2020.  a b c d e Chisholm 1911 p. 81.  Wilkinson 1999 p. 3  The Funerary Enclosures of Abydos. Digital Egypt. UCL. Retrieved 20080115.  a b Harvey EA24 p.3  a b c d e f g h i j k l Chisholm 1911 p. 82.  Petrie Abydos ii.  Petrie Abydos i. and ii.  OConnor David 2009. Abydos Egypts First Pharaohs and the Cult of Osiris. Thames  Hudson. pp. 1819  Stephen P. Harvey 25 June 2001. Holy Abydos. Archaeology.  Chisholm 1911 pp. 8182.  Ancient mass production brewery uncovered in Egypt. Reuters. 14 February 2021. Retrieved 20210214.  50
00 yearold brewery possibly worlds oldest uncovered in Egypt. CBC News. Retrieved 20210214.  Misty Cryer Travellers in Egypt  William John Bankes 2006 TravellersinEgypt.org web TravEgyptWJB Archived 20060830 at the Wayback Machine rediscovered Table of Abydos.  Caulfield Temple of the Kings  Murray The Osireion at Abydos  Bard Katheryn 1999. Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. Routledge. p. 114. ISBN 0415185890.  The Abydos temple helicopter. Archived from the original on 28 July 2005.  Helicopter Hieroglyphs Explained. raincool.blogspot.nl. 23 May 2010.  Grajetzki Wolfram 2014. Tomb 197 at Abydos Further Evidence for Long Distance Trade in the Middle Kingdom. gypten und Levante  Egypt and the Levant. 24 159170. doi
10.1 5
53 s159. JSTOR 43553796.  Stevenson Alice 2015. Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology Characters and Collections. UCL Press. p. 54. ISBN 9781910634042.  Petrie Royal Tombs i. and ii.  Mariette Abydos ii. and iii.  Ayrton Abydos iii. Referencesedit This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain Chisholm Hugh ed. 1911. Abydos. Encyclopdia Britannica. Vol. 1 
11 th ed.. Cambridge University Press. pp. 8182. Ayrton Edward Russell William Matthew Flinders Petrie 1904. Abydos. Vol. iii. Offices of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Harvey Stephen Spring 2004. New Evidence at Abydos for Ahmoses funerary cult. Egyptian Archaeology. 24. EES. Murray Margaret Alice Joseph Grafton Milne Walter Ewing Crum 1904. The Osireion at Abydos. Vol. ii. and iii. reprint edition June 1989 ed.. B. Quaritch. ISBN 9781854170415. Wilkinson Toby A. H. 1999. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge. Mariette Auguste Abydos ii. and iii. William Flinders Petrie Abydos i. and ii. William Flinders Petrie Royal Tombs i. and ii. External linksedit Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Abydos. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Abydos. Abydos. Digital Egypt. UCL. Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. Retrieved 20080115. Encyclopdia Britannica Online Abydos search EncBritAbydos importance of Abydos The Mortuary Temple of Seti I at Abydos University of Pennsylvania Museum excavations at Abydos v t e Egyptian cities and towns by population 1000000 and more Alexandria Cairo Giza Shubra El Kheima 300000999999 Asyut Bilbeis Damietta Faiyum Imbaba Ismailia El Mahalla El Kubra Kom Ombo Mansoura Luxor Port Said Suez Tanta Zagazig 100000299999 
6 th of October Arish Aswan Benha Beni Suef Damanhur Desouk Edfu Hurghada Kafr El Dawwar Kafr El Sheikh Mallawi Minya New Borg El Arab New Cairo Obour Qena Shibin El Kom Sohag 99999 Abydos Ain Sokhna Akhmim Dahab Dakhla Dendera Dekernes El Alamein El Gouna Esna Port Fuad Hamrah Dom Halaib Kharga Marsa Alam Marsa Matruh Nag Hammadi New Nubariya Nuweiba Rosetta Sadat Safaga Saint Catherine Siwa Sharm El Sheikh Taba Talkha v t e Landmarks of Abydos Temples Great Osiris Temple Kom El Sultan Mahat chapel of Mentuhotep II Osireion Temple of Ramesses II Temple of Seti I Necropolises and tombs Pyramid of Ahmose S9 S10 Shunet El Zebib Tomb of Senebkay Tomb of Senusret III Umm El Qaab Related articles Abydos boats v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Geographic Pleiades Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleAbydosEgyptoldid1219744259 Categories Abydos Egypt Populated places established in the 
4 th millennium BC Populated places disestablished in the 
4 th century BC Cities in ancient Egypt Populated places in Sohag Governorate Former populated places in Egypt Archaeological sites in Egypt Naqada III Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Arabiclanguage sources ar CS1 errors missing periodical Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Copticlanguage text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Arabiclanguage text Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica CS1 long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with Pleiades identifiers This page was last edited on 19 April 2024 at 1535 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width