File:Relief Mentuhotep IV Lepsius.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileRelief Mentuhotep IV Lepsius.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. ReliefMentuhotepIVLepsius.jpg 198  297 pixels file size 14 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionRelief Mentuhotep IV Lepsius.jpg English Drawing of a rock inscription from Wadi Hammamat pharaoh Nebtawyre Mentuhotep IV right gives offerings to the god Min left. Reign of Mentuhotep IV end 
11 th Dynasty Middle Kingdom. Date 22 September 2014 201039 Source Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und Aethiopien  Tafelwerke  Band IV pl. 149 c. Author Karl Richard Lepsius 181084 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1884 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic   Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 22 September 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1823 22 September 2014 198  297 14 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt List of pharaohs Mentuhotep IV UserAnd Leavesandbox UserImDefAHumansandbox User talkKhrunerArchive 2 Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org       Usage on arz.wikipedia.org      Usage on av.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org On birinci slal Misir Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep III Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV. Usage on el.wikipedia.org   Usage on es.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV Usage on eu.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV.a Usage on fi.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Montouhotep IV Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org IV. Montuhotep Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on id.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV Usage on it.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV Lista dei faraoni Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 4 Usage on ko.wikipedia.org  4 Usage on lt.wikipedia.org Mentuhotepas IV Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on nl.wikipedia.org Mentoehotep IV Usage on pl.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  IV Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Mentuhotep IV. Usage on sv.wikipedia.org Egyptens elfte dynasti Mentuhotep IV Usage on ta.wikipedia.org   Usage on th.wikipedia.org   4  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on uk.wikipedia.org  IV Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Mentuhotep IV Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q313865 UserIvan A. KrestininPortraitsXIX   . . TalkQ37110 View more global usage of this file. Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileReliefMentuhotepIVLepsius.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width