Mentuhotep IV - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family Toggle Family subsection 
1.1 Kings Mother Imi 
1.2 Mentuhotep III or Mentuhotep II 
2 Rock inscriptions Toggle Rock inscriptions subsection 
2.1 Wadi elHudi 
2.2 Ain Sukhna 
2.3 Wadi Hammamat Eastern Desert 
3 Other attestations 
4 End of reign 
5 See also 
6 References 
7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Mentuhotep IV 34 languages   Catal etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog    Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Mentuhotep IV Mentuhotep IV right gives offerings to Min. From Wadi Hammamat Pharaoh Reign 19971991 BC1 Predecessor Mentuhotep III Successor Amenemhat I Royal titulary Horus name Nebtawy Nbt3.wj Lord of the Two Lands2 Nebty name Nebtawy Nbt3.wj Lord of the Two Lands Golden Horus Neteru Nebu NTrwnbw Gold of the gods Prenomen Praenomen Nebtawyre Nbt3.wjR Lord of the Two Lands is Ra3 Nomen Mentuhotep Mnwtp Montu is Content4 Mother Imi Kings Mother Died 1991 BC Dynasty 
11 th dynasty Nebtawyre Mentuhotep IV was the last king of the 
11 th Dynasty in the Middle Kingdom. He seems to fit into a 
7 year period in the Turin Canon for which there is no recorded king. Familyedit Kings Mother Imiedit In Wadi Hammamat a rock inscription Hammamat M 191 with the royal name of Mentuhotep IV also mentions Kings Mother Imi.5 This monument only focus on the title Kings Mother presumably the mother of Mentuhotep IV. It does not include other titles like Kings Wife Kings Sister or Kings Daughter. Some have speculated that she was a concubine in the royal harem. Mentuhotep III or Mentuhotep IIedit It is not certain who the father of Mentuhotep IV was. Most scholars suggest that he was the son and successor of Mentuhotep III. However it is also possible that he was a son of Mentuhotep II thus a brother or halfbrother of Mentuhotep III. The fact that he has been omitted from several king lists indicate that there was a crisis in the order of succession. He also represents the last king of the eleventh dynasty and his reign is poorly documented indicating turmoil. Rock inscriptionsedit He is known from several inscriptions at several locations despite his reign being omitted from the Abydos king list. The inscriptions show the organization and makeup of a large expedition during his reign. Wadi elHudiedit Also he is attested by the inscriptions at Wadi elHudi.6 Wadi elHudi 1 dated to Year 1 Wadi elHudi 2 dated to Year 1 Wadi elHudi 3 dated to Year 1 Wadi elHudi 4 dated to Year 1 Ain Sukhnaedit At the Red Sea port of Ain Sukhna expeditions went to places like the Wadi Maghareh in the Sinai. Products like turquoise and copper were transported to Memphis some 120 km across the sand tracks of the Eastern Desert. Or perhaps transported along the Red Sea coast further south to the port of Mersa Gawasis. Inscriptions dated to Mentuhotep IV have been found.7 Year 1 arrival of the kings men workforce 3000 to bring back turquoise copper3 bronze  and all fine products of the desert.8 rnptzp 1 jwt m n nswt nw n m pn 3000 n s r jnt mfkt bj smn  jnw nbw nfrw n st Wadi Hammamat Eastern Desertedit He is known from a few inscriptions in Wadi Hammamat that record expeditions to the Red Sea coast and to quarry stone for the royal monuments. One of these inscriptions confirms the name of his mother to be Kings Mother Imi. The leader of an expedition to Wadi Hammamat during the second year of Mentuhotep IVs reign was his vizier Amenemhat who is assumed to be the future king Amenemhat I the first king of the 
12 th Dynasty and Mentuhoteps immediate successor. Hammamat G 52 Hammamat G 53 Hammamat G 54 dated to Year 2 Hammamat G 55 Hammamat G 56 Hammamat G 57 dated to Year 2 Hammamat G 58 Hammamat G 59 Hammamat G 60 Hammamat G 73 Hammamat G 140 Hammamat M 1 Hammamat M 40 Hammamat M 55 Hammamat M 105 Hammamat M 110 dated to Year 2 by Vizier Amenemhat jrjpt jmjr njwt tj jmjr kt nsw n mjb jmnmt Hammamat M 113 dated to Year 2 by Vizier Amenemhat jrjpt jmjr njwt tj jmjr kt nsw n mjb jmnmt Hammamat M 191 Hammamat M 192 dated to Year 2 by Vizier Amenemhat jrjpt jmjr njwt tj jmjr kt nsw n mjb jmnmt Hammamat M 205 by Vizier Amenemhat jrjpt jmjr njwt tj jmnmt Hammamat M 241 Other attestationsedit A fragment of a slate bowl found at Lisht North was regarded for a long time to be inscribed on the outside with the official titulary of Mentuhotep IV and on the inside with that of King Amenemhat I his successor. Since the two inscriptions are incised in a different style of writing according to Dorothea Arnold this indicates that Amenemhat had his name added to an older vessel that already bore the name of Mentuhotep IV.9 However Peter Janosi showed that Mentuhotep IV is not mentioned on the bowl the titulary preserved there fits better to Mentuhotep II.10 End of reignedit It is assumed by some Egyptologists that Amenemhat either usurped the throne or assumed power after Mentuhotep IV died childless. There is currently no archaeological or textual evidence to prove that Mentuhotep was deposed by his vizier or that he chose Amenemhat to be his designated successor. Neither his mummy nor his burial place have been found. See alsoedit Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt family tree Referencesedit  Stewart John 2006. African States and Rulers Third ed.. London McFarland. p. 81. ISBN 0786425628.  Mentuhotep IVs titulary on Eglyphica.de  King List chronological  Clayton Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs The ReignbyReign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson. p72. 2006. ISBN 0500286280  Hammamat M 191  Persons and Names of the Middle Kingdom.  Fakhry Ahmed 1952. The Inscriptions of the Amethyst Quarries at Wadi el Hudi.  ElRaziq Mahmoud Abd 2002. Les Inscriptions dAyn Southna. pp. 
4 a and 
4 b. ISBN 9782724703221.  Mahmoud Abd elRaziq Georges Castel Pierre Tallet Grgory Marouard 2012 The Pharaonic Site of Ayn Soukhna in the Gulf of Suez 20012009 Progress Report  Dorothea Arnold Amenemhat I and the Early Twelfth Dynasty at Thebes. Metropolitan Museum Journal v. 26 1991  Jnosi Peter 2010. MontuhotepNebtawyre and Amenemhat I Observations on the Early Twelfth Dynasty in Egypt. Metropolitan Museum Journal. 45 720. doi
10.1 0
86 met.
45.4 1558050. S
2 CID 192546924. Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mentuhotep IV. Grajetzki Wolfram 20060224. The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History Archaeology and Society. pp. 2526. ISBN 9780715634356. Preceded by Mentuhotep III Pharaoh of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty 1998 BC  1991 BC Succeeded by Amenemhat I v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMentuhotepIVoldid1200600022 Categories Pharaohs of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt 
20 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
20 thcentury BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with VIAF identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 29 January 2024 at 2137 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width