Segerseni - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestation 
2 Biography 
3 References 
4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Segerseni 14 languages  Catal Deutsch Franais Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Magyar   Slovenina Svenska  Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian or Nubian chieftain Segerseni Sekherseni Drawing of an inscription depicting Segersenis titulary. Pharaoh Reign early 
20 th century BCE Royal titulary Horus name Biknebuankh Bjknbwn Living golden falcon Prenomen Praenomen Menkhkare Mnk
3 R Fresh is the ka of Ra12 Nomen Segerseni Sgrsnj Dynasty king of Nubia concurrent with 
11 th
12 th Dynasty Segerseni was an ancient Egyptian or Nubian chieftain of Nubia likely reigning concurrently with the end of the 
11 th and beginning of the 
12 th Dynasty during the early Middle Kingdom. Attestationedit Segerseni is attested by one3 or two45 rock inscriptions discovered in Umbarakab KhorDehmit in Lower Nubia. Segersenis throne name as given on the inscriptions remains in doubt as it was roughly carved and became badly weathered over time. It could be Menkhkare or Wadjkare. The former is now regarded as more probable.3 One of Segersenis inscriptions possibly records a war in the unidentified region of Persenbet.5 Segerseni is not attested on any of the Egyptian king lists.3 Biographyedit Even though Segerseni adopted the titles of an Egyptian pharaoh there is no evidence of him outside of Nubia.3 He was thus most likely a pretender to the Egyptian or Nubian throne headquartered in Lower Nubia during a politically troubled period either at the beginning of the First Intermediate Period3 during the Second Intermediate Period5 or in the time span including the reign of Mentuhotep IV of the 
11 th Dynasty and the early reign of Amenemhat I of the 
12 th Dynasty.136 The latter possibility is seen as more probable by Egyptologists.3 In particular these two rulers seem to have had problems in being universally recognized as legitimate pharaohs. It is known that Amenemhat I dispatched Khnumhotep I the faithful Great Chief of the Oryx nome the 
16 th nome of Upper Egypt at Elephantine to Nubia in order to wipe out the last resistance against him there7 but it is not known with certainty who was the leader of this resistance. It remains conjectural to posit that it was Segerseni. Furthermore two other rulers based in Nubia Iyibkhentre and Qakare Ini are known likely from the same time period. They were both likely pretenders to the Egyptian throne and the relationships between them and Segerseni are unknown. If Segerseni was indeed Amenemhat Is foe he could have been fighting on Mentuhotep IVs side or for his own Nubian realm. Indeed Nubia had gained its independence during the First Intermediate Period as indicated by the military campaigns of Mentuhotep II in the region only 40 years prior to Segersenis conjectured lifetime.8 Referencesedit  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen Deutscher Kunstverlag Mnchen Berlin 1984 ISBN 3422008322 pp. 64 196.  Arthur Weigall A Report on the Antiquities of Lower Nubia. Cairo 1907 pl. 19.  a b c d e f g Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 357  T. SaveSoderbergh Agypten und Nubien Lund Hakan Ohlsson 1941 43 f  a b c Trk Lszl 2008. Between Two Worlds The Frontier Region Between Ancient Nubia and Egypt 3700 BC  500 AD. Brill. pp. 101 102. ISBN 9789004171978.  Wolfram Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom of ancient Egypt history archaeology and society. London Duckworth Egyptology 2006 pp. 2728.  Nicolas Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt Oxford Blackwell Books 1992 p. 15860.  Gae Callender in Ian Shaw edit. Oxford History of Ancient Egypt p. 140. Further readingedit Henri Gauthier Nouvelles remarques sur la XIe dynastie BIFAO 9 1911 pp. 99136. Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen. Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 p. 259. v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSegersenioldid1178520561 Categories 
20 thcentury BC Pharaohs People of the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt People of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Nondynastic pharaohs Nubian people Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 October 2023 at 0534 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width