File:Inscription Iyibkhentre Gauthier 02.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileInscription Iyibkhentre Gauthier 02.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. InscriptionIyibkhentreGauthier02.jpg 763  508 pixels file size 40 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionInscription Iyibkhentre Gauthier 02.jpg English Drawing of a rock inscription with part of the royal titulary of the Nubian ruler Iyibkhentre from Abu Hor Lower Nubia end 
11 thbeginning 
12 th Dynasty. Date 14 September 2014 193042 Source Nouvelles remarques sur la XIe dynastie. BIFAO 9 1911 pp. 99136 Author Henri Gauthier 18771950 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1950 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 70 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 14 September 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1836 14 September 2014 763  508 40 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Ibkhenetre Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Ibkhenetra Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Usage on th.wikipedia.org  Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Usage on www.wikidata.org Q1658019 TalkQ37110 Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileInscriptionIyibkhentreGauthier02.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width