File:Statue Senusret I Petrie.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStatue Senusret I Petrie.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Size of this preview 400  600 pixels. Other resolutions 160  240 pixels  320  480 pixels  806  1209 pixels. Original file 806  1209 pixels file size 106 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStatue Senusret I Petrie.jpg English Closeup of a statue of pharaoh Senusret I. Limestone from elLisht 
12 th dynasty Middle Kingdom now at the Cairo Museum. Date 12 May 2014 123435 Source Petrie ed in Ancient Egypt 1914 MacMillian and Co.  British School fo Archaeology in Egypt University College London. Author W. M. Flinders Petrie 18531942 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1942 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 80 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Arabic    Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 12 May 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1052 12 May 2014 806  1209 106 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Conspiracies in ancient Egypt List of pharaohs Senusret I Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org       Usage on arz.wikipedia.org     Usage on bn.wikipedia.org   Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Chronologie des pharaons de lgypte antique Conspirations dans lgypte antique Usage on it.wikipedia.org Sesostri I Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras Sesstris I Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  I Usage on ta.wikipedia.org   Usage on th.wikipedia.org  1  Usage on tr.wikipedia.org I. Senusret Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileStatueSenusretIPetrie.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width