Senusret I - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Family 
2 Events 
3 Building program 
4 The royal court 
5 Succession 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Senusret I 42 languages   Azrbaycanca    Catal  etina Deutsch  Espaol Euskara  Franais  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Lietuvi Magyar  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Slovenina Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog   Trke  Ting Vit Yorb  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Pharaoh of Egypt Senusret I Sesostris Sesonchosis Statue of Senusret I in the Cairo Museum Egypt Pharaoh Reign 19711926 BC 19201875 BC Predecessor Amenemhat I Successor Amenemhat II Royal titulary Horus name Ankhmesut nmsw.t Living of births Nebty name Ankhmesut nmsw.t Living of births Golden Horus Ankhmesut nmsw.t Living of births Turin canon ...ka k3 Prenomen Praenomen Kheperkare prk
3 R The Ka of Ra is created Nomen Senusret SjnWsrt Man of Wosret Consort Neferu III Children Amenemhat II Amenemhatankh Itakayt Sebat Neferusobek Neferuptah Father Amenemhat I Mother Neferitatjenen1 Died 1926 BC 1875 BC Burial Pyramid at elLisht Monuments White Chapel Pyramid of Senusret I Dynasty Twelfth Dynasty Senusret I Middle Egyptian znwsrt su nij was.i also anglicized as Sesostris I and Senwosret I was the second pharaoh of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt. He ruled from 1971 BC to 1926 BC 1920 BC to 1875 BC2 and was one of the most powerful kings of this Dynasty. He was the son of Amenemhat I. Senusret I was known by his prenomen Kheperkare which means the Ka of Re is created.3 He expanded the territory of Egypt allowing him to rule over an age of prosperity.4 He continued his fathers aggressive expansionist policies against Nubia by initiating two expeditions into this region in his 
10 th and 
18 th years and established Egypts formal southern border near the second cataract where he placed a garrison and a victory stele.5 He also organized an expedition to a Western Desert oasis. Senusret I established diplomatic relations with some rulers of towns in Syria and Canaan. He also tried to centralize the countrys political structure by supporting nomarchs who were loyal to him. His pyramid was constructed at elLisht. Senusret I is mentioned in the Story of Sinuhe where he is reported to have rushed back to the royal palace in Memphis from a military campaign in Libya after hearing about the assassination of his father Amenemhat I. Familyedit See also Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt family tree The family relations of the king are well known. Senusret I was the son of Amenemhat I. His mother was a queen with the name Neferitatenen. His main wife was Neferu III who was also his sister and mother of his successor Amenemhat II. The known children are Amenemhat II and the princesses Itakayt and Sebat. The latter was most likely a daughter of Neferu III as she appears with the latter together in one inscription. Later in life his father was killed. Eventsedit In his 
18 th year of reign Senusret I launched a military campaign against Lower Nubia and conquered the region down to the Second Cataract. The date of the expedition is mentioned on a stela from Buhen.6 The military campaign is mentioned in several inscriptions of this kings reign. Several local officials were involved with the military expedition. Amenemhat governor of the Oryx nome went there with the title overseer of troops.7 In year 25 Egypt was devastated by a famine caused by a low Nile flood.8 Building programedit Senusret I dispatched several quarrying expeditions to the Sinai and Wadi Hammamat and built numerous shrines and temples throughout Egypt and Nubia during his long reign. He rebuilt the important temple of ReAtum in Heliopolis which was the centre of the sun cult. He erected 2 red granite obelisks there to celebrate his Year 30 Heb Sed Jubilee. One of the obelisks still remains and is the oldest standing obelisk in Egypt. It is now in the AlMasalla Obelisk in Arabic area of AlMatariyyah district near the Ain Shams district Heliopolis. It is 67 feet tall and weighs 120 tons or 240000 pounds. Senusret I is attested to be the builder of a number of major temples in Ancient Egypt including the temple of Min at Koptos the Temple of Satet on Elephantine the Montutemple at Armant and the Montutemple at ElTod where a long inscription of the king is preserved.9 A shrine known as the White Chapel or Jubilee Chapel with fine high quality reliefs of Senusret I was built at Karnak to commemorate his Year 30 jubilee. It has subsequently been successfully reconstructed from various stone blocks discovered by Henri Chevrier in 1926. Finally Senusret remodelled the Temple of KhentiAmentiu Osiris at Abydos among his other major building projects. The White Chapel of Senusret I at Karnak. The royal courtedit Some of the key members of the court of Senusret I are known. The vizier at the beginning of his reign was Intefiqer who is known from many inscriptions and from his tomb next to the pyramid of Amenemhat I. He seems to have held this office for a long period of time and was followed by a vizier named Senusret. Two treasurers are known from the reign of the king Sobekhotep year 22 and Mentuhotep. The latter had a huge tomb next to the pyramid of the king and he seems to have been the main architect of the Amun temple at Karnak. Several high stewards are attested. Hor is known from several stelae and from an inscription in the Wadi elHudi where he was evidently the leader of an expedition for amethyst. One of the stelae is dated to year nine of the king. A certain Nakhr followed in office attested around year 12 of the king. He had a tomb at Lisht. A certain Antef son of a woman called Zatamun is known again from several stelae one dates to year 24 another one to year 25 of Senusret I. Another Antef was the son of a woman called Zatuser and was most likely also high steward in the kings reign.10 Successionedit Senusret was crowned coregent with his father Amenemhat I in his fathers 
20 th regnal year.11 Towards the end of his own life he appointed his son Amenemhat II as his coregent. The stele of Wepwawet is dated to the 
44 th year of Senusret and to the 
2 nd year of Amenemhet thus he would have appointed him some time in his 
43 rd year.12 Senusret is thought to have died during his 
46 th year on the throne since the Turin Canon ascribes him a reign of 45 Years.13 Upper part of a statue of Senusret I from Egypt Middle Kingdom 
12 th Dynasty. C. 1950 BC. Neues Museum Germany Obelisk of Senusret I in Heliopolis Osiride statue of Senusret I Stone weight with Senusret Is cartouche Base of a granite statue inscribed with the name of Senusret I. From Armant Egypt. Petrie Museum London See alsoedit Loyalist Teaching Referencesedit  W. Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History Archaeology and Society Duckworth London 2006 ISBN 0715634356 p.36  Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss David Warburton eds. 2006. Ancient Egyptian chronology. Brill. ISBN 9004113851. OCLC 70878036.  Peter Clayton Chronicle of the Pharaohs Thames  Hudson Ltd 1994 p.78  Robins. The Art of Ancient Egypt. pp. 9597.  Senusret I  William K. Simpson Sesostris II inWolfgang Helck ed. Lexikon der gyptologie Vol. 5 Harrassowitz Wiesbaden 1984 ISBN 3447024895 p. 895  Percy E. Newberry Beni Hasan volume 1 London 1893 p. 25 onlin  Wolfram Grajetzki The People of the Cobra Province in EgyptOxbow Books. Oxford 2020 ISBN 9781789254211 pp. 177178  Grajetzki The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt History p. 3841  W. Grajetzki Court officials of the Middle Kingdom London 2009 ISBN 9780715637456 p. 172  Murnane William J. Ancient Egyptian Coregencies Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization. No. 40. p.2. The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago 1977.  Murnane William J. Ancient Egyptian Coregencies Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization. No. 40. p.5. The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago 1977.  Murnane William J. Ancient Egyptian Coregencies Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization. No. 40. p.6. The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago 1977. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Senusret I. External linksedit Senusret I Kheperkare Sesostris I Kheperkare v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 WorldCat National Germany Israel United States Poland People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSenusretIoldid1219577577 Categories Senusret I Pharaohs of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt 
20 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
20 thcentury BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 18 April 2024 at 1557 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width