Karnak - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Name 
2 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 
2.1 Hypostyle Hall 
3 History Toggle History subsection 
3.1 European knowledge of Karnak 
4 Main parts Toggle Main parts subsection 
4.1 Precinct of AmunRe 
4.2 Precinct of Mut 
4.3 Precinct of Montu 
4.4 Temple of Amenhotep IV deliberately dismantled 
5 Gallery 
6 See also 
7 References 
8 Further reading 
9 External links Toggle the table of contents Karnak 59 languages Afrikaans  Azrbaycanca    Brezhoneg Catal Cebuano etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Gaeilge Galego    Igbo Bahasa Indonesia slenska Italiano  Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Limburgs Magyar Malagasy  Nederlands  Norsk bokml Occitan  Portugus Romn  Shqip Simple English Slovenina Slovenina   srpski Suomi Svenska   Trke   Ting Vit Winaray   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 254
37 N 3239
31 E  
25.7 18
61 N 
32.6 58
61 E  
25.7 1861 
32.6 5861 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Ancient Egyptian temple complex This article is about the Karnak temple complex in Egypt. For the Neolithic menhir site see Carnac. For other uses of either spelling see Karnak disambiguation. Karnak Pillars of the Great Hypostyle Hall from the Precinct of AmunRe Shown within Egypt Location ElKarnak Luxor Governorate Egypt Region Upper Egypt Coordinates 254
37 N 3239
31 E  
25.7 18
61 N 
32.6 58
61 E  
25.7 1861 
32.6 5861 Type Sanctuary Part of Thebes History Builder Senusret INectanebo I Material Stone Founded c.1970 BCE Periods Middle Kingdom to Ptolemaic Kingdom Site notes Condition Ruin Public access Yes UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Ancient Thebes with its Necropolis Type Cultural Criteria I III VI Designated 1979 
3 rd session Reference no. 87 Region Arab states The Karnak Temple Complex commonly known as Karnak kr.nk1 comprises a vast mix of temples pylons chapels and other buildings near Luxor Egypt. Construction at the complex began during the reign of Senusret I reigned 19711926 BCE in the Middle Kingdom c.20001700 BCE and continued into the Ptolemaic Kingdom 30530 BCE although most of the extant buildings date from the New Kingdom. The area around Karnak was the ancient Egyptian Ipetisut The Most Selected of Places and the main place of worship of the 
18 th Dynastic Theban Triad with the god Amun as its head. It is part of the monumental city of Thebes and in 1979 it was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List along with the rest of the city.2 Karnak gets its name from the nearby and partly surrounded modern village of ElKarnak 
2.5  kilometres 
1.6  miles north of Luxor. Nameedit The original name of the temple was Ipetisut meaning The Most Select of Places.3 The complexs modern name Karnak comes from the nearby village of elKarnak4 which means fortified village.5 Overviewedit The complex is a vast open site and includes the Karnak Open Air Museum. It is believed to be the secondcitation needed most visited historical site in Egypt only the Giza pyramid complex near Cairo receives more visits. It consists of four main parts of which only the largest is currently open to the public. The term Karnak often is understood as being the Precinct of AmunRe only because this is the only part most visitors see. The three other parts the Precinct of Mut the Precinct of Montu and the dismantled Temple of Amenhotep IV are closed to the public. There also are a few smaller temples and sanctuaries connecting the Precinct of Mut the Precinct of AmunRe and the Luxor Temple. The Precinct of Mut is very ancient being dedicated to an Earth and creation deity but not yet restored. The original temple was destroyed and partially restored by Hatshepsut although another pharaoh built around it in order to change the focus or orientation of the sacred area. Many portions of it may have been carried away for use in other buildings. The key difference between Karnak and most of the other temples and sites in Egypt is the length of time over which it was developed and used. Construction of temples started in the Middle Kingdom and continued into Ptolemaic times. Approximately thirty pharaohs contributed to the buildings enabling it to reach a size complexity and diversity not seen elsewhere. Few of the individual features of Karnak are unique but the size and number of features are vast. The deities represented range from some of the earliest worshipped to those worshipped much later in the history of the Ancient Egyptian culture. Although destroyed it also contained an early temple built by Amenhotep IV Akhenaten the pharaoh who later would celebrate a nearly monotheistic religion he established that prompted him to move his court and religious center away from Thebes. It also contains evidence of adaptations where the buildings of the ancient Egyptians were used by later cultures for their own religious purposes such as Coptic churches. Hypostyle Halledit Open papyrus umbel capitals and architrave on the central columns of the Hypostyle Hall Main article Great Hypostyle Hall The Great Hypostyle Hall in the Precinct of AmunRe has an area of 50000 sq ft 5000 m2 with 134 massive columns arranged in 16 rows. One hundred and twentytwo of these columns are 10 metres 33 ft tall and the other 12 are 21 metres 69 ft tall with a diameter of over 3 metres 
9.8  ft. The architraves on top of these columns are estimated to weigh 70 tons. These architraves may have been lifted to these heights using levers. This would be a timeconsuming process and also would require great balance to get to such heights. A common alternative theory regarding how they were moved is that large ramps were constructed of sand mud brick or stone and that the stones were then towed up the ramps. If stone had been used for the ramps they would have been able to use much less material. The top of the ramps presumably would have employed either wooden tracks or cobblestones for towing the megaliths. There is an unfinished pillar in an outoftheway location that indicates how it would have been finished. Final carving was executed after the drums were put in place so that it was not damaged while being placed.67 Several experiments moving megaliths with ancient technology were made at other locations  some of which are amongst the largest monoliths in the world. The sun gods shrine was built so that it has light focused upon it during the winter solstice.8 In 2009 UCLA launched a website dedicated to virtual reality digital reconstructions of the Karnak complex and other resources.9 Historyedit Main article History of the Karnak Temple complex Gate at Karnak. Brooklyn Museum Archives Goodyear Archival Collection before 1923 The history of the Karnak complex is largely the history of Thebes and its changing role in the culture. Religious centers varied by region and when a new capital of the unified culture was established the religious centers in that area gained prominence. The city of Thebes does not appear to have been of great significance before the Eleventh Dynasty and previous temple building there would have been relatively small with shrines being dedicated to the early deities of Thebes the Earth goddess Mut and Montu. Early building was destroyed by invaders. The earliest known artifact found in the area of the temple is a small eightsided column from the Eleventh Dynasty which mentions AmunRe. Amun sometimes called Amen was long the local tutelary deity of Thebes. He was identified with the ram and the goose. The Egyptian meaning of Amun is hidden or the hidden god.10 Obelisks of Hatshepsut a tall obelisk stands above a field of rubble and bricks in the foreground lies the top of another obelisk. 1906 Major construction work in the Precinct of AmunRe took place during the Eighteenth Dynasty when Thebes became the capital of the unified Ancient Egypt. Almost every pharaoh of that dynasty added something to the temple site. Thutmose I erected an enclosure wall connecting the Fourth and Fifth pylons which comprise the earliest part of the temple still standing in situ. Hatshepsut had monuments constructed and also restored the original Precinct of Mut that had been ravaged by the foreign rulers during the Hyksos occupation. She had twin obelisks at the time the tallest in the world erected at the entrance to the temple. One still stands as the secondtallest ancient obelisk still standing on Earth the other has toppled and is broken. Another of her projects at the site Karnaks Red Chapel or Chapelle Rouge was intended as a barque shrine and originally may have stood between her two obelisks. She later ordered the construction of two more obelisks to celebrate her sixteenth year as pharaoh one of the obelisks broke during construction and thus a third was constructed to replace it. The broken obelisk was left at its quarrying site in Aswan where it still remains. Known as the unfinished obelisk it provides evidence of how obelisks were quarried.11 The Great Hypostyle Hall 1857 Rijksmuseum The Netherlands Construction of the Great Hypostyle Hall also may have begun during the Eighteenth Dynasty although most new building was undertaken under Seti I and Ramesses II in the Nineteenth. Merneptah also of the Nineteenth Dynasty commemorated his victories over the Sea Peoples on the walls of the Cachette Court the start of the processional route also known as the Avenue of Sphinxes to the Luxor Temple. The last major change to the Precinct of AmunRes layout was the addition of the First Pylon and the massive enclosure walls that surround the precinct both constructed by Nectanebo I of the Thirtieth Dynasty. In 323 AD Roman emperor Constantine the Great recognized the Christian religion and in 356 Constantius II ordered the closing of pagan temples throughout the Roman empire into which Egypt had been annexed in 30 BC. Karnak was by this time mostly abandoned and Christian churches were founded among the ruins the most famous example of this is the reuse of the Festival Hall of Thutmose IIIs central hall where painted decorations of saints and Coptic inscriptions can still be seen. European knowledge of Karnakedit Thebes exact placement was unknown in medieval Europe though both Herodotus and Strabo give the exact location of Thebes and how long up the Nile one must travel to reach it. Maps of Egypt based on the 
2 nd century Claudius Ptolemaeus mammoth work Geographia had been circulating in Europe since the late 
14 th century all of them showing Thebes Diospolis location. Despite this several European authors of the 
15 th and 
16 th centuries who visited only Lower Egypt and published their travel accounts such as Joos van Ghistele and Andr Thvet put Thebes in or close to Memphis. Hieroglyphs from the great obelisk of Karnak transcribed by Ippolito Rosellini in 1828 The Karnak temple complex is first described by an unknown Venetian in 1589 although his account gives no name for the complex. This account housed in the Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Firenze is the first known European mention since ancient Greek and Roman writers about a range of monuments in Upper Egypt and Nubia including Karnak Luxor temple the Colossi of Memnon Esna Edfu Kom Ombo Philae and others. Karnak Carnac as a village name and name of the complex is first attested in 1668 when two capuchin missionary brothers Protais and Charles Franois dOrlans travelled though the area. Protais writing about their travel was published by Melchisdech Thvenot Relations de divers voyages curieux 16
70 s1696 editions and Johann Michael Vansleb The Present State of Egypt 1678. Photograph of the temple complex taken in 1914 Cornell University Library The first drawing of Karnak is found in Paul Lucas travel account of 1704 Voyage du Sieur Paul Lucas au Levant. It is rather inaccurate and can be quite confusing to modern eyes. Lucas travelled in Egypt during 16991703. The drawing shows a mixture of the Precinct of AmunRe and the Precinct of Montu based on a complex confined by the three huge Ptolemaic gateways of Ptolemy III Euergetes  Ptolemy IV Philopator and the massive 113 m long 43 m high and 15 m thick First Pylon of the Precinct of AmunRe. Karnak was visited and described in succession by Claude Sicard and his travel companion Pierre Laurent Pincia 1718 and 172021 Granger 1731 Frederick Louis Norden 173738 Richard Pococke 1738 James Bruce 1769 CharlesNicolasSigisbert Sonnini de Manoncourt 1777 William George Browne 179293 and finally by a number of scientists of the Napoleon expedition including Vivant Denon during 17981799. Claudetienne Savary describes the complex in rather great detail in his work of 1785 especially in light of the fact that it is a fictional account of a pretend journey to Upper Egypt composed out of information from other travellers. Savary did visit Lower Egypt in 177778 and published a work about that too. Main partsedit The Precinct of AmunRe as seen from the Sacred Lake Precinct of AmunReedit Main article Precinct of AmunRe This is the largest of the precincts of the temple complex and is dedicated to AmunRe the chief deity of the Theban Triad. There are several colossal statues including the figure of Pinedjem I which is 
10.5  metres 34 ft tall. The sandstone for this temple including all of the columns was transported from Gebel Silsila 100 miles 161 km south on the Nile river.12 It also has one of the largest obelisks weighing 328 tons and standing 29 metres 95 ft tall.1314 Precinct of Mutedit Main article Precinct of Mut Map of the Precinct of Mut and AmunRe. Located to the south of the newer AmenRe complex this precinct was dedicated to the mother goddess Mut who became identified as the wife of AmunRe in the Eighteenth Dynasty Theban Triad. It has several smaller temples associated with it and has its own sacred lake constructed in a crescent shape. This temple has been ravaged many portions having been used in other structures. Following excavation and restoration works by the Johns Hopkins University team led by Betsy Bryan see below the Precinct of Mut has been opened to the public. Six hundred black granite statues were found in the courtyard to her temple. It may be the oldest portion of the site. In 2006 Bryan presented her findings of a festival that included apparent intentional overindulgence in alcohol.15 Participation in the festival included the priestesses and the population. Historical records of tens of thousands attending the festival exist. These findings were made in the temple of Mut because when Thebes rose to greater prominence Mut absorbed the warrior goddesses Sekhmet and Bast as some of her aspects. First Mut became MutWadjetBast then MutSekhmetBast Wadjet having merged into Bast then Mut also assimilated Menhit another lioness goddess and her adopted sons wife becoming MutSekhmetBastMenhit and finally becoming MutNekhbet. Temple excavations at Luxor discovered a porch of drunkenness built onto the temple by the pharaoh Hatshepsut during the height of her twentyyear reign. In a later myth developed around the annual drunken Sekhmet festival Ra by then the sun god of Upper Egypt created her from a fiery eye gained from his mother to destroy mortals who conspired against him Lower Egypt. In the myth Sekhmets bloodlust was not quelled at the end of the battle and led to her destroying almost all of humanity so Ra had tricked her by turning the Nile as red as blood the Nile turns red every year when filled with silt during inundation so that Sekhmet would drink it. The trick however was that the red liquid was not blood but beer mixed with pomegranate juice so that it resembled blood making her so drunk that she gave up slaughter and became an aspect of the gentle Hathor. The complex interweaving of deities occurred over the thousands of years of the culture. Ruins in the Precinct of Montu Precinct of Montuedit Main article Precinct of Montu This portion of the site is dedicated to the son of Mut and AmunRe Montu a wargod. It is located to the north of the AmunRe complex and is much smaller in size. It is not open to the public. Temple of Amenhotep IV deliberately dismantlededit Main article Temple of Amenhotep IV The temple that Akhenaten Amenhotep IV constructed on the site was located east of the main complex outside the walls of the AmunRe precinct. It was destroyed immediately after the death of its builder who had attempted to overcome the powerful priesthood who had gained control over Egypt before his reign. It was so thoroughly demolished that its full extent and layout is unknown. The priesthood of that temple regained their powerful position as soon as Akhenaten died and were instrumental in destroying many records of his existence. Galleryedit Luxor dromos an avenue of humanheaded sphinxes which once connected the temples of Karnak and Luxor. The Sacred Lake of the Precinct of AmunRe View of the first pylon of the temple of AmunRe at Karnak Ramheaded sphinx statues at Karnak Hypostyle hall of the Precinct of AmunRe as it appeared in 1838 in The Holy Land Syria Idumea Arabia Egypt and Nubia Colossal statue of Ramses II Open papyrus umbel capitals of the Hypostyle Hall Closed papyrus umbel capitals of the Hypostyle Hall Obelisk of Thutmosis I in Karnak Statue of Khepri in Karnak Karnak Egypt Gate and Pylon. n.d. Brooklyn Museum Archives Karnak Egypt Great Statues. n.d. Goodyear. Brooklyn Museum Archives See alsoedit List of megalithic sites Referencesedit  Karnak. MerriamWebsters Collegiate Dictionary Eleventh Edition. MerriamWebster 2007. p. 1550  Ancient Thebes with its Necropolis. UNESCO World Heritage Centre. United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization. Retrieved 7 September 2021.  Wilkinson Richard H. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 154. ISBN 9780500051009. Retrieved 21 March 2024.  Wilkinson Richard H. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London Thames  Hudson. p. 154. ISBN 9780500051009.  Peust Carsten 2010. Die Toponyme Vorarabischen Ursprungs im Modernen gypten Ein Katalog Gttinger Miszellen Beihefte Nr. 8 PDF in German. Gttingen Universitt Gttingen. p. 56. Retrieved 21 March 2024.  Egypt Engineering an empire engineering feats  Lehner Mark The Complete Pyramids London Thames and Hudson 1997 pp.202225 ISBN 0500050848.  Everything You Need to Know About the Winter Solstice. National Geographic. December 21 2015. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 22 December 2022.  Ancient Egypt Brought To Life With Virtual Model Of Historic Temple Complex Science Daily 30 April 2009 retrieved 12 June 2009 1  Stewert Desmond and editors of the Newsweek Book Division The Pyramids and Sphinx 1971 pp. 6062  The Unfinished Obelisk by Peter Tyson March 16 1999 NOVA online adventure  Time Life Lost Civilizations series Ramses II Magnificence on the Nile 1993 pp. 5354  Walker Charles 1980 Wonders of the Ancient World pp247  The Seventy Wonders of the Ancient World edited by Chris Scarre 1999 Thames  Hudson London  Sex and booze figured in Egyptian rites nbcnews.com Oct 30 2006 Further readingedit Blyth Elizabeth 2006. Karnak Evolution of a Temple. Routledge. ISBN 9780203968376. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Karnak temple complex. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Karnak. CFEETK  Centre Francogyptien dtude des Temples de Karnak en Temple of Amun numerous photos  schemes comments in russian Karnak images www.karnak
3 d.net  Webbook The 
3 D reconstruction of the Great Temple of Amun in Karnak. Marc Digital Karnak UCLA Karnak Temple picture gallery at Remains.se v t e Karnak General History Open Air Museum Opet Festival Precincts AmunRe Great Hypostyle Hall Temple of Ptah Temple of Khonsu Bubastite Portal Festival Hall of Thutmose III Botanical garden of Thutmose III Montu Mut Aten Temple Temple of Amenhotep IV Related Chapelle Rouge Great Karnak Inscription Karnak king list White Chapel v t e Landmarks of Luxor East Bank Luxor Temple Luxor International Airport Karnak Temple Luxor Museum Mummification Museum Winter Palace Hotel West Bank Valley of the Kings Valley of the Queens Medinet Habu The Ramesseum Deir alMadinah Tombs of the Nobles Deir elBahri Malkata Colossi of Memnon v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Ancient Egyptian race controversy Population history of Egypt Prehistoric Egypt Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Pottery Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade EgyptMesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Authority control databases National Czech Republic Geographic Structurae Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKarnakoldid1218792429 Categories Karnak temple complex Buildings and structures completed in the 
20 th century BC 1589 archaeological discoveries Thebes Egypt Populated places in Luxor Governorate Openair museums in Egypt Tourist attractions in Egypt Theban Triad Hidden categories CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with Structurae structure identifiers This page was last edited on 13 April 2024 at 2134 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width