Pyramid - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Ancient monuments Toggle Ancient monuments subsection 
1.1 West Asia 

1.1.1 Mesopotamia 
1.2 Africa 

1.2.1 Egypt 

1.2.2 Sudan 

1.2.3 Sahel 

1.2.4 Nigeria 
1.3 Europe 

1.3.1 Greece 

1.3.2 Spain 

1.3.3 Roman Empire 

1.3.4 Medieval Europe 
1.4 Americas 

1.4.1 Peru 

1.4.2 Mesoamerica 

1.4.3 United States 
1.5 Asia 

1.5.1 India 

1.5.2 Indonesia 

1.5.3 East Asia Southeast Asia and Central Asia 
1.6 Oceania 
2 Modern pyramids Toggle Modern pyramids subsection 
2.1 Modern mausoleums 
3 See also 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Pyramid 124 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch  Aragons  Asturianu Avae Azrbaycanca    Bnlmg      Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal etina ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Fiji Hindi Franais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gidhlig Galego       Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue IsiZulu slenska Italiano    Kernowek Kiswahili Kurd  Latina Latvieu Lietuvi Limburgs Magyar   Malagasy   Bahasa Melayu   Mngdngng  Nederlands Nedersaksies     Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Ozbekcha      Patois Polski Portugus Qrmtatarca Romn Runa Simi   Shqip Sicilianu  Simple English  Slovenina Slovenina lnski    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska Tagalog  Taqbaylit    Trke Trkmene   Ting Vit Vro WestVlams Winaray    Zazaki  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikivoyage From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Structure shaped as a geometric pyramid This article is about pyramidshaped structures. For the geometric shape see Pyramid geometry. For other uses see Pyramid disambiguation. Pyramid of Khafre Egypt built c.2600 BC A pyramid from Ancient Greek  purams pyramid12 is a structure whose visible surfaces are triangular and converge to a point at the top making the shape roughly a pyramid in the geometric sense. The base of a pyramid can be of any polygon shape such as trilateral or quadrilateral a 
2 dimensional shape is a triangle. A pyramid has the majority of its mass closer to the ground3 with less mass towards the pyramidion at the apex. This is due to the gradual decrease in the crosssectional area along the vertical axis with increasing elevation. This offers a weight distribution that allowed early civilizations to create monumental structures. Prasat Thom temple at Koh Ker Cambodia Civilizations in many parts of the world have built pyramids. The largest pyramid by volume is the Mesoamerican Great Pyramid of Cholula in the Mexican state of Puebla. For millennia the largest structures on Earth were pyramidsfirst the Red Pyramid in the Dashur Necropolis and then the Great Pyramid of Khufu both in Egyptthe latter is the only extant example of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Ancient monumentsedit See also Ancient pyramid West Asiaedit Mesopotamiaedit Main article Ziggurat Anu ziggurat and White Temple at Uruk Chogha Zanbil is an ancient Elamite complex in the Khuzestan province of Iran. The Mesopotamians built the earliest pyramidal structures called ziggurats. In ancient times these were brightly painted in goldbronze. They were constructed of sundried mudbrick and little remains of them. Ziggurats were built by the Sumerians Babylonians Elamites Akkadians and Assyrians. Each ziggurat was part of a temple complex that included other buildings. The ziggurats precursors were raised platforms that date from the Ubaid period4 of the fourth millennium BC. The earliest ziggurats began near the end of the Early Dynastic Period.5 The original pyramidal structure the anu ziggurat dates to around 4000 BC. The White Temple was built on top of it circa 3500 BC.6 Built in receding tiers upon a rectangular oval or square platform the ziggurat was a pyramidal structure with a flat top. Sunbaked bricks made up the core of the ziggurat with facings of fired bricks on the outside. The facings were often glazed in different colors and may have had astrological significance. Kings sometimes had their names engraved on them. The number of tiers ranged from two to seven. It is assumed that they had shrines at the top but no archaeological evidence supports this and the only textual evidence is from Herodotus.7 Access to the shrine would have been by a series of ramps on one side of the ziggurat or by a spiral ramp from base to summit. Africaedit Egyptedit Main article Egyptian pyramids The pyramids of the Giza necropolis as seen from the air The most famous pyramids are in Egypt  huge structures built of bricks or stones some of which are among the worlds largest constructions. They are shaped in reference to the suns rays. Most had a smoothed white limestone surface. Many of the facing stones have fallen or were removed and used for construction in Cairo.8 The capstone was usually made of limestone granite or basalt and some were plated with electrum.9 Ancient Egyptians built pyramids from 2700 BC until around 1700 BC. The first pyramid was erected during the Third Dynasty by the Pharaoh Djoser and his architect Imhotep. This step pyramid consisted of six stacked mastabas.1011 Early kings such as Snefru built pyramids with subsequent kings adding to the number until the end of the Middle Kingdom. The age of the pyramids reached its zenith at Giza in 25752150 BC.12 The last king to build royal pyramids was Ahmose13 with later kings hiding their tombs in the hills such as those in the Valley of the Kings in Luxors West Bank.14 In Medinat Habu and Deir elMedina smaller pyramids were built by individuals. Smaller pyramids with steeper sides were built by the Nubians who ruled Egypt in the Late Period.15 The Great Pyramid of Giza is the largest in Egypt and one of the largest in the world. At 1
46.6  metres 481 ft it was the tallest structure in the world until the Lincoln Cathedral was finished in 1311 AD. Its base covers an area of around 53000 square metres 570000 sq ft. The Great Pyramid is the only extant one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Ancient Egyptian pyramids were in most cases placed west of the river Nile because the divine pharaohs soul was meant to join with the sun during its descent before continuing with the sun in its eternal round.9 As of 2008 some 135 pyramids had been discovered in Egypt1617 most located near Cairo.18 Sudanedit Main article Nubian pyramids Pyramids at Meroe with pylonlike entrances Nubian pyramids at archaeological sites of the Island of Meroe While pyramids are commonly associated with Egypt Sudan has 220 extant pyramids the most in the world.19 Nubian pyramids were constructed roughly 240 of them at three sites in Sudan to serve as tombs for the kings and queens of Napata and Mero. The pyramids of Kush also known as Nubian Pyramids have different characteristics than those of Egypt. The Nubian pyramids had steeper sides than the Egyptian ones. Pyramids were built in Sudan as late as 200 AD. Saheledit Main article Tomb of Askia The Tomb of Askia in Gao Mali is believed to be the burial place of Askia Mohammad I one of the Songhai Empires most prolific emperors. It was built at the end of the fifteenth century and is designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. UNESCO describes the tomb as an example of the monumental mudbuilding traditions of the West African Sahel. The complex includes the pyramidal tomb two mosques a cemetery and an assembly ground. At 17 metres 56 ft in height it is the largest precolonial architectural monument in Gao. It is a notable example of the SudanoSahelian architectural style that later spread throughout the region. Nigeriaedit Main article Nsude pyramid shrines One of the unique structures of Igbo culture was the Nsude pyramids in the Nigerian town of Nsude northern Igboland. Ten pyramidal structures were built of claymud. The first base section was 60 ft 18 m in circumference and 3 ft 
0.9  m in height. The next stack was 45 ft 14 m in circumference. Circular stacks continued to the top. The structures were temples for the god Ala who was believed to reside there. A stick was placed at the top to represent the gods residence. The structures were laid in groups of five parallel to each other. Because it was built of claymud like the Deffufa of Nubia over time periodic reconstruction has been required.20 Europeedit Greeceedit Main article Greek pyramids Pyramid of Hellinikon Pausanias 
2 nd century AD mentions two buildings resembling pyramids one 19 kilometres 12 mi southwest of a still standing structure at Hellenikon21 a common tomb for soldiers who died in a legendary struggle for the throne of Argos and another that he was told was the tomb of Argives killed in a battle around 6698 BC. Neither survives and no evidence indicates that they resembled Egyptian pyramids. At least two surviving pyramidlike structures are available to study one at Hellenikon and the other at LigourioLigurio a village near the ancient theatre Epidaurus. These buildings have inwardly sloping walls but bear no other resemblance to Egyptian pyramids. They had large central rooms unlike Egyptian pyramids and the Hellenikon structure is rectangular rather than square 
12.5  by 14 metres 41 by 46 ft which means that the sides could not have met at a point.22 The stone used to build these structures was limestone quarried locally and was cut to fit not into freestanding blocks like the Great Pyramid of Giza.citation needed These structures were dated from pot shards excavated from the floor and grounds. The latest estimates are around the 
5 th and 
4 th centuries. Normally this technique is used for dating pottery but researchers used it to try to date stone flakes from the structure walls. This launched debate about whether or not these structures are actually older than Egypt part of the Black Athena controversy.23 Lefkowitz criticised this research suggesting that some of the research was done not to determine the reliability of the dating method as was suggested but to back up a claim and to make points about pyramids and Greek civilization. She claimed that not only were the results imprecise but that other structures mentioned in the research are not in fact pyramids e.g. a tomb alleged to be the tomb of Amphion and Zethus near Thebes a structure at Stylidha Thessaly which is a long wall etc. She pushed the possibility that the stones that were dated might have been recycled from earlier constructions. She claimed that earlier research from the 19
30 s confirmed in the 19
80 s by Fracchia was ignored.24 Liritzis responded that Lefkowitz failed to understand and misinterpreted the methodology.25 Spainedit Pyramids of Gmar Tenerife Spain The Pyramids of Gmar refer to six rectangular pyramidshaped terraced structures built from lava without mortar. They are located in the district of Chacona part of the town of Gmar on the island of Tenerife in the Canary Islands. The structures were dated to the 
19 th century and their function explained as a byproduct of contemporary agricultural techniques. Autochthonous Guanche traditions as well as surviving images indicate that similar structures also known as Morras Majanos Molleros or Paredones were built in many locations on the island.citation needed However over time they were dismantled and used as building material. Gmar hostred nine pyramids only six of which survive. Roman Empireedit Main article Pyramid of Cestius Pyramid of Cestius in Rome Italy The 
27 metrehigh Pyramid of Cestius was built by the end of the 
1 st century BC and survives close to the Porta San Paolo. Another named Meta Romuli stood in the Ager Vaticanus todays Borgo but was destroyed at the end of the 
15 th century.26 Medieval Europeedit Pyramids were occasionally used in Christian architecture during the feudal era e.g. as the tower of Oviedos Gothic Cathedral of San Salvador. Americasedit Pyramid of the Moon Teotihuacan built between 100 and 450 AD Peruedit Andean cultures used pyramids in various architectural structures such as the ones in Caral Tcume and Chavn de Huantar constructed around the same time as early Egyptian pyramids. Mesoamericaedit Main article Mesoamerican pyramids El Castillo at Chichen Itza Several Mesoamerican cultures built pyramidshaped structures. Mesoamerican pyramids were usually stepped with temples on top more similar to the Mesopotamian ziggurat than the Egyptian pyramid. The largest by volume is the Great Pyramid of Cholula in the Mexican state of Puebla. Constructed from the 
3 rd century BC to the 
9 th century AD this pyramid is the worlds largest monument and is still not fully excavated. The third largest pyramid in the world the Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan is also located in Mexico. An unusual pyramid with a circular plan survives at the site of Cuicuilco now inside Mexico City and mostly covered with lava from an eruption of the Xitle Volcano in the 
1 st century BC. Several circular stepped pyramids called Guachimontones survive in Teuchitln Jalisco. Pyramids in Mexico were often used for human sacrifice. Harner stated that for the dedication of the Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan in 1487 one source states 20000 another 72344 and several give 80400 as the number of humans sacrificed.27 United Statesedit A diagram showing the various components of Eastern North American platform mounds Monks Mound Cahokia Many preColumbian Native American societies of ancient North America built large pyramidal earth structures known as platform mounds. Among the largest and bestknown of these structures is Monks Mound at the site of Cahokia in what became Illinois completed around 1100 AD. It has a base larger than that of the Great Pyramid. Many mounds underwent repeated episodes of expansion. They are believed to have played a central role in the moundbuilding peoples religious life. Documented uses include semipublic chiefs house platforms public temple platforms mortuary platforms charnel house platforms earth lodgetown house platforms residence platforms square ground and rotunda platforms and dance platforms.282930 Cultures that built substructure mounds include the Troyville culture Coles Creek culture Plaquemine culture and Mississippian cultures. Asiaedit Main article Chinese pyramids Ancient Korean tomb in Jian Northeastern China Shaohao Tomb Qufu China Many square flattopped mound tombs in China. The First Emperor Qin Shi Huang c.221 BC who unified the 7 preImperial Kingdoms was buried under a large mound outside modern day Xian. In the following centuries about a dozen more Han Dynasty royals were also buried under flattopped pyramidal earthworks.citation needed Indiaedit Numerous giant granite temple pyramids were built in South India during the Chola Empire many of which remain in use. Examples include Brihadisvara Temple at Thanjavur Brihadisvara Temple at Gangaikonda Cholapuram and the Airavatesvara Temple at Darasuram. However the largest temple area is the Ranganathaswamy Temple in Srirangam Tamil Nadu. The Thanjavur temple was built by Raja Raja Chola in the 
11 th century. The Brihadisvara Temple was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1987 the Temple of Gangaikondacholapuram and the Airavatesvara Temple at Darasuram were added in 20
04.3 1 The granite gopuram tower of Brihadeeswarar Temple 1010 CE. The pyramidal structure above the sanctum at Brihadisvara Temple. Pyramidstructure inside Airavatesvara Temple. Ranganathaswamy Temple gopurams at Srirangam dedicated to Ranganatha a reclining form of the Hindu deity Maha Vishnu. Indonesiaedit Borobudur Central Java Indonesia Candi Sukuh in Java Indonesia Austronesian megalithic culture in Indonesia featured earth and stone step pyramid structures called punden berundak. These were discovered in Pangguyangan near Cisolok32 and in Cipari near Kuningan.33 The stone pyramids were based on beliefs that mountains and high places were the abode for the spirit of the ancestors.34 The step pyramid is the basic design of the 
8 th century Borobudur Buddhist monument in Central Java.35 However later Java temples were influenced by Indian Hindu architecture as exemplified by the spires of Prambanan temple. In the 
15 th century during late Majapahit period Java saw the revival of indigenous Austronesian elements as displayed by Sukuh temple that somewhat resemble Mesoamerican pyramids and also stepped pyramids of Mount Penanggungan.36 East Asia Southeast Asia and Central Asiaedit Dot Stupa of nodera Temple Sakai Osaka Prefecture Japa In east Asia Buddhist stupas were usually represented as tall pagodas. However some pyramidal stupas survive. One theory is that these pyramids were inspired by the Borobudur monument through Sumatran and Javanese monks.37 A similar Buddhist monument survives in Vrang Tajikistan.3839 At least nine Buddhist step pyramids survive 4 from former Gyeongsang Province of Korea 3 from Japan 1 from Indonesia Borobudur and 1 from Tajikistan.3739 Oceaniaedit Several pyramids were erected throughout the Pacific islands such as Puukohol Heiau in Hawaii the Pulemelei Mound in Samoa and Nan Madol in Pohnpei.citation needed Puukohol Heiau National Historic Site Hawaii United States. Modern pyramidsedit Comparison of approximate profiles of several notable pyramidal or nearpyramidal buildings. Dotted lines indicate original heights where data is available. In its SVG file hover over a pyramid to highlight and click for its article. Two pyramidshaped tombs were erected in Maudlins Cemetery Ireland c. 1840 belonging to the De Burgh family. Louvre Pyramid Paris France The Louvre Pyramid in Paris France in the court of the Louvre Museum is a 
20.6  metre about 70 foot glass structure that acts as a museum entrance. It was designed by American architect I. M. Pei and completed in 1989. The Pyramide Inverse Inverted Pyramid is displayed in the underground Louvre shopping mall. The TamaRe village was an Egyptianthemed set of buildings and monuments built near Eatonton Georgia by Nuwaubians in 1993 that was mostly demolished after it was sold in 2005. The Luxor Hotel in Las Vegas United States is a 
30 story pyramid. The 
32 story Memphis Pyramid Memphis was named after the Egyptian capital whose name was derived from the name of one of its pyramids. Built in 1991 it was the home court for the University of Memphis mens basketball program and the National Basketball Associations Memphis Grizzlies until 2004. It was not regularly used as a sports or entertainment venue after 2007 and in 2015 was repurposed as a Bass Pro Shops megastore. The Walter Pyramid home of the basketball and volleyball teams of the California State University Long Beach campus in California United States is an 
18 storytall blue true pyramid. Transamerica Pyramid in San Francisco California The 
48 story Transamerica Pyramid in San Francisco California designed by William Pereira is a city symbol. The 1
05 story Ryugyong Hotel is in Pyongyang North Korea. A former museummonument in Tirana Albania is commonly known as the Pyramid of Tirana. It differs from typical pyramids in having a radial rather than square or rectangular shape and gently sloped sides that make it short in comparison to the size of its base. The Slovak Radio Building in Bratislava Slovakia is an inverted pyramid. The Palace of Peace and Reconciliation is in Astana Kazakhstan. The three pyramids of Moody Gardens are in Galveston Texas. The CoOp Bank Pyramid or Stockport Pyramid in Stockport England is a large pyramidshaped office block. The surrounding part of the valley of the upper Mersey has sometimes been called the Kings Valley after the Egypts Valley of the Kings. The Ames Monument in southeastern Wyoming honors the brothers who financed the Union Pacific Railroad. The Trylon a triangular pyramid was erected for the 1939 Worlds Fair in Flushing Queens and demolished after the Fair closed. The Ballandean Pyramid at Ballandean in rural Queensland is a 
15 metre folly pyramid made from blocks of local granite. The Karlsruhe Pyramid is a pyramid made of red sandstone located in the centre of the market square of Karlsruhe Germany. It was erected in 18231825 over the vault of the citys founder Margrave Charles III William 16791738. Muttart Conservatory greenhouses are in Edmonton Alberta. The Sunway Pyramid in Subang Jaya has an Egyptianinspired pyramid with a lionlike sphinx. Sunway Pyramid shopping mall is in Selangor Malaysia. Hanoi Museum has an overall design of a reversed pyramid. The Ha Ha Pyramid by artist JeanJules Soucy in La Baie Quebec is made out of 3000 give way signs.40 The Pyramid ru cultureentertainment complex and Monument of the Kazan siege ru is in Kazan Russia. The Time pyramid in Wemding Germany is a pyramid begun in 1993 and scheduled for completion in the year 31
83.4 1 Triangle is a proposed skyscraper in Paris. The Shimizu MegaCity Pyramid is a proposed project for construction of a massive pyramid over Tokyo Bay in Japan. The Donkin Memorial was erected on a Xhosa reserve in 1820 by Cape Governor Sir Rufane Shaw Donkin in memory of his late wife Elizabeth in Port Elizabeth South Africa. The pyramid is used in many different coatsofarms associated with Port Elizabeth. Oscar Niemeyers design for a museum in Caracas Stockport Pyramid in Stockport United Kingdom Karlsruhe Pyramid Germany Hanoi Museum in Vietnam features an inverted pyramid shape. Slovak Radio Building Bratislava Slovakia. Pyramid cultureentertainment complex in Kazan Russia. Luxor Hotel in Las Vegas Nevada Pyramid Arena in Memphis Tennessee Walter Pyramid in Long Beach California Modern mausoleumsedit Metairie Cemetery New Orleans With the Egyptian Revival movement in the nineteenth and early twentieth century pyramids became more common in funerary architecture. The tomb of Quintino Sella outside the monumental cemetery of Oropa is pyramidshaped.42 This style was popular with tycoons in the US. Hunts Tomb in Phoenix Arizona and Schoenhofen Pyramid Mausoleum in Chicago are notable examples. Some people build pyramid tombs for themselves. Nicolas Cage bought a pyramid tomb for himself in a famed New Orleans graveyard.43 See alsoedit List of largest monoliths Lists of pyramids List of pyramid mausoleums in North America Mound Pyramid power Stupa Triadic pyramid Tumulus burial mound Referencesedit   Archived 20210709 at the Wayback Machine Henry George Liddell Robert Scott A GreekEnglish Lexicon on Perseus Digital Library  The word meant a kind of cake of roasted wheatgrains preserved in honey the Egyptian pyramids were named after its form R. S. P. Beekes Etymological Dictionary of Greek Brill 2009 p. 1261.  Centre of volume is one quarter of the way upsee Centre of mass.  Crawford page 
73 citation not found  Crawford page 73
74 citation not found  Crsemann Nicola Ess Margarete van Hilgert Markus Salje Beate Potts Timothy 2019. Uruk First City of the Ancient World. Getty Publications. p. 325. ISBN 9781606064443.  Crawford page 
85 citation not found  Viegas Jennifer 28 April 2008. Pyramids packed with fossil shells. ABC Science. Archived from the original on 1 August 2021. Retrieved 1 August 2021.  a b Redford Donald B. McCauley Marissa 15 April 2014. How were the Egyptian pyramids built. Research. The Pennsylvania State University. Archived from the original on 22 December 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2012.  Lehner Mark 25 March 2008. Mark Lehner 2008. The Complete Pyramids Solving the Ancient Mysteries. pp. 1415 84. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 9780500285473.  Davidovits Joseph 20 May 2008. They Built the Pyramids. Geopolymer Institute. p. 206. ISBN 9782951482029.  Egypt PyramidsTime Line. National Geographic. 17 October 2002. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011.  Filer Joyce 16 January 2006. Pyramids. Oxford University Press. p. 99. ISBN 9780195305210.  Fodors 15 March 2011. Fodors Egypt 
4 th Edition. Random House Digital Inc. pp. 249250. ISBN 9781400005192.  Harpur James 1997. Pyramid. Barnes  Noble Books. p. 24. ISBN 9780760702154.  Slackman Michael 17 November 2008. In the Shadow of a Long Past Patiently Awaiting the Future. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 January 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2010.  Lehner Mark 25 March 2008. Mark Lehner 2008. The Complete Pyramids Solving the Ancient Mysteries. p. 34. Thames  Hudson. ISBN 9780500285473.  Filer Joyce 16 January 2006. Pyramids. Oxford University Press. pp. 3839. ISBN 9780195305210.  Pollard Lawrence 9 September 2004. Sudans past uncovered. BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2010.  Basden G. S1966. Among the Ibos of Nigeria 1912. Psychology Press p. 109 ISBN 0714616338  Mary Lefkowitz 2006. Archaeology and the politics of origins. In Garrett G. Fagan ed.. Archaeological Fantasies How Pseudoarchaeology Misrepresents the Past and Misleads the Public. Routledge. p. 188. ISBN 9780415305938.  Mary Lefkowitz 2006. Archaeology and the politics of origins. In Garrett G. Fagan ed.. Archaeological Fantasies How Pseudoarchaeology Misrepresents the Past and Misleads the Public. Routledge. pp. 189190. ISBN 9780415305938.  Mary Lefkowitz 2006. Archaeology and the politics of origins. In Garrett G. Fagan ed.. Archaeological Fantasies How Pseudoarchaeology Misrepresents the Past and Misleads the Public. Routledge. pp. 185186. ISBN 9780415305938.  Mary Lefkowitz 2006. Archaeology and the politics of origins. In Garrett G. Fagan ed.. Archaeological Fantasies How Pseudoarchaeology Misrepresents the Past and Misleads the Public. Routledge. p. 195. ISBN 9780415305938.  Liritzis Ioannis 1 September 2011. Surface dating by luminescence An overview. Geochronometria. 38 3 292302. doi
10.2 4
78 s1338601100327. ISSN 17338387.  Lacovara Peter 2018. Pyramids and Obelisks Beyond Egypt. Aegyptiaca 2 124129. doi
10.1 15
88 aegyp.20

18.2.4 8018. Archived from the original on 17 June 2019. Retrieved 17 June 2019.  The Enigma of Aztec Sacrifice Archived 20170519 at the Wayback Machine. Natural History April 1977. Vol. 86 No. 4 pages 4651.  Lindauer Owen Blitz John H. 1997. Higher Ground The Archaeology of North American Platform Mounds PDF. Journal of Archaeological Research. 5 2. Archived from the original PDF on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2011.  Raymond Fogelson 20 September 2004. Handbook of North American Indians  Southeast. Smithsonian Institution. p. 741. ISBN 9780160723001. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2020.  Henry van der Schalie Paul W. Parmalee September 1960. The Etowah Site Mound C Barlow County Georgia. Florida Anthropologist. 8 3739. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2011.  EVALUATIONS OF CULTURAL PROPERTIES PDF. Whc.unesco.org. Archived PDF from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2022.  Pangguyangan. Dinas Pariwisata dan Budaya Provinsi Jawa Barat in Indonesian. Archived from the original on 24 December 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2017.  I.G.N. Anom Sri Sugiyanti Hadniwati Hasibuan 1996. Maulana Ibrahim Samidi eds.. Hasil Pemugaran dan Temuan Benda Cagar Budaya PJP I in Indonesian. Direktorat Jenderal Kebudayaan. p. 87.  Timbul Haryono 2011. Sendratari mahakarya Borobudur in Indonesian. Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia. p. 14. ISBN 9789799103338.  R. Soekmono 2002. Pengantar Sejarah Kebudayaan Indonesia 2 in Indonesian. Kanisius. p. 87. ISBN 9789794132906.permanent dead link  Edi Sedyawati Hariani Santiko Hasan Djafar Ratnaesih Maulana Wiwin Djuwita Sudjana Ramelan Chaidir Ashari 2013. Candi Indonesia Seri Jawa IndonesianEnglish Volume 1 dari Candi Indonesia Indonesia. Direktorat Pelestarian Cagar Budaya dan Permuseuman Seri Jawa. Direktorat Jenderal Kebudayaan. ISBN 9786021766934.  a b   PDF. Archived PDF from the original on 19 September 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2021.  Salopek Paul 2 October 2017. The Ruby Sellers of Vrang. National Geographic Magazine. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2021.  a b Salopek Paul 14 July 2015.  PDF. National Geographic Magazine. Archived PDF from the original on 15 June 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2021.  La pyramide de la baies des HaHa capteurs dondes telluriques. conspiration.ca. Archived from the original on 7 March 2011. Retrieved 19 October 2010.  Conception Archived 20110719 at the Wayback Machine Official Zeitpyramide website accessed 14 December 2010  Luisa Bocchietto Mario Coda and Carlo Gavazzi. THE OTHER OROPA A Guide to the Monumental Cemetery of the Sanctuary PDF. Archived from the original PDF on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 21 June 2013.  Nicolas Cages Pyramid Tomb. Atlasobscura.com. Archived from the original on 12 May 2019. Retrieved 18 June 2019. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pyramids. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Pyramids. v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 
4 D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Sculpture String art Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Famlia Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Drer Parmigianino Selfportrait in a Convex Mirror 
19 th
20 th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au caf LOiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall Ren Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dal Crucifixion The Swallows Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh Istvn Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimia Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Drer Vier Bcher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali darchitettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dellarchitettura Romantic Samuel Colman Natures Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematicians Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Gdel Escher Bach Nikos Salingaros The Life of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution Founder crops New World crops Ard  plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Akl Hyk Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quernstone Storage pits Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear spearthrower baton harpoon Schningen woomera Projectile points Arrowhead Transverse Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Mastodon Plano Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Preparedcore technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Firesaw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quernstone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Pyramid Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Dwellings Neolithic architecture long house British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mudbrick Mehrgarh Pithouse Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Stone roof Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Megalithic architectural elements Midden Oldest extant buildings Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothingtextiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes tzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cordmarked Grooved ware Jmon Linear Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Hill figure Golden hats Guardian stones Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurine Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb CotswoldSevern Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court cairn Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedgeshaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grnsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Archaeoastronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Evolutionary origin of religion Paleolithic religion Prehistoric religion Spiritual drug use Origin of language Prehistoric counting Prehistoric medicine trepanning Prehistoric music Alligator drum flutes Divje Babe flute gudi Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism Authority control databases National Spain France BnF data Germany Israel United States Japan Czech Republic Poland Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePyramidoldid1221600946 Categories Pyramids Types of monuments and memorials Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links All articles with broken links to citations CS1 Indonesianlanguage sources id All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2024 Articles containing Greeklanguage text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J
9 U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers This page was last edited on 30 April 2024 at 2140 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width