Nomarch - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Etymology 
2 Egyptian history 
3 Later reuse of the term 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nomarch 27 languages  Azrbaycanca Catal  Deutsch Eesti  Espaol  Franais Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Italiano  Lietuvi  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokml Polski  Slovenina   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Svenska  Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Redirected from Nomarchs Ancient Egyptian local governor Not to be confused with Monarch. A nomarch Ancient Greek 1 Ancient Egyptian rj tp  Great Chief was a provincial governor in ancient Egypt the country was divided into 42 provinces called nomes singular sp.t plural sp.wt. A nomarch was the government official responsible for a nome.2 Etymologyedit The term nome is derived from Ancient Greek  noms province district. Nomarch is derived from  nomrkhs province   ruler. Egyptian historyedit The division of the Egyptian kingdom into nomes can be documented as far back as the reign of Djoser of the 
3 rd Dynasty in the early Old Kingdom c. 2670 BCE and potentially dates even further back to the Predynastic kingdoms of the Nile valley. The earliest topographical lists of the nomes of Upper and Lower Egypt date back to the reign of Nyuserre Ini of the mid 
5 th Dynasty from which time the nomarchs no longer lived at royal capital but stayed in their nomes.3 The power of the nomarchs grew with the reforms of Nyuserres second successor Djedkare Isesi which effectively decentralized the Egyptian state. The post of nomarch then quickly became hereditary thereby creating a virtual feudal system where local allegiances slowly superseded obedience to the pharaoh. Less than 200 years after Djedkares reign the nomarchs had become the allpowerful heads of the provinces. At the dawn of the First Intermediate Period the power of the Pharaohs of the 
8 th Dynasty had diminished to the extent that they owed their position to the most powerful nomarchs upon whom they could only bestow titles and honours. The power of the nomarchs remained important during the later royal revival under the impulse of the 
11 th Dynasty originally a family of Theban nomarchs. Their power diminished during the subsequent 
12 th Dynasty setting the stage for the apex of royal power during the Middle Kingdom. Later reuse of the termedit The title nomarch continued to be used into the Roman period. The title is also in use in modern Greece for the heads of the prefectures of Greece which were also titled nomos pl.  nomoi  nomarchia also being used to refer to the area within a nomarchs purview.4 See alsoedit Hatya Pepi II Neferkare Referencesedit  Diodorus Siculus Library 
1.7 3  Grimal Nicolas 1992. A History of Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Books. pp. 142 400.  Altenmller Hartwig 2001. Old Kingdom Fifth Dynasty. In Redford Donald B. ed.. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Vol. 2. Oxford University Press. p. 597. ISBN 9780195102345.  Jones James Barry Keating Michael 1995. The European Union and Its Regions. Clarendon Press. p. 253. ISBN 0198279
99 X  via Google Books. External linksedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nomarchs. The Nomes provinces of Ancient Egypt. Philae.nu. Archived from the original on 2 June 2010. v t e Ancient Egyptian titulary Royal titulary Great Royal Wife Khenemetneferhedjet Pharaoh Religious titulary Divine Adoratrice of Amun Gods Wife Gods Wife of Amun High Priest of Amun High Priest of Osiris High Priest of Ptah High Priest of Ra Lector priest Priestess of Hathor Second Prophet of Amun Servant in the Place of Truth Stolist Two Ladies Courtly and administrative titulary Fanbearer on the Right Side of the King Hatya High steward Irypat Khekeretnisut Nomarch Overseer of cattle Overseer of fields Overseer of the treasuries Overseer of Upper Egypt Royal sealer Ancient Egypt Treasurer Viceroy of Kush Vizier Reporter Ancient Egypt portal Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleNomarcholdid1178680393 Categories Nomarchs Ancient Egyptian titles Nomes of ancient Egypt Ancient Greek titles Gubernatorial titles Government of the Ptolemaic Kingdom Hidden categories Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek to 14
53 language text Articles containing Ancient Egyptianlanguage text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 October 2023 at 0535 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width