Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Main Page Main Page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia Foundation MediaWiki MetaWiki Wikimedia Outreach Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikifunctions Wikimania Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Welcome to Wikipedia  the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 6821739 articles in English From todays featured article The horned sungem Heliactin bilophus is a species of hummingbird native to Brazil Bolivia and Suriname. It prefers open habitats such as savanna grassland and garden and expanded its range into southern Amazonas and Esprito Santo probably due to deforestation. It is a small hummingbird with a long tail and a short black bill. The sexes differ in appearance with males having two shiny red golden and green feather horns above the eyes a shiny blue head crest and a black throat with a pointed beard. The female is plainer with a brown or yellowbuff throat. It is a nomadic species responding to the seasonal flowering of its food plants. If a flowers shape is unsuited to the birds short bill it may rob nectar through a hole at its base. It also eats small insects. Only the female builds the small cup nest incubates the two white eggs and rears the chicks. The species is currently classified as least concern and its population is thought to be increasing. Full article... Recently featured Anna Blackburne The Structure of Literature Take Ichi convoy Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Prince Philip ... that Prince Philip pictured was the first member of the British royal family to fly in a helicopter ... that the 19101916 publication Raamim was the first newspaper in the JudeoTajik language ... that football player Dick Harris was selected in professional drafts four times including twice as a firstround pick but never played professionally ... that Pulp singer Jarvis Cocker helped fundraise to save a Merseyside flat that has been called the first example of outsider art to be nationally listed ... that in 1911 the Butterfly Theater featured a pipe organ worth 10000 equivalent to 327000 in 2023 ... that environmental economist V. Kerry Smith has been described as a Renaissance Man of Economics ... that a year after objecting to the unauthorised use of his own AIgenerated vocals Drake used vocals of other rappers generated that way to respond to a diss against him ... that in 1919 nurse Hilda Hope McMaugh became the first Australian woman to qualify as a pilot ... that employees of a Florida TV station joked that their studio building would survive as long as the termites dont stop holding hands Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Flooding in Porto Alegre Flooding pictured in Rio Grande do Sul Brazil leaves more than 100 people dead and at least 130 others missing. Kyren Wilson wins the World Snooker Championship. In horse racing Mystik Dan wins the Kentucky Derby. Following the Solomon Islands general election Jeremiah Manele becomes the prime minister. Acting prime minister of Haiti Ariel Henry resigns and the Transitional Presidential Council is sworn in. Ongoing IsraelHamas war Myanmar civil war Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline War in Sudan timeline Recent deaths Obi Ezeh Steve Albini Hootie Ingram Frank Stella Kristin Hallenga Frank Shrontz Nominate an article On this day May 9 Europe Day in the European Union Liberation Day in the Channel Islands 1945 Hotel Polen fire 1877  An earthquake struck northern Chile leading to the deaths of 2385 people mostly victims of the ensuing tsunami as far away as Hawaii and Fiji. 1944  World War II The Japanese Take Ichi convoy arrived at Halmahera in the Dutch East Indies after losing many ships and thousands of troops to Allied attacks while attempting to carry two divisions of troops from China to New Guinea. 1977  The Hotel Polen in Amsterdam was destroyed by fire pictured leaving 33 people dead. 1980  Part of the Sunshine Skyway Bridge in Florida collapsed after a pier was struck by the MV Summit Venture killing 35 people. 2001  Police at the Ohene Djan Stadium in Accra Ghana fired tear gas to quell unrest at a football match leading to a stampede that killed 126 people. AlAdid b. 1151 John Dalrymple 
2 nd Earl of Stair d. 1747 Yukiya Amano b. 1947 More anniversaries May 8 May 9 May 10 Archive By email List of days of the year Todays featured picture The acorn woodpecker Melanerpes formicivorus is a bird in the woodpecker family Picidae. It is found across Central America as well as the western United States and parts of Colombia. A mediumsized bird it has a length of around 20 cm 8 in and is mostly black and adult males have a red cap starting at the forehead and females a black area between the forehead and the cap. As their name implies acorn woodpeckers are heavily dependent on acorns for food which they store in small holes that they drill into trees known as granaries or storage trees. This acorn woodpecker was photographed in the grounds of California State University Chico United States. Photograph credit Frank Schulenburg Recently featured Heungseon Daewongun Symphony No. 9 Phoenicolacerta troodica Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal  The central hub for editors with resources links tasks and announcements. Village pump  Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself including policies and technical issues. Site news  Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse  Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk  Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk  Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals  A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedias sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation a nonprofit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development MetaWiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Freecontent news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Freecontent library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available some of the largest are listed below. 1000000 articles   Deutsch Espaol  Franais Italiano Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Svenska  Ting Vit  250000 articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu   Bnlmg  Catal etina Dansk Esperanto Euskara    Magyar Norsk bokml Romn Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Trke Ozbekcha   50000 articles Asturianu Azrbaycanca  Bosanski  Eesti  Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski  Kurd Latvieu Lietuvi    Norsk nynorsk  Shqip Slovenina Slovenina    Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleMainPageoldid1212457119 49 languages  Azrbaycanca   Bosanski Catal etina Dansk Deutsch Eesti  Espaol Esperanto Euskara  Franais Galego  Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano   Latvieu Lietuvi Magyar  Bahasa Melayu Nederlands  Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Polski Portugus Romn  Simple English Slovenina Slovenina    srpski Srpskohrvatski   Suomi Svenska  Trke  Ting Vit  This page was last edited on 7 March 2024 at 2359 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width