Pyramid of Amenemhat III (Dahshur) - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 
1.1 Superstructure 

1.1.1 Pyramidion 
1.2 Substructure 
2 Structural problems 
3 Recent looting 
4 See also 
5 References 
6 Works cited 
7 Further reading 
8 External links Toggle the table of contents Pyramid of Amenemhat III Dahshur 21 languages  Azrbaycanca Catal Deutsch  Espaol Franais Italiano  Norsk bokml Polski Portugus  Slovenina Slovenina Suomi Svenska   Ting Vit  Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Coordinates 2947
30 N 3113
25 E  
29.7 91
67 N 
31.2 23
61 E  
29.7 9167 
31.2 2361 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Middle Kingdom pyramid near Cairo Egypt This article includes a list of general references but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. November 2020 Learn how and when to remove this message Black Pyramid Amenemhat III Coordinates 2947
30 N 3113
25 E  
29.7 91
67 N 
31.2 23
61 E  
29.7 9167 
31.2 2361 Ancient name Jmnmh
3 tq
3 nfrf Imenemhat Qanefer Amenemhat is mighty and perfect Type True pyramid ruined Height ca. 75 metres Base 105 metres Slope 59 lower 55 upper The Black Pyramid Arabic   romanized alHaram alAswad was built by King Amenemhat III r. c. 1860 BCc. 1814 BC during the Middle Kingdom of Egypt 20551650 BC. It is one of the five remaining pyramids of the original eleven pyramids at Dahshur in Egypt. Originally named Amenemhet is Mighty the pyramid earned the name Black Pyramid for its dark decaying appearance as a rubble mound. The Black Pyramid was the first to house both the deceased pharaoh and his queens. Jacques de Morgan on a French mission began the excavation on the pyramids at Dahshur in 1892. The German Archaeological Institute of Cairo completed excavation in 1983. Structureedit Name of the pyramid of Amenemhat III on a funerary stele Muse du Louvre The pyramid was originally about 75 metres tall with a base 105 metres long and an incline of 57. Typical for pyramids of the Middle Kingdom the Black Pyramid although encased in limestone is made of mud brick and clay instead of stone. The groundlevel structures consist of the entrance opening into the courtyard and mortuary temple surrounded by walls. There are two sets of walls between them there are ten shaft tombs which are a type of burial structure formed from graves built into natural rock. Superstructureedit The pyramid was built with an eastwest orientation and has two entrances located on the southeastern and southwestern corners. The core of the superstructure was of mud brick with no internal walls possibly a weight saving measure considering how close the pyramid was to the Nile. The pyramid was however built on clay that was incapable of supporting its weight and it began to sink just as the Bent Pyramid of Sneferu at Dashur had done centuries before. The two pyramids are approximately 
1.5  km apart. The outer cladding of limestone veneer was held together with dovetail pegs following the style of his fathers tomb. The finished dimensions were approximately 200 cubits per side and 150 cubits high. Pyramidionedit Main article Pyramidion of Amenemhat III Pyramidion capstone at Egyptian Museum Cairo The pyramidion capstone was covered with inscriptions and religious symbols. Some of these were later scratched off leading researchers to conclude that the pyramidion was either never used or was defaced during Akhenatens rule. Substructureedit Below ground level in the subterranean structure lay a network of complicated passages. The Kings section remains mostly intact with a sarcophagus and canopic jar however the king was not buried there. The Queens section was broken into by robbers and looted. There are four other burial chambers in the subterranean structure to whom they belong however is unknown. Two are thought to belong to King Amenemhet IV and queen Sobekneferu. As the pyramid sank it began to crush the chambers located beneath it. The builders tried hastily installing supporting beams and mud brick walls to stop the sinking but this final effort was unsuccessful and the pyramid was ultimately abandoned. The Kings section contained a burial chamber containing a large sarcophagus that was carved to imitate the outer wall of Djosers Pyramid complex at Saqqara possibly another attempt to reinforce the legitimacy of his rule. Burial chambers for two of his queens were created beneath the pyramid the first chamber of the Queens section under the southwestern quadrant of the pyramid was for Queen Aat and the second chamber was for an unnamed queen. Although both chambers had been entered and looted in antiquity archaeologists found many items overlooked by the looters including one of Queen Aats canopic jars. Queen Aats chamber contained a sarcophagus similar to the kings. The causeway was unusually wide with a large open area. There were houses on the northern side of the causeway that have been identified as priests houses. By the 
13 th Dynasty a lack of security led to local inhabitants using the Valley Temple as a granary and the pyramid being looted for the first time. There is evidence of restoration work perhaps 100 years later when King Auibre Hor and his princess Nubheteptikhered were buried in two of the ten shaft tombs on the northern side of the outer enclosure.1 Structural problemsedit The Black Pyramid was constructed with multiple structural deficiencies. The pyramid was built in one of the lowest regions of Egypt only 10 metres above sea level which allowed groundwater from the Nile to seep into the structure. There are countless passageways and chambers underground but not enough stress relievers built into the pyramid above these areas to support the resulting loads. Mud brick was used beneath the surface blocks instead of traditional stone and removal of the limestone casing has allowed the brick to weather and crumble. The poorly supported underground chambers unsuitable building materials and low site elevation have all led to the sinking and subsequent collapse of the pyramid. Recent lootingedit Since the Egyptian Revolution of 2011 looting has been taking place at the site.2 See alsoedit Egyptian pyramid construction techniques List of Egyptian pyramids Lepsius list of pyramids Referencesedit  Mark Lehner The Complete Pyramids p. 181. Thames and Hudson London 1997 ISBN 9780500285473  Hartley Aiden 9 November 2013. The new tomb raiders. The Spectator. UK. Retrieved 10 November 2013. Works citededit Encyclopdia Britannica. Dahshur. 2007. httpwww.britannica.comebarticle90285
42 Dahshur Hooker Richard. The Middle Kingdom. World Civilizations. June 1999. httpwww.wsu.edudeeEQYPTMIDDLE.HTMpermanent dead link Kinnaer Jacques. The Ancient Site. September 2007. httpwww.ancientegypt.orgindex.html Further readingedit Verner Miroslav The Pyramids  Their Archaeology and History Atlantic Books 2001 ISBN 1843541718 External linksedit The Pyramids at Dahshur v t e Egyptian pyramids List of Egyptian pyramids Lepsius Commons Period Dynasty Pyramids Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Buried Layer Lepsius I Athribis Elephantine Edfu South elKula Naqada Saujet elMeitin de Sinki de IV Seila Meidum Bent Red Khufu Djedefre Unfinished Northern Pyramid of Zawyet elAryan Khafre Menkaure Khentkaus I Mastabet elFaraun G
1 a G
1 b G
1 c G
1 d G
2 a G
3 a G
3 b G
3 c Lepsius L V Userkaf Neferhetepes de Sahure Neferirkare Khentkaus II Neferefre Unfinished Nyuserre Lepsius XXIV Double Headless DjedkareIsesi Unas VI Teti Pepi I Merenre Pepi II Sesheshet 
1 st Intermediate Period 21812040 BC VIII Ity Neferkare Neby Ibi Khui X Merikare Middle Kingdom 20401650 BC XI Reherishefnakht XII Amenemhat I Senusret I White Senusret II Senusret III Black Hawara Neferuptah de Central Dahshur de South Mazghuna North Mazghuna XIII Ameny Qemau Khendjer Southern South Saqqara SAK S 3 SAK S 7 de South Dahshur A de South Dahshur B de DAS 46 DAS 49 DAS 50 DAS 51 DAS 53 de S 9 S 10 Merneferre Ay Second Intermediate 16501570 BC XVII Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom 15701070 BC XVIII Ahmose Step pyramid Construction techniques Seked Texts Pyramidion Pyramidology Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitlePyramidofAmenemhatIIIDahshuroldid1215092658 Categories 
19 thcentury BC establishments in Egypt Buildings and structures completed in the 
19 th century BC Dahshur Pyramids of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat III Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking intext citations from November 2020 All articles lacking intext citations Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Arabiclanguage text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 23 March 2024 at 0124 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width