Tell el-Dab'a - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Identification of the site 
2 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 
2.1 Residences 
2.2 Tombs 
2.3 Temples 
3 Artistic influence Toggle Artistic influence subsection 
3.1 Minoan frescos 
3.2 Cypriot pottery 
4 Other important finds Toggle Other important finds subsection 
4.1 Weighing stones 
5 Ezbet Rushdi 
6 See also 
7 References Toggle the table of contents Tell elDaba 4 languages  Franais   srpski Srpskohrvatski   Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version Coordinates 30
47 N 31
50 E  
30.7 
83 N 
31.8 
33 E  
30.7 83 
31.8 33 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Archaeological site in Egypt Tell elDaba Location Sharqia Egypt Region Nile delta Coordinates 30
47 N 31
50 E  
30.7 
83 N 
31.8 
33 E  
30.7 83 
31.8 33 Tell elDaba is an archaeological site in the Nile Delta region of Egypt where Avaris the capital city of the Hyksos once stood. Avaris was occupied by Asiatics from the end of the 
12 th through the 
13 th Dynasty early second millennium BC. The site is known primarily for its Minoan frescoes. Identification of the siteedit Excavations in the area were started in 1885 by douard Naville. Between 1929 and 1939 Pierre Montet excavated at Tanis 20 km to the north finding remarkably rich tombs. He believed that he found the location of Avaris and his opinion was widely accepted at the time. Yet others such as Labib Habachi one of the pioneering Egyptian Egyptologists were not convinced. In 194142 he excavated at Tell elDaba for the Egyptian Antiquities Service and came to the conclusion that this was in fact Avaris When a detailed study of the topography of the site and its surroundings was made by Manfred Bietak of the Austrian Archaeological Institute in the 19
80 s Habachis hypothesis was confirmed. Bietaks mission revealed that the actual Hyksos capital was indeed Tell alDaba.1 Recent investigations of cemeteries at Avaris have been conducted as part of thirty years of joint excavations by the Austrian Archaeological Institute of Cairo led by Manfred Bietak and since October 2010 by Irene ForstnerMller. An interesting thrust of the latest investigations has to do with the historic epidemic at Avaris in 1715 BC documented in archaeology and surviving papyrus.citation needed The nature of civilization at Tell elDaba is understood from archaeological examination of the site. Excavations have discovered buildings namely residences tombs and temples that combine Egyptian and Canaanite architectural styles.2 The society of Tell elDaba interacted with individuals from other regions who influenced their frescos.3 Although the remains have been damaged by the marshy environment as well as by the continual rebuilding and agriculture on the site archeologists have shown that this city was occupied by a wealthy society with a large sacred precinct and unusual burial practices.2 From 1951 to 1954 Shehata Adam partly excavated the 
12 th Dynasty site of Ezbet Rushdi near Tell ElDaba. Architectureedit Residencesedit Tell elDaba experienced an increase in immigration during the period 16101590 BCE.2 Between 1590 and 1570 BCE the population of Tell elDaba faced overcrowding.2 Due to space restrictions small houses were built in cemeteries and children were buried in the doorways of larger houses.2 Tombs became incorporated into the structure of the houses.2 During the early Hyksos period members of lower social classes built their houses around their masters house.2 This is not as evident during the later Hyksos Period due to the overcrowding and damage caused by agriculture.2 The size of the houses of Tell elDaba indicates the affluence of the inhabitants.2 In the northeast periphery area the houses were very small reflecting poorer classes.2 In contrast in the eastern area of Tell elDaba the remains of large houses with stairs leading to upper floors were discovered indicating that the more wealthy members of the society lived there.2 Towards the end of the Hyksos period between 1600 and 1570 BCE the rulers of Tell elDaba felt threatened by the possibility of attack.2 They therefore built a thick enclosure wall around the city for defense.2 Tombsedit The tomb styles and methods used to bury the dead in Tell elDaba were Canaanite.24 The tombs consist of vaulted mudbrick chambers.4 They reflect the belief in the afterlife of the inhabitants of Tell elDaba similar to that of the Egyptians. Grave goods were often buried with the bodies.2 Servant and donkey burials are recognized as remarkable burial practices of Tell elDaba.2 The servant and donkey burials were practiced between 1680 and 1660 BCE. They were most popular during the period of Asiatic immigration at the beginning of the Hyksos reign.2 The servants were not buried in the same manner as the tomb owners the servants were buried at a different orientation in the tomb in order to show their position in the hierarchy of Tell elDaba.2 They were buried across the tomb entrance facing the door.2 This is interpreted as the servants waiting for the instructions of the tomb masters which would be a component of the ideal life in the afterlife.2 Three servant burials have been found at Tell elDaba. The servants appear to have been buried at the same time as the tomb owners during a servant sacrifice.2 The donkey burials took place throughout the history of Tell el Daba. The donkeys were generally found in pairs in front of the tombs at the site.2 The donkeys may have been sacrificed when the tomb owner died as they were both buried at the same time.2 The donkeys emphasize the societys belief in the afterlife donkeys were closely associated with expeditions and could thus be connected with the journey between life and death.2 Templesedit Excavations at Tell elDaba have uncovered temples that date to the Hyksos period. The temples exhibit Egyptian and Canaanite styles.2 By convention the entrances of the temples are in the north wall and the temples are orientated NNWSSE.2 Items such as bronze daggers ax heads and jugs have been found at these complexes.4 The most noteworthy temple is Temple I.2 It is in the Egyptian style and dates to between 1680 and 1660 BCE.2 It contains three sanctuaries and in its courtyard there is evidence of an altar upon which sacrifices may have been made.2 The outside walls were made of mudbrick that was whitewashed. Traces of blue paint have been found on the walls.2 Artistic influenceedit Minoan frescosedit Main article Minoan frescoes from Tell elDaba In 1987 thousands of fragments of Minoan wall paintings were discovered in the ancient gardens that adjoin the palace complex of Tell elDaba on the site of a fortress of the early New Kingdom.5 The fragments show techniques subjects and styles that are characteristic of Minoan frescos.5 The frescos were applied as buon fresco a defining aspect of Minoan works.6 They include scenes of mazelike patterns bulls and bullleapers the flying gallop griffins and leopard and lion hunts images associated with the Minoan artistic culture. The Minoan wall paintings from Tell elDaba therefore show that the early 7 
18 th dynasty rulers were open to works and themes from the eastern Mediterranean.8 The Hyksos and Minoan societies were in contact potentially through itinerant artists who transferred Minoan technology to Tell elDaba. The population of Tell elDaba may have also included Aegean families resulting in direct connections between Aegean and Egyptian art.3 The bullleaping scenes depicted on the fresco fragments are considered to be indistinguishable from those found in Minoan palaces.8 The theme of bull leaping is identified in particular with Knossos Crete.5 The fresco was painted in the Minoan bullleaping fresco style a darkskinned individual with dark wavy hair wearing Minoanstyle clothing namely the kilt boots and armbands is depicted performing a flip over a bulls back. Nanno Marinatos tentatively formed a twofold scene of the lion and leopard hunting fragments in 19
94.3  Leopards are depicted hunting deer against a red background in the upper scene of the fresco while lions chasing an ibex is illustrated in the lower region. Other fragments show boots. It was thus deduced that a hunting scene was depicted. In addition Bietak included a photograph of a leopard in his work that shows its rear parts.3 The animals legs and tail are fully extended in the flying gallop pose in order to show motion a common representational technique of Minoan art. Cypriot potteryedit Approximately 500 pieces of Cypriot pottery containing oil and perfume were discovered at Tell elDaba. Pendent Line Cross Line and White Painted V styles of White Painted Cypriot pottery compose the largest component of exported pottery to Tell elDaba indicating that Tell elDaba had trade relations with Cyprus.9 The majority of the exported pieces were of the broad band tradition.9 A single rim fragment from a jar of the White Painted V Fine Line Style was found at the site.9 The Hyksos citadel must have been constructed towards the end of the Hyksos Period ph. D2 as fragments of Cypriot Bichrome Ware have been found in sand dumps deposited in order to raise the land for the construction.10 Other important findsedit Weighing stonesedit In the Second Intermediate Period graves were uncovered sets of sphendonoid weighing stones confirming the use of shekel weighing system both Syrian c. 
99.5  g and Mesopotamian c. 
8.1 
8.5  g.11 Here presumably stems the changed weighing system of the New Kingdom with a completely different deben unit than in previous periods. Ezbet Rushdiedit Ezbet Rushdi is a small village about 1 km northeast of Tell elDaba. A temple and a settlement of the Middle Kingdom period have been discovered there by recent excavations. The report on the excavations was published in 20
15.1 2 Previously excavated by Shehata Adam who discovered a temple east of the village the Austrian Archaeological Institute reexcavated the site in 1996. It was discovered that prior to the construction of the temple there was already an early 
12 th dynasty settlement there.13 See alsoedit Tanis Referencesedit  Jill Kamil Labib Habachi The Life and legacy of an Egyptologist. Archived 20131105 at the Wayback Machine American University in Cairo Press 2007 p.77 ISBN 9774160614  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad Booth Charlotte 2005. The Hyksos Period in Egypt. Princes Risborough Osprey Publishing. ISBN 0747806381.  a b c d Thomas Nancy R. 2004. The Early Mycenaean Lion up to Date. Hesperia Supplements.  a b c Freedman David Allen Meyers Astrid Beck 2000. Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible. Grand Rapids Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 0802824005.  a b c Gates Charles 2004. The Adoption of Pictorial Imagery in Minoan Wall Painting A Comparativist Perspective. Hesperia Supplements.  Nicholson Paul T. Ian Shaw 2000. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521452570.  Manfred Bietaks report on Tell elDaba  a b Kristiansen Kristian Thomas Larsson 2005. The Rise of Bronze Age Society Travels Transmissions and Transformations. Cambridge Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521843634.  a b c Barlow Jane Diane Bolger Barbara Kling 1991. Cypriot Ceramics Reading the Prehistoric Record. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology. ISBN 0924171103.  Manfred Bietak The Palatial Precinct at the Nile Branch Area H auaris.at  Prell Silvia Rahmstorf Lorenz 2021. Implications for Trade  Weights from Tell elDaba as Indicators of Eastern Mediterranean Influence on Egypt. Excavating the ExtraOrdinary Challenges  Merits of Working with Small Finds Proceedings of the International Egyptological Workshop at Johannes GutenbergUniversity Mainz 89 April 2019 133153. doi
10.1 15
88 PROPYLAEUM.676.C11288  via Propylaeum.  Czerny Ernst 2015. Tell elDaba XXII  Der Mund der beiden Wege  Die Siedlung und der Tempelbezirk des Mittleren Reiches von Ezbet Ruschdi. SCIEM. Wien. ISBN 9783700179115. OCLC 1078637695.cite book CS1 maint location missing publisher link  Ernst Czerny Ezbet Rushdi www.auaris.at Authority control databases Geographic Pleiades Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleTellelDab
27 aoldid1216402238 Categories 1885 archaeological discoveries Cities in ancient Egypt Archaeological sites in Egypt Former populated places in Egypt Nile Delta Minoan archaeology Hyksos cities in ancient Egypt Minoan art Avaris Hidden categories Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 Articles with Pleiades identifiers This page was last edited on 30 March 2024 at 1953 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width