Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
1.1 Kahun Papyrus IV Petrie Museum UC 32166 
1.2 Architecture 

1.2.1 Medamud Temple of Montu 

1.2.2 Deir elBahri Temple of Mentuhotep II 
1.3 Nile Level Records 
1.4 Small finds 
1.5 Alleged tomb 
2 Chronological position 
3 References 
4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep 26 languages   Azrbaycanca Catal etina Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Polski Portugus  Slovenina Tagalog  Trke  Ting Vit Yorb Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Sekhemre Khutawy Amenemhat Sobekhotep Sobekhotep II Sobekhotep I depending on chronology Head of a statue thought to represent Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep although other attributions have been proposed Pharaoh Reign At least three years 18031800 BC1 or 17241718 BC2 Predecessor Uncertain Sobekneferu or Sedjefakare Kay Amenemhat VII Successor Uncertain Sekhemkare Sonbef or Khendjer Royal titulary Horus name Menekh... Mn... Splendid ... Golden Horus Ankhnetjeru nnrw Life of the gods Turin canon Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep smr wt3.w Mighty Ra who protects the Two Lands Sobek is satisfied Prenomen Praenomen Sekemre Khutawy SmRwjt
3 wj Mighty Ra he who protects the two lands Nomen Amenemhat Sobekhotep Jmnm
3 t Sbktp Amun is in front Sobek is satisfied Father Uncertain possibly Amenemhat IV1 Born after 1900 BC Died before 1700 BC Dynasty 
13 th Dynasty Sekhemre Khutawy Amenemhat Sobekhotep was an Egyptian pharaoh of the early 
13 th Dynasty. His chronological position is much debated. In literature Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep is known as Sobekhotep II and Amenemhat Sobekhotep. Kim Ryholt 1997 makes a strong case for Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep as the founder of the dynasty a hypothesis that is now dominant in Egyptology.13 If so he may be the first ruler with this name making him Sobekhotep I. His double name may also be a filiation Sobekhotep son of Amenemhat. Attestationsedit Sekhemre Khutawy Amenemhat Sobekhotep is attested by contemporary sources dating to the early 
13 th Dynasty.45 In Year 1 he is attested on a papyrus at Lahun in the middle part of Egypt. Later he is mainly attested by architectural elements in the 
4 th Nome of Thebes. His highest attested date is Year 4 according to Nile Level Records in Nubia. Kahun Papyrus IV Petrie Museum UC 321
66 edit He is mentioned on the Kahun Papyrus IV.67 Written in hieratic text it contains a census of the household of a lectorpriest that is dated to the first regnal year of the king.8 The household includes a son of the lectorpriest and the papyrus records the birth of this son during a 
40 th regnal year of an unnamed king which can only refer to Amenemhat III.5 This establishes that Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep reigned close in time to Amenemhat III with the son still part of the household of the lectorpriest. Architectureedit A number of architectural elements bearing Sobekhoteps titulary are known a fragment of a Hebsed chapel from Medamud three lintels from Deir elBahri and Medamud an architrave from Luxor and a doorjamb from Medamud that is now in the Louvre. Medamud Temple of Montuedit Deir elBahri Temple of Mentuhotep IIedit Titulary of Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep on a relief from the mortuary temple of Mentuhotep II Deir elBahri.9 At Deir elBahri Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep added a relief to the Mortuarty Temple of Mentuhotep II. Nile Level Recordsedit Three Nile level records from Semna and Kumna in Nubia are also attributable to Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep the latest of which is dated to year 4 showing that he reigned for at least three complete years.110 At Semna a nile level record was made in Year 2 and Year 31112 At Kumma a nile level record was made in Year 
4.1 2 Small findsedit Smaller artifacts mentioning Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep comprise a cylinder seal13 from Gebelein an adzeblade14 a statuette from Kerma and a faience bead now in the Petrie Museum UC 132
02.1 415 Alleged tombedit See also S 10 Abydos His tomb was believed to have been discovered in Abydos in 2013 but its attribution is now questioned.16 During a 2013 excavation in Abydos a team of archaeologists led by Josef W. Wegner of the University of Pennsylvania discovered the tomb of a king with the name Sobekhotep. While Sobekhotep I was named as owner of the tomb on several press reports since January 20141718192021 further investigations made it more likely that the tomb belongs to king Sobekhotep IV instead.16 Chronological positionedit Drawing of a seal reading The son of Ra Sobekhotep Amenemhat beloved of SobekRa Lord of Iumiteru.22 There is some dispute in Egyptology over the position of this king in the 
13 th Dynasty. The throne name Sekhemre Khutawyre appears in the Turin King List as the 
19 th king of the 
13 th Dynasty. However the Nile level records and his appearance on a papyrus found at Lahun indicate that he might date to the early 
13 th Dynasty. In both monument types only kings of the late 
12 th and early 
13 th Dynasty are mentioned. In the Turin King List Khutawyre appears as the first 
13 th Dynasty king. Egyptologist Kim Ryholt maintains that it is possible that the writer of the list confused Sekhemre Khutawy with Khutawyre the nomen of Wegaf.1 The identification of any mention of Sekhemre Khutawy is difficult as at least three kings are known to have had this name Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep Sekhemre Khutawy Pantjeny and Sekhemre Khutawy Khabaw. His double name Amenemhat Sobekhotep may be a filiation meaning Sobekhotep son of Amenemhat. It has been suggested that Sobekhotep was a son of the penultimate pharaoh of the 
12 th Dynasty king Amenemhat IV. Therefore Sobekhotep may have been a brother of Sekhemkare Sonbef the second ruler of the 
13 th Dynasty.23 Other Egyptologists read Amenemhat Sobekhotep as a double name these being common in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Dynasty.24 Referencesedit  a b c d e f K. S. B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997.  Thomas Schneider after Detlef Franke Lexikon der Pharaonen p. 255  Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 443  a b Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep the Petrie Museum. Digitalegypt.ucl.ac.uk. Retrieved 10 January 2014.  a b Ryholt 1997315  London Petrie Museum UC32166  Kahun papyrus IV Petrie Museum  UC 32166  Persons and Names of the Middle Kingdom.  douard Naville The XIth dynasty temple at Deir elBahari PART II 19
07 available copyrightfree online  Nicols Grimal A History of Ancient Egypt WileyBlackwell 1994 pp 183184  Sudan National Museum 34370  a b Elsa Yvanez 2010 Rock Inscriptions from Semna and Kumma  New York Metropolitan Museum of Art MMA 

30.8.3 19  Egyptian Museum at Cairo JE 67944 forgery Ali Hassan Eid 2022 The Journey from Authenticity to Forgery A Casestudy on an Adzeblade Egyptian Museum Cairo JE 67944 of the Thirteenth Dynasty  Faience bead of Sekhemre Khutawy Petrie Museum  a b Josef W. Wegner A Royal Necropolis at Abydos in Near Eastern Archaeology 78 2 2015 p. 70  Giant Sarcophagus Leads Penn Museum Team in Egypt To the Tomb of a Previously Unknown Pharaoh. Penn Museum. Retrieved 17 January 2014.  King Sobekhotep I Tomb discovered in Sohag. State Information Services. 7 January 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2014.  Stephen Adkins 7 January 2014. Pennsylvania Researchers Discover Tomb of Egypts First King of 
13 th Dynasty. University Herald. Retrieved 8 January 2014.  US diggers identify tomb of Pharoah sic Sobekhotep I. Times Live. South Africa. 6 January 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2014.  Stark Florian 7 January 2014. Pharaonengrab aus apokalyptischen Zeiten entdeckt. Die Welt in German. Retrieved 8 January 2014.  Percy Newberry 1908 Scarabs an introduction to the study of Egyptian seals and signet rings available online copyright free see plate XLIII num 3  Dodson Aidan and Hilton Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames  Hudson 2004. ISBN 0500051283  Stephen Quirke In the Name of the King on Late Middle Kingdom Cylinders in Timelines Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak Leuven Paris Dudley MA. ISBN 9042917
30 X 26364 Further readingedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sebekhotep Sekhemre Khutawy. K. S. B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 336 File 131. Preceded by uncertain Sobekneferu or Sedjefakare Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by uncertain Sonbef or Khendjer v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSekhemreKhutawySobekhotepoldid1221612547 Categories 
19 thcentury BC Pharaohs 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt 
2 ndmillennium BC births 
2 ndmillennium BC deaths Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension CS1 Germanlanguage sources de Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 April 2024 at 2308 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width