File:Stele of Nerikare.png - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileStele of Nerikare.png Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata No higher resolution available. SteleofNerikare.png 406  208 pixels file size 86 KB MIME type imagepng This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionStele of Nerikare.png English Drawing of the stele of Nerikare discovered by Lepsius together with a single scarab this is the unique contemporary attestation of pharaoh Nerikare of the 
13 th dynasty. The stele is now lost. Date 19 January 2014 134022 Source Drawing by Karl Richard Lepsius 1810  1884 published in 1897 source availabe online copyrightfree see p. 152 f Author Karl Richard Lepsius 1810  1884 source availabe online copyrightfree see p. 152 f Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse Public domain This media file is in the public domain in the United States. This applies to U.S. works where the copyright has expired often because its first publication occurred prior to January 1 1929 and if not then due to lack of notice or renewal. See this page for further explanation. United States This image might not be in the public domain outside of the United States this especially applies in the countries and areas that do not apply the rule of the shorter term for US works such as Canada Mainland China not Hong Kong or Macao Germany Mexico and Switzerland. The creator and year of publication are essential information and must be provided. See WikipediaPublic domain and WikipediaCopyrights for more details. Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 19 January 2014 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1343 19 January 2014 406  208 86 KB IryHor User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed List of pharaohs Nerikare Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on am.wikipedia.org  Usage on ar.wikipedia.org     Usage on arz.wikipedia.org    Usage on az.wikipedia.org On nc slal Misir Usage on ca.wikipedia.org Cronologia egpcia convencional Usage on es.wikipedia.org AnexoFaraones de Egipto Nerikare Usage on fr.wikipedia.org Nerkar Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org Nerikar Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on it.wikipedia.org Lista dei faraoni Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on pnb.wikipedia.org    Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Lista de faras XIII dinastia egpcia Nericar Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on simple.wikipedia.org List of pharaohs Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Trinajsta egipanska dinastija Nerikare Usage on th.wikipedia.org    Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Nerikare Usage on zh.wikipedia.org  Metadata This file contains additional information probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Horizontal resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Vertical resolution 
28.3 5 dpc Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileSteleofNerikare.png Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width