Wikipedia:Citation needed - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 When to use this tag 
2 When not to use this tag 
3 If your work has been tagged 
4 How to help reduce the backlog 
5 See also 
6 External links Toggle the table of contents WikipediaCitation needed 50 languages nglisc   Azrbaycanca    Cymraeg Deutsch  Franais Galego    Igbo Ilokano   Ladin  Ltzebuergesch   Malti    Nederlands  Norsk bokml  Ozbekcha       Scots Shqip   Slovenina      Ting Vit Xitsonga  Edit links Project page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Wikipedia information page This is an information page. It is not one of Wikipedias policies or guidelines rather its purpose is to explain certain aspects of WikipediaVerifiability policy. It may reflect differing levels of consensus and vetting. Shortcuts WPCITENEED WPNEEDCITE A complete version of the documentation for this template is provided at TemplateCitation needed. If you are new to editing and instead just need a general overview of how sources work see the referencing for beginners help page. The Citation needed template aims to promote accountable discourse. To ensure that all Wikipedia content is verifiable Wikipedia provides a means for anyone to question an uncited claim. If your work has been tagged please provide a reliable source for the statement and discuss if needed. You can add a citation by selecting from the dropdown menu at the top of the editing box. In markup you can add a citation manually using ref tags. There are also more elaborate ways to cite sources. In wiki markup you can question an uncited claim by inserting a simple Citation needed tag or a more comprehensive Citation neededreasonYour explanation heredateMay 2024. Alternatively fact and cn will produce the same result. These all display as Example 87 percent of statistics are made up on the spot.citation needed For information on adding citations in articles see HelpReferencing for beginners. For information on when to remove this template messages see HelpMaintenance template removal. When to use this tag A citation needed tag is a request for another editor to supply a source for the tagged fact a form of communication between members of a collaborative editing community. It is never in itself an improvement of an article. Though readers may be alerted by a citation needed that a particular statement is not supported and even doubted by some many readers dont fully understand the communitys processes. Not all tags get addressed in a timely manner staying in place for months or years forming an evergrowing Wikipedia backlogthis itself can be a problem. Best practice recommends the following Tag thoughtfully. Avoid hitandrun or pointed tagging. Try to be courteous and consider the hypothetical felloweditor who will we hope notice your tag and try to find the citation you have requested. When adding a tag ask yourself Is it clear just what information you want cited Is the information probably factual If it is not then it needs deletion or correction rather than citation Is the knowledge so selfevident that it really does not need to be cited at all Some things do not. Some tags are inserted by people wellplaced to find a suitable citation themselves. If this is the case consider adding these articles to your watchlist or a worklist so that you can revisit the article when you have the opportunity to fix any verifiability issues yourself. When not to use this tag Before adding a tag at least consider the following alternatives one of which may prove much more constructive Do not use this tag because you dont understand a statement or feel that nonexpert readers are likely to be confused. Use Clarify Explain Confusing Examples Why or Non sequitur as appropriate instead. If the content is nonsense or is unlikely to be true be bold and delete it Do not tag controversial material about living people that is unsourced or poorly sourced. Remove it immediately Per WPDIARY do not tag excessively trivial claims. Remove them. If you are sure the statement you want to tag is not factual even if it does not come under either of the preceding headings it may be more appropriate to simply remove the text delete it. Be sure to add a suitable edit summary such as Very doubtful  please add a citation if you return the content. If the original statement was accurate after all this gives someone the chance to put it back hopefully with a proper citation this time. If a statement sounds plausible and is consistent with other statements in the article but you doubt that it is totally accurate then consider making a reasonable effort to find a reference yourself. In the process you may end up confirming that the statement needs to be edited or deleted to better reflect the best knowledge about the topic. If an article or a section within an article is underreferenced then consider adding an Unreferenced Refimprove or Unreferenced section tag to the article or section concerned  these tags allow you to indicate more systemic problems to the page. A reference at the end of a paragraph typically refers to the whole paragraph and similarly a reference at the end of a sentence may almost always be taken as referring to the whole sentence. If a particular part of a sentence or paragraph seems to require a separate citation or looks as if it may have been inserted into the text at a sentence or paragraph level try to check the original reference rather than adding tags to text that may already be well referenced. The extra parameters available in the Citation needed span template may allow you to indicate which section you want to refer to. Do not insert a Citation needed tag to make a point to pay back another editor or because you dont like a subject a particular article or another editor. If your work has been tagged If you can provide a reliable source for the claim then please add it If you are not sure how to do this then give it your best try and replace the Citation needed template with enough information to locate the source. You may leave the copyediting or Wikifying to someone else or learn more about citing sources on Wikipedia. This beginners referencing guide for Wikipedia provides a brief introduction on how to reference Wikipedia articles. Shortcuts WPCITENEEDREMOVE WPNEEDCITEREMOVE If someone tagged your contributions with a Citation needed tag or tags and you disagree discuss the matter on the articles talk page. The most constructive thing to do in most cases is probably to supply the references requested even if you feel the tags are overdone or unnecessary. How to help reduce the backlog There are 519623 articles with Citation needed statements. You can browse the whole list of these articles at CategoryAll articles with unsourced statements. Frequently the authors of statements do not return to Wikipedia to support the statement with citations so other Wikipedia editors have to do work checking those statements. With 519623 articles containing statements that need WPVerification sometimes its hard to choose which article to work on. The tool Citation Hunt makes that easier by suggesting random articles which you can sort by topical category membership. I can help Give me a random citation to find See also TemplateCitation needed TemplateCitation needed span TemplateVerify source TemplateUnreferenced for an article rather than an individual statement that does not cite any references or sources. TemplateMore citations needed for an article rather than an individual statement that has some citations but not enough. Template messages  Sources of articles Inline verifiability and sources cleanup templates WikipediaVerification methods  listing examples of the most common ways that citations are used in Wikipedia articles WikipediaCiting sourcesExample edits for different methods  showing comparative edit mode representations for different citation methods and techniques. WikipediaCitation templates  a full listing of various styles for citing all sorts of materials WikipediaWikiProject Reliability CategoryAll articles with unsourced statements  list of all pages with citation needed External links Media related to Citation needed at Wikimedia Commons v t e Inline cleanup tags Attribution Among whom According to whom Attribution needed By whom From whom Like whom To whom Who With whom Clarity Ambiguous Clarify Clarify span Clarify timeframe Context inline Expand acronym Incomprehensible inline Incomprehensible span Key needed Non sequitur Sentence fragment Which calendar Miscellaneous Chinese script needed inline Copyright violation Copyvio link Data missing Disambiguation needed External links inline Improve caption Needs IPA Original research inline Original research span Pronunciation needed Script needed inline Spam link Synthesis inline Synthesis span Under discussion inline Verify spelling Whose translation Neutrality Buzzword inline Compared to Editorializing Fact or opinion Opinion Peacock inline POV statement Promotion inline Unbalanced opinion Weasel inline Weasel word some span Precision By how much Definition Definition needed Example needed Example needed span Explain How How often Misquoted Quantify Specify Vague When Where Which Who else Why Year needed Excessive Overly detailed inline Duplication span Importance inline Relevance inline Undue weight inline Globalize inline Timesensitivity Anachronism inline Clarify timeframe Current event inline Is this date calibrated Update after Update inline Update span Verifiability Dubious Contradictory inline Disputed inline Dubious Dubious span Inconsistent Needs independent confirmation Speculation inline Bare URLs Bare URL inline Bare URL nonHTML Bare URL AV media Bare URL PDF Bare URL image Bare URL DOC Bare URL plain text Bare URL spreadsheet Incomplete or broken citation Author incomplete Author missing Date missing Dead link Edition needed Episode needed Full citation needed Incomplete short citation ISBN missing Moved resource Page needed Place missing Publisher missing Season needed Time needed Title incomplete Title missing Volume needed Year missing Missing or problematic reference Additional citation needed Better source needed Better source needed example Check quotation Chronology citation needed Circular reference Citation needed Citation needed span Citation not found Close paraphrasing inline COI source Deprecated inline Excessive citations inline Failed verification Failed verification span Image reference needed Irrelevant citation Medical citation needed Medical citation needed span Nonspecific Not verified in body Obsolete source Page range too broad Primary source inline Promotional source Quote without source Request quotation Request quotation span Retracted Scientific citation needed Selfpublished inline Tertiary source inline Thirdparty inline Unreliable fringe source Unreliable medical source Unreliable source Verify quote Verify source Wording Buzzword inline Colloquialism Copy edit inline Neologism inline Technical inline Tone inline General advice Citing sources Reliable sources Maintenance template removal Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Referencing styles Inline cleanup templates WikiProject Inline Templates v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Referencetags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and donts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation Edit refs Refref Refref2 Refstart Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleWikipediaCitationneededoldid1222277800 Categories Wikipedia information pages Citation and verifiability maintenance templates Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia quick introductions Hidden categories Wikipedia moveprotected project pages Wikipedia extendedconfirmedprotected pages This page was last edited on 5 May 2024 at 0041 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width