File:Table CG23040 Kamal.jpg - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk FileTable CG23040 Kamal.jpg Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. File Talk English Read View on Commons Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View on Commons General What links here Upload file Special pages Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia File File history File usage Global file usage No higher resolution available. TableCG230
40 Kamal.jpg 714  476 pixels file size 52 KB MIME type imagejpeg This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary DescriptionTable CG23040 Kamal.jpg English Schematic drawing of an ancient Egyptian offering table. The table made from sandstone was unearthed in Karnak Great Temple north court and bears the name of Seankhibre AmenyIntefAmenemhat a pharaoh of the 
13 th Dynasty Second Intermediate Period. Now in Cairo Egyptian Museum CG 23040  JE 3423 39804. Date 1909 Source Tables doffrandes vol. I Le Caire 1909 available online Author Ahmed Kamal 18511923 Licensing Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse The author died in 1923 so this work is in the public domain in its country of origin and other countries and areas where the copyright term is the authors life plus 100 years or fewer. This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published or registered with the U.S. Copyright Office before January 1 1929. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law including all related and neighboring rights. httpscreativecommons.orgpublicdomainmark
1.0 PDMCreative Commons Public Domain Mark 
1.0 falsefalse Captions English Add a oneline explanation of what this file represents Items portrayed in this file depicts inception 1909 File history Click on a datetime to view the file as it appeared at that time. DateTime Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 1440 30 July 2015 714  476 52 KB Khruner User created page with UploadWizard File usage The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file pages on other projects are not listed Amenemhat VI List of pharaohs Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt UserImDefAHumansandbox Global file usage The following other wikis use this file Usage on ar.wikipedia.org   Usage on az.wikipedia.org On nc slal Misir Usage on gl.wikipedia.org Lista de farans Usage on hu.wikipedia.org VI. Amenemhat Usage on hy.wikipedia.org     Usage on ja.wikipedia.org 6 Usage on ms.wikipedia.org Senarai firaun Usage on ro.wikipedia.org Lista faraonilor egipteni Usage on ru.wikipedia.org  VI Usage on si.wikipedia.org   Usage on sl.wikipedia.org Seznam faraonov Trinajsta egipanska dinastija Amenemhet VI. Usage on th.wikipedia.org    6 Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Firavunlar listesi Usage on ur.wikipedia.org        Usage on vi.wikipedia.org Danh sch pharaon Amenemhet VI Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwikiFileTableCG230
40 Kamal.jpg Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width