Sehetepibre - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Chronological position 
2 Attestations 
3 References Toggle the table of contents Sehetepibre 15 languages   Catal Deutsch Franais Italiano  Magyar  Portugus  Slovenina   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh Sehetepibre Sewesekhtawy Sehotepibre Seusekhtowy Seweskhtowy Lapis lazuli cylinder seal with Sehetepibres cartouche Pharaoh Reign 2 years 1783 BC  1781 BC Predecessor Semenkare Nebnuni Ryholt  Baker Amenemhat V von Beckerath  Franke Successor Sewadjkare Ryholt  Baker Iufni von Beckerath  Franke Royal titulary Horus name Sewesekhtawy Swst3.wj He who enlarges the two lands Prenomen Praenomen Sehetepibre S.tpibR He who satisfies the heart of Ra Turin canon Sehetepibre S.tpibR He who satisfies the heart of Ra Dynasty 
13 th Dynasty Sehetepibre Sewesekhtawy also Sehetepibre I or Sehetepibre II depending on the scholar was an Egyptian pharaoh of the 
13 th Dynasty during the early Second Intermediate Period possibly the fifth1 or tenth2 king of the Dynasty. Chronological positionedit The position of Sehetepibre Sewesekhtawy within the 
13 th Dynasty is not entirely clear. In the Turin canon a king list redacted in the early Ramesside period two kings are listed with the name Sehetepibre both in Column 73 which mainly lists kings of the 
13 th Dynasty. The first Sehetepibre appears as the fourth king of the Dynasty and the other as its eighth. Therefore the exact chronological position of Sehetepibre Sewesekhtawy cannot be ascertained using only the Turin canon. According to the Egyptologists Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker Sehetepibre Sewesekhtawy was in fact the tenth king of the Dynasty reigning for two years from 1783 BC until 1781 BC.24 They believe that the first Sehetepibre is an error resulting from the corruption of the name of Hotepibre Qemau Siharnedjheritef. They further propose that the author of the list did not include two kings Nerikare and Ameny Qemau thereby artificially making Sehetepibre Sewesekhtawy the eighth king when he was the tenth.2 On the other hand Detlef Franke and Jrgen von Beckerath see Sehetepibre Sewesekhtawy as the first Sehetepibre listed in the Turin canon and thus as fifth king of the Dynasty. Franke and von Beckerath both identify the second Sehetepibre with Hotepibre Qemau Siharnedjheritef.567 Attestationsedit For a long time Sehetepibre was known only from the Turin canon and from a single lapis lazuli cylinder seal. The seal of unknown provenance was bought by a private collector in Cairo and finally sold in 1926 to the Metropolitan Museum of Art where it is now on display.8 The seal bears Sehetepibres prenomen and is dedicated to Hathor Lady of Byblos.2 The seal is further inscribed with the name in cuneiform of a governor of Byblos named YakinIlu.4 The archaeologist William F. Albright has tentatively identified YakinIlu with a governor Yakin attested on a stele discovered in Byblos and depicting his son Yantinu seated on a throne next to Neferhotep Is cartouches.29 If Albrights hypothesis is correct then Sehetepibre would be one generation removed from Neferhotep I. The principal contemporary attestation of Sehetepibre is a stela published in 1980 and discovered earlier at Gebel Zeit by the Red Sea where galena mines were located. The stela bears the name of a king Sehetepibre together with the Horus name Sewesekhtawy. This stela contemporary with his reign further confirms the existence of this king.410 In addition two scarabseals found in debris from the north pyramid cemetery at elLisht bear the name Sehetepibre written without a cartouche or royal title.11 A virtually identical scarab was also found at Tell elAjjul in a Middle Bronze Age context paralleling the Second Intermediate Period in Egypt.12 Whether these refer to the same individual is not certain. Referencesedit  Thomas Schneider Ancient Egyptian Chronology  Edited by Erik Hornung Rolf Krauss And David a. Warburton available online see p. 176  a b c d e K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 excerpts available online here.  Position within the papyrus Column 7 line 8 and 
7.1 2  The column starts with rulers of the Twelfth Dynasty  a b c Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 359360  Detlef Franke Zur Chronologie des Mittleren Reiches 
12.1 8. Dynastie Teil 1  Die 12. Dynastie in Orientalia 57 1988  Jrgen von Beckerath Untersuchungen zur politischen Geschichte der Zweiten Zwischenzeit in gypten Glckstadt 1964  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des pharaonischen gyptens Mnchner gyptologische Studien 46. Mainz am Rhein 1997  Seal of Sehetepibre at the MMA picture and context.  W. M. F. Albright An Indirect Synchronism between Egypt and Mesopotamia cir. 1730 BC BASOR 99 1945  P. Mey G. Castel J.P. Goyon Installations rupestres du moyen et du nouvel empire au Gebel Zeit prs de Rs Dib In Mitteilungen des deutschen Archologischen Institutes Kairo 36 1980 303305 fig. 1 1 pl. 80 a  MMA 
09.1 
80.1 203 
09.1 
80.1 204 see BenTor Daphna 2007. Scarabs Chronology and Interconnections Egypt and Palestine in the Second Intermediate Period. Friburg Academic Press. p. 111 Pl. 49561.  Petrie William Flinders Mackay Ernest J. H . Murray Margaret A. 1952. City of Shepherd Kings and Ancient Gaza V. London British School of Egyptian Archaeology University College. Pl. V124. Preceded by Semenkare Nebnuni Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Sewadjkare v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSehetepibreoldid1178846165 Categories 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 October 2023 at 0730 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width