Khaankhre Sobekhotep - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
1.1 Noncontemporary attestations 
2 Theories 
3 See also 
4 References Toggle the table of contents Khaankhre Sobekhotep 23 languages   Azrbaycanca  Catal Deutsch Espaol Euskara  Franais Italiano  Magyar  Nederlands  Portugus  Slovenina Suomi   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia 
13 th Dynasty Egyptian king Khaankhre Sobekhotep Sobekhotep I or II is some studies Doorjamb of a temple bearing Khaankhre Sobekhoteps nomen originally from Abydos now on display at the Louvre Pharaoh Reign three to fourandahalf years ca. 1735 BC Predecessor Nedjemibre Successor Renseneb Royal titulary Horus name Sematawy Smt.wj He who unifies the two lands Nebty name Djedkhaw djw He whose apparitions are enduring Golden Horus Kawnetjeru Kwnr.w The Kas of the gods Turin King List Sobekhotep Ra... Sbk ..p..R Sobek is satisfied Ra ... Prenomen Praenomen Khaankhre jnR Living is the apparition of Ra Nomen Sobekhotep Sbktp Sobek is satisfied Monuments Chapel in Abydos1 Dynasty 
13 th Dynasty Khaankhre Sobekhotep I now believed to be Sobekhotep II or Sobekhotep IV in some newer studies was a pharaoh of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period. Attestationsedit At Abydos Khaankhre Sobekhotep is attested by a relief from a chapel.23 Of Unknown Provenance is a fragment of an inscribed column.4 His name Khaankhre Sobekhotep also appears on a granite statue pedestal.567 Noncontemporary attestationsedit The Karnak king list preserves his prenomen Khaankhre. This list of kings was made during the reign of Thutmose III. The Turin canon 615 preserves the nomen Sobekhotepre. The addition of re may be a scribal error as the correct entry would be Sobekhotep. This list of kings was made during the reign of Ramesses II. Khaankhre Sobekhotep is often associated with this entry but it is not certain. The nomen Sobekhotep can refer to any king using this nomen for instance Sobekhotep I. This part of the king list is also so fragmentary and uncertain that its hard to interpret. Other king lists like the Abydos King List simply omitted all rulers between Amenemhat IV and Ahmose I  perhaps because they were minor kings who only controlled some estates or parts of the country in competition with other claimants. Theoriesedit While Khaankhre Sobekhotep is regarded as a ruler of the 
13 th Dynasty his chronological position is debated. His reign was most likely short. Ryholt has suggested three to fourandahalf years.6 According to egyptologists Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker Khaankhre Sobekhotep was the 
13 th pharaoh of the dynasty and had a short reign ca. 1735 BC. Alternatively Jrgen von Beckerath sees him as the 
16 th pharaoh of the dynasty.89 Ryholt mentions that Sobekhotep I may be identical with Sobekhotep II who is only mentioned as Sobekhotep in the Turin King List.6 Others like Dodson consider Khaankhre Sobekhotep II and Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep I to be two different rulers from the 
13 th Dynasty10 while Bierbrier lists Khaankhre Sobekhotep I and Sekhemre Khutawy Sobekhotep II.11 Recently Simon Connor and Julien Siesse investigated the style of the kings monument and argue that he reigned much later than previously thought after Sobekhotep IV  who would become Sobekhotep III.12 See alsoedit List of pharaohs Referencesedit Media related to Sebekhotep Khaankhre at Wikimedia Commons  Inventory of the Louvre B.35 C.910 E. Bresciani Un edificio di KhaanekhRa Sobekhotep ad Abdido. In Egitto e Vicino Oriente vol. II 1979 pp. 120  Paris Louvre Museum B. 35 C. 910  Bresciani 1979  London Petrie Museum UC 14411  London British Museum BM 69497 formerly Amherst Collection  a b c K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 339 File 1313.  C. N. Reeves Miscellanea Epigraphica Studien zur Altgyptischen Kultur Bd. 13 1986 pp. 165170  K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c.18001550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997  Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 445  Aidan Dodson Monarchs of the Nile American Univ in Cairo Press 2000 p 207  Bierbrier M.L. 2008. Historical dictionary of ancient Egypt. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810857940. Retrieved 8 January 2014.  Simon Connor Julien Siesse Nouvelle datation pour le roi Sobekhotep Khnkhr in Revue dgyptologie 66 2015 2015 227247 compare Throne Names Patterns as a Clue for the Internal Chronology of the 
13 th to 
17 th Dynasties Late Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period GM 246 2015 p. 7598 798 online Preceded by Nedjemibre Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Renseneb v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleKhaankhreSobekhotepoldid1183890378 Categories 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 November 2023 at 0323 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width