Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw - Wikipedia
Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 
1 Attestations Toggle Attestations subsection 
1.1 Bubastis architrave BM EA 1100 
1.2 Tanis architrave 
1.3 Cylinderseals 
1.4 Nubia sealimpressions 
2 King Lists 
3 Identity 
4 Theories 
5 See also 
6 References Toggle the table of contents Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw 15 languages  Catal Deutsch Espaol Franais Italiano  Magyar  Portugus  Slovenina   Ting Vit Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Egyptian pharaoh of the early 
13 th Dynasty Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Drawing by Wallis Budge of a fragment of a red granite architrave discovered in Bubastis and bearing the name of Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw.1 Pharaoh Reign 17751772 BC Ryholt 12 years Baker 17521746 BC Schneider Coregency Hor Predecessor Hor Successor Djedkheperew Royal titulary Horus name Khabaw jb
3 w The apparition of the Bas Nebty name Wehemdjed Wmd Permanent renewal Golden Horus Ankhrenput nrnpwt Living of years Prenomen Praenomen Sekemrekhutawy SmRwjt
3 wj Mighty Ra he who protects the two lands Nomen Unknown possibly Sobek2 Father Hor Dynasty 
13 th Dynasty Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw was an Egyptian pharaoh of the early 
13 th Dynasty during the Second Intermediate Period. Attestationsedit Khabaw is well attested through archaeological finds. Bubastis architrave BM EA 11
00 edit Fragments of a red granite architrave measuring 2 feet 6 inches 
0.7 6 m by 5 feet 11 inches 
1.8 0 m bearing his Horus name and prenomen were discovered during excavations at Bubastis in 1891 conducted by douard Naville for the Egypt Exploration Society.13 The architrave is now in the British Museum under the catalog number BM EA 1100. Tanis architraveedit Another architrave discovered in Tanis shows Khabaws name together with that of pharaoh Hor of the 
13 th Dynasty. Darrell Baker and Ryholt suggest that this close association might mean that Khabaw was Hors son and may have been his coregent.4 Ryholt and Baker believe that both architraves did not originate from the Delta region but from Memphis. The architraves could have come to their find spots after the fall of the 
13 th Dynasty when the Hyksos moved a large number of monuments from Memphis to Avaris and other cities of the Nile Delta such as Bubastis and Tanis.4 Alternatively the architraves may have stayed in Avaris until the reign of Ramses II when this king built his capital at PiRamesses using material from Avaris. PiRamesses was subsequently dismantled during the 
21 st Dynasty and its monuments scattered in the Delta region.25 Cylindersealsedit Cylinderseal of Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Petrie Museum UC 115
27.6 7 Khabaw is attested by a cylinderseal now in the Petrie Museum UC 115
27.7  Nubia sealimpressionsedit In Nubia he is attested by 4 seal impressions from the fortress of Uronarti and one from the fortress of Mirgissa.2 King Listsedit The Turin canon does not mention Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw. Nor is he mentioned in any other ancient king list.8 According to Ryholt Khabaws name was lost in a wsf literally missing lacuna of the Turin canon reported in Column 7 line 17 of the document. The redactor of this king list which was written in the early Ramesside period wrote wsf when the older document from which he was copying the list had a lacuna.2 Identityedit The nomen of Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw is unknown and his identity is therefore not completely established. Ryholt has proposed Khabaws nomen could have been Sobek as this nomen is attested from artifacts which must belong to a king of the first half of the 
13 th Dynasty. Only two kings of this time period have their nomina unknown Khabaw and Nerikare. Sobek may thus possibly be the nomen of Khabaw.2 On the other hand Jrgen von Beckerath identified Khabaws nomen as Pantjeny thereby equating Khabaw with Sekhemrekhutawy Pantjeny who is otherwise attested by a single stele.9 However this hypothesis has been invalidated in a recent study of stele by Marcel Mare. Mare has shown that the stele was produced by the same workshop and possibly the same person who produced the stelae of Wepwawetemsaf and Rahotep. The latter is firmly dated to the early 
17 th Dynasty c. 1580 BC and thus Pantjeny must have ruled c. 1600 BC possibly at the end of the 
16 th Dynasty.10 Alternatively Pantjeny could be a member of the Abydos Dynasty which ruled over central Egypt from c. 1650 BC until 1600 BC.2 Wolfgang Helck and Stephen Quirke have equated Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw with Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep called Sobekhotep I or Sobekhotep II depending on the scholar. This hypothesis is considered incorrect by most Egyptologists including von Beckerath Detlef Franke Ryholt and Anthony Spalinger11 Von Beckerath and Franke point out that although both kings have the same throne name their other names are completely different. Spalinger argues that the Nile records of Nubia associated to Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep cannot be attributed to Khabaw.11 Responding to these arguments Stephen Quirke pointed out that the Horus and gold names of Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep are known from a single block from Medamud the attribution of which is not entirely certain.12 Theoriesedit According to the egyptologist Kim Ryholt he was the sixteenth king of the dynasty reigning for three years from 1775 BC until 1772 BC.2 Thomas Schneider on the other hand places his reign from 1752 BC until 1746 BC.13 Alternatively Jrgen von Beckerath sees him as the third king of the dynasty.14159 As a ruler of the early 
13 th Dynasty Khabaw would have ruled from Memphis to Aswan and possibly over the western Nile Delta.4 See alsoedit List of pharaohs Referencesedit Wikimedia Commons has media related to Khabaw Sekhemrekhutawy.  a b Wallis Budge Hieroglyphic Texts V 1914 see p. 7 and pl. 18 available copyrightfree online.  a b c d e f g K.S.B. Ryholt The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period c. 1800  1550 BC Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications vol. 20. Copenhagen Museum Tusculanum Press 1997 excerpts available online here.  E. Naville Bubastis 1891 15 pl. XXXIII available copyrightfree online  a b c Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 289290  See a similar situation for the colossi of Imyremeshaw.  Flinders Petrie Scarabs and cylinders with names 1917 available copyrightfree here pl. XVIII  a b Seal of Khabaw catalog of the Petrie Museum.  Darrell D. Baker The Encyclopedia of the Pharaohs Volume I  Predynastic to the Twentieth Dynasty 33001069 BC Stacey International ISBN 9781905299379 2008 p. 166167  a b Jrgen von Beckerath Handbuch der gyptischen Knigsnamen MS 49 Philip Von Zabern. 1999  Marcel Mare A sculpture workshop at Abydos from the late Sixteenth or early Seventeenth Dynasty in Marcel Mare editor The Second Intermediate period ThirteenthSeventeenth Dynasties Current Research Future Prospects Leuven Paris Walpole MA. 2010 ISBN 9789042922280. p. 247 268  a b A. Spalinger Sobekhotep II in Wolfgang Helck editor Lexikon der gyptologie vol. 5. Harrasowitz Wiesbaden 1984 ISBN 3447024895  Stephen Quirke In the Name of the King on Late Middle Kingdom Cylinders in E. Czerny I. Hein H. Hunger D. Melman A. Schwab editors Timelines Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak Volume I Leuven Paris Dufdley MA ISBN 9789042917309 p. 263274.  Thomas Schneider Lexikon der Pharaonen Albatros Dsseldorf 2002 ISBN 3491960533 p. 255 and 259  Jrgen von Beckerath Untersuchungen zur politischen Geschichte der Zweiten Zwischenzeit in gypten Glckstadt 1964  Jrgen von Beckerath Chronologie des pharaonischen gyptens Mnchner gyptologische Studien 46. Mainz am Rhein 1997 Preceded by Hor Pharaoh of Egypt Thirteenth Dynasty Succeeded by Djedkheperew v t e Pharaohs Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period 31502040 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Protodynastic pre3150 BC Lower Hedju Hor NyHor NiNeith HatHor Pu Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Mekh A Double Falcon Wash Upper A Finger Snail Fish PenAbu Stork Bull Scorpion I Shendjw IryHor Ka Scorpion II Narmer  Menes Early Dynastic 31502686 BC I Narmer  Menes HorAha Djer Djet Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qaa Sneferka Horus Bird II Hotepsekhemwy Nebra Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa WenegNebty Wadjenes Senedj SethPeribsen SekhemibPerenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Old Kingdom 26862181 BC III Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Sedjes Qahedjet Huni IV Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis V Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas VI Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Neferka Nefer 
1 st Intermediate 21812040 BC VIIVIII Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare III Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare IV Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare V Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare VI Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Iby Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Wadjkare Khuiqer Khui Iytjenu IX Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Imhotep X Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period 20401550 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Middle Kingdom 20401802 BC XI Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Nubia Segerseni Qakare Ini Iyibkhentre XII Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu Seankhibtawy Seankhibra 
2 nd Intermediate 18021550 BC XIII Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep Sonbef Nerikare Sekhemkare Amenemhat V Ameny Qemau Hotepibre Iufni Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI Semenkare Nebnuni Sehetepibre Sewadjkare Nedjemibre Khaankhre Sobekhotep Renseneb Hor Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw Djedkheperew Sebkay Sedjefakare Wegaf Khendjer Imyremeshaw Sehetepkare Intef Seth Meribre Sobekhotep III Neferhotep I Sihathor Sobekhotep IV Merhotepre Sobekhotep Khahotepre Sobekhotep Wahibre Ibiau Merneferre Ay Merhotepre Ini Sankhenre Sewadjtu Mersekhemre Ined Sewadjkare Hori Merkawre Sobekhotep Mershepsesre Ini II Sewahenre Senebmiu Merkheperre Merkare Sewadjare Mentuhotep Seheqenre Sankhptahi XIV Yakbim Sekhaenre Yaammu Nubwoserre Qareh Khawoserre Ammu Ahotepre Maaibre Sheshi Nehesy Khakherewre Nebefawre Sehebre Merdjefare Sewadjkare III Nebdjefare Nebsenre Sekheperenre Bebnum Apepi Nuya Wazad Sheneh Shenshek Khamure Yakareb YaqubHar XV Sharek Semqen AperAnati Salitis SakirHar Khyan Yanassi Apepi Khamudi XVI Djehuti Sobekhotep VIII Neferhotep III Mentuhotepi Nebiryraw I Nebiriau II Semenre Bebiankh Sekhemre Shedwast Dedumose I Dedumose II Montuemsaf Merankhre Mentuhotep Senusret IV Pepi III Abydos Senebkay Wepwawetemsaf Pantjeny Snaaib XVII Rahotep Nebmaatre Sobekemsaf I Sobekemsaf II SekhemreWepmaat Intef Nubkheperre Intef SekhemreHeruhirmaat Intef Senakhtenre Ahmose Seqenenre Tao Kamose New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period 1550664 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain New Kingdom 15501070 BC XVIII Ahmose I Amenhotep I Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb XIX Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret XX Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI 
3 rd Intermediate 1069664 BC XXI Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II High Priests of Amun Herihor Piankh Pinedjem I Masaharta Djedkhonsuefankh Menkheperre Smendes II Pinedjem II Psusennes III XXII Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Tutkheperre Shoshenq Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV XXIII Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Iuput I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Shoshenq VII Menkheperre Ini XXIV Tefnakht Bakenranef XXV Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Late Period and Hellenistic Period 66430 BC Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Late 664332 BC XXVI Ammeris Tefnakht II Nekauba Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III XXVII Cambyses II Petubastis III Darius I Psammetichus IV Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II XXVIII Amyrtaeus XXIX Nepherites I Hakor Psammuthes Nepherites II Muthis XXX Nectanebo I Teos Nectanebo II XXXI Artaxerxes III Khabash Arses Darius III Hellenistic 33230 BC Argead Alexander the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Ptolemaic Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra Ptolemy VI Philometor Cleopatra II Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Ptolemy VIII Euergetes Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Soter Cleopatra IV Ptolemy X Alexander I Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander II Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos Cleopatra V Berenice IV Epiphaneia Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator Arsinoe IV Ptolemy XIV Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Roman Period 30 BC313 AD Period Dynasty Pharaohs male female uncertain Roman 30 BC313 AD XXXIV Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius Nero Galba Otho Vitellius Vespasian Titus Domitian Nerva Trajan Hadrian Antoninus Pius Lucius Verus Marcus Aurelius Commodus Pertinax Pescennius Niger Septimius Severus Geta Caracalla Macrinus Diadumenian Elagabalus Severus Alexander Maximinus Thrax Gordian I Gordian II Pupienus Balbinus Gordian III Philip Decius Trebonianus Gallus Aemilianus Valerian Macrianus Minor Quietus Lucius Mussius Aemilianus Gallienus Claudius Gothicus Quintillus Aurelian Tacitus Probus Carus Carinus Numerian Diocletian Maximian Galerius Maximinus Daza Dynastic genealogies 
1 st 
2 nd 
3 rd 
4 th 
11 th 
12 th 
18 th 
19 th 
20 th 
21 st to 
23 rd 
24 th 
25 th 
26 th 
27 th 
30 th 
31 st Argead Ptolemaic List of pharaohs Retrieved from httpsen.wikipedia.orgwindex.phptitleSekhemrekhutawyKhabawoldid1197974476 Categories 
18 thcentury BC Pharaohs Pharaohs of the Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Hidden categories Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 January 2024 at 1701 UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike License 
4.0  additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width